
 IDENTITY THEFT 

 Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series 
 American Families in Crisis ,  Jeffrey S. Turner 
 Animal Rights,  Clifford J. Sherry 
 Campaign and Election Reform,  Glenn H. Utter and Ruth Ann 
Strickland 
 Climate Change,  David L. Downie, Kate Brash, and Catherine 
Vaughan 
 Corporate Crime,  Richard D. Hartley 
 DNA Technology,  David E. Newton 
 Domestic Violence,  Margi Laird McCue 
 Education in Crisis,  Judith A. Gouwens 
 Emergency Management,  Jeffrey B. Bumgarner 
 Energy Use Worldwide,  Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith 
 Environmental Justice,  David E. Newton 
 Gangs,  Karen L. Kinnear 
 Gay and Lesbian Rights,  David E. Newton 
 Globalization,  Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith 
 Lobbying in America,  Ronald J. Hrebenar and Bryson B. Morgan 
 Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy,  Glenn H. Utter 
 Modern Sports Ethics,  Angela Lumpkin 
 Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation,  Sarah J. Diehl and James 
Clay Moltz 
 Obesity,  Judith Stern and Alexandra Kazaks 
 Policing in America,  Leonard A. Steverson 
 Renewable and Alternative Energy Resources,  Zachary A. Smith 
and Katrina D. Taylor 
 Rich and Poor in America,  Geoffrey Gilbert 
 Sentencing,  Dean John Champion 
 U.S. National Security,  Cynthia A. Watson 
 U.S. Social Security,  Steven G. Livingston 
 U.S. Trade Issues,  Alfred E. Eckes, Jr. 
 Waste Management,  Jacqueline Vaughn 
 For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit  
www.abc-clio.com. 

 Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital 
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution, 
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and 
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly 
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting 
point for research by high school and college students, scholars, 
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, 
activists, and others. 
 Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an 
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical 
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies, 
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index. 
 Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will 
find the information they need to have a better understanding of 
the social, political, environmental, and economic issues facing 
the world today. 


 IDENTITY THEFT 
 A Reference Handbook 
 Sandra K. Hoffman and Tracy G. McGinley 
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England

 Copyright 2010 by ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior 
permission in writing from the publisher. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Hoffman, Sandra K.
 Identity theft : a reference handbook / Sandra K. Hoffman and 
Tracy G. McGinley.
  p. cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-1-59884-143-5 (print : alk. paper) — 
 ISBN 978-1-59884-144-2 (ebook)
 1. Identity theft. I. McGinley, Tracy G. II. Title. 
 HV6675.H64 2010
 364.16'33—dc22   2009043174 
 ISBN 978-1-59884-143-5 : paper 
 ISBN 978-1-59884-144-2 : ebook
 14 13 12 11 10  1 2 3 4 5 
 This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. 
 Visit www.abc-clio.com for details. 
 ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911 
 Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911 
 This book is printed on acid-free paper 
 
 Manufactured in the United States of America 

vii
 Contents 
 Preface , xi
 1 
Background and History , 1
What Is Identity Theft?, 1
Personal Identity Theft, 2
Business Identity Theft, 3
The History of Identity Theft, 5
Jacob and Esau, 6
Cade’s Rebellion of 1450, 6
Sarah Wilson in Colonial America, 7
Czar Nicholas II and His Family, 8
The Great Imposter, 9
The Most Misused Social Security Number 
in History, 10
The Chicago Debacle, 11
The First Documented Multinational Internet Bank 
Robbery, 12
An Early Case of Credit Card Fraud, 13
The First Internet Murder, 15
Who Are the Perpetrators?, 16
Opportunity Takers or Makers, 17
Gender, 19
Age, 23
Ethnicity, 24
Criminal History, 25
Country of Origin, 26
Affiliation with Other Crimes, 27
Affiliation with Other Criminals, 27
Who Are the Victims?, 29
Types of Identity Theft, 29

viii Contents
Geographical Location, 31
Age, 32
References, 34
 2 
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions , 41
The Victims’ Experiences, 41
Methods of Detection and Time Lapse, 42
Types of Identity Theft and the Restoration Period, 44
Effects on Relationships, 46
Emotional and Medical Concerns, 47
Financial Losses, 49
The Second Insult, 49
Sources and Methods Used by  Perpetrators to Access 
Identities, 51
Trends and Special Issues, 53
Tax Fraud, 54
Medical Fraud, 54
Real Estate Loan Fraud, 56
Offshoring Identities, 57
Data Breaches, 59
The Hidden Costs of the Crime, 62
Solving the Identity Theft Problem, 62
Responsibility Theories, 63
Government Responses, 64
References, 83
 3 
Worldwide Perspective , 89
Canada, 89
United Kingdom, 100
Mexico, 107
Russia, 109
South Africa, 112
Asia, 113
The Threat to International and Homeland Security, 115
References, 118
 4 
Chronology , 123
 5 
Biographical Sketches , 139
Abagnale, Frank, Jr. (1948 –), 140
Ashcroft, John (1942 –) U.S. Attorney General, 140

Contents ix
Bliley, Thomas Jerome, Jr. (1932–) U.S. Representative 
(R-Va.), 141
Bowen, Debra (1955–) California Secretary 
of State, 142
Calderon, Charles (1950 –) State Senator 
(D-Calif.), 143
Cantwell, Maria (1958–) U.S. Senator (D-Wash.), 143
Carter, Steve (1954 –) Indiana Attorney General, 144
Cogdill, David (1950 –) State Assembly (R-Calif.), 145
Cuccinelli, Ken (1968 –) State Senator (R-Va.), 146
Feinstein, Dianne (1933 –) U.S. Senator (D-Calif.), 146
Foley, Linda, 147
Frank, Mari, 148
Givens, Beth, 149
Gramm, William Philip (1942–) U.S. Senator 
(R-Tex.), 149
Kaine, Timothy M. (1958 –) Governor (D-Va.), 150
Kyl, Jon (1942–) U.S. Senator (R-Ariz.), 151
Leach, James Albert Smith (1942–) 
U.S. Representative (R-Iowa), 151
Leahy, Patrick (1940 –) U.S. Senator (D-Vt.), 152
Madigan, Lisa (1966 –) Illinois Attorney General, 153
May, Johnny, 153
Oller, Thomas (1958 –) State Assemblyman 
(R-Calif.), 154
Ostergren, Betty “B. J.”, 154
Paterson, David A. (1954 –) Governor (D-N.Y.), 155
Petro, James (1948–) Ohio Attorney General, 156
Poochigian, Charles (1949 –) State Senator 
(R-Calif.), 157
Simitian, Joe (1953 –) State Senator (D-Calif.), 157
Specter, Arlen (1930 –) U.S. Senator (R-Pa.), 158
Torlakson, Tom (1949 –) State Assemblyman 
(D-Calif.), 159
Wyland, Mark (1946 –) State Senator (R-Calif.), 160
 6 
Data and Documents , 163
Executive Summary Consumer Fraud and Identity Theft 
Complaint Data January–December 2008, 163
President’s Identity Theft Task Force, 165
Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act, 173
Title V of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 1999, 180

x Contents
 7 
Directory of Organizations, Associations, 
and Agencies , 199
 8 
Resources , 219
Print Resources, 219
Books, 219
Journals and Magazines, 224
Pamphlets/Booklets, 236
Nonprint Resources, 237
 Glossary , 247
 Index , 253
 About the Author , 263

xi
 Preface 
 I
dentity Theft: A Reference Handbook  is a comprehensive guide 
to developing an understanding of what identity theft is. The 
book demonstrates that the crime of identity theft knows no 
boundaries. Victims and perpetrators of identity theft vary in age, 
gender, race, socioeconomic status, and occupation. Furthermore, 
it is a crime of global concern. Incidents of identity theft are es-
calating in the United States as well as in other countries. Given 
the far-reaching implications and proliferation of the crime, it is 
important to develop a thorough understanding of the crime in 
order to work toward viable solutions to the problem. 
 Chapter 1 begins by defining identity theft and distinguishing 
between the different types of the crime. The chapter then offers 
readers a history of the crime to illustrate its evolution as it has 
adapted to changes in modern society. After the historical discus-
sion, the chapter focuses on the common characteristics of iden-
tity theft perpetrators. In this section, readers are presented with 
demographic information pertaining to the offenders and their 
motives for committing the crime. Lastly, Chapter 1 discusses the 
types of identity theft to which victims are most often subjected 
and explores the factors that may contribute to the likelihood of 
victimization. 
 Chapter 2 addresses the problems, controversies, and solu-
tions surrounding identity theft. This section looks at the ele-
ments that go into detecting identity theft, the impact that it has 
on its victims, and the tactics that perpetrators utilize to commit 
the crime. Also discussed are various trends in the crime, such as 
medical identity theft, and issues that put identities at risk of being 
stolen, including information security breaches. Chapter 2 then 
focuses on the possible solutions to identity theft. These  solutions 

xii Preface
are discussed from various perspectives. The chapter delves into 
many of the state and federal government responses to the crime, 
including legislation to assign an agency the responsibility of col-
lecting and maintaining a database of identity theft complaints. 
Then, the role of the criminal justice system in responding to vic-
tims is explored. The chapter concludes by offering suggestions 
for protecting personal identifying information. 
 Chapter 3 takes readers on an exploration of the global impli-
cations of identity theft. This chapter examines the connection be-
tween identity theft in the United States and other countries. The 
scope and nature of the problem in Canada, the United Kingdom, 
Mexico, Russia, South Africa, and Asia is discussed as well as how 
these countries have responded to it. The chapter closes with an 
examination of the threats posed by identity theft to international 
and homeland security. 
 Chapter 4 provides a chronological overview of the crime of 
identity theft, its evolution, and the laws that were created in re-
sponse to it. The chapter offers a listing of federal and state laws, 
civil lawsuits, criminal cases, security breaches, and other note-
worthy events that have shaped the way in which identity theft is 
addressed in modern society. 
 Chapter 5 is designed to help familiarize readers with the key 
activists, thinkers, victims’ advocates, researchers, citizens, busi-
ness leaders, and policy makers in relation to identity theft. It de-
scribes each person’s role in addressing critical issues pertaining 
to the crime. 
 Copies of some of the key pieces of legislation appear in Chap-
ter 6, thereby allowing the reader to review, in detail, the laws 
that are considered the most significant in tackling identity theft 
problems. Also included in this chapter is information relating to 
the latest statistics published by the Federal Trade Commission. 
Chapter 7 provides a list of the organizations, associations, and 
agencies that have evolved to deal with the crime of identity theft. 
The origin, function, and Web site content (if available) of each 
entity is discussed. An annotated bibliography of key resources 
on identity theft is offered in Chapter 8. These resources include 
books, journals, magazines, newspapers, pamphlets, booklets, 
and Web sites. 
 At this point, we would like to acknowledge those who made 
it possible for this book to become a reality. We would like to ex-
press our appreciation to the publisher for assisting us through 

Preface xiii
the process of writing this book. Also, we would like to thank our 
friends and family members for their support. A special thanks 
to Bryan, Connor, Hannah, Walter, Jason, and Melissa for their 
patience and encouragement. Finally, we dedicate this book to all 
victims of identity theft. 


1
 1 
 I
dentity theft is frequently mentioned in today’s society; the 
crime is often reported in the news. Advertisements warn con-
sumers to review their credit reports, and companies offer in-
surance, credit monitoring, and early detection products. By and 
large, identity theft is not considered a serious crime, but is often 
thought of as a nuisance crime in which a person’s information, 
such as a credit card number, is stolen and used to make pur-
chases. Though many may think of it as a new social phenom-
enon created by increased reliance upon technology, in reality it is 
a much broader and more complex crime than this, and one that 
can have serious ramifications for all aspects of society, including 
the economy and national security. 
 The purpose of this chapter is to assist readers in develop-
ing a better understanding of this complicated, multifaceted 
crime. First, identity theft is defined in order to build a founda-
tion for the remainder of the book, and then a discussion of the 
crime’s history demonstrates its transformation as it has adapted 
to changes in modern society. Lastly, an assessment of existing 
research on the subject is undertaken in an effort to discern the 
characteristics most commonly associated with the perpetrators 
and their  victims. 
 What Is Identity Theft? 
 Identity theft is a modern name for an ancient crime. Identity 
theft did not become a federal offense, however, until 1998. Al-
though they vary from state to state, identity theft-related  statutes 
 Background and History 

2 Background and History
have been enacted in every state. Thus, the following definition 
is based upon a compilation of these established laws. Simply 
stated, identity theft is fraud. There are many types of identity 
theft, and thieves target both businesses and individuals. 
 Personal Identity Theft 
 Personal identity theft is the use of an individual’s personal iden-
tifying information without his or her knowledge and with the 
intent to aid or abet in any unlawful activity such as the fraudu-
lent obtaining of services, merchandise, money, and/or credit. It 
also occurs when an individual’s identifying information is used 
to file for bankruptcy or to aid in the commission of other felonies 
and/or misdemeanors. 
 Personal identifying information distinguishes a person from 
all other people. It includes, but is not limited to, a person’s name, 
address, telephone number, birth date, Social Security number 
(SSN), driver’s license number, passport number, health insur-
ance policy number, employee identification number, employ-
ment history, student identification number, mother’s maiden 
name, financial account numbers, account passwords, biometric 
data, e-mail address, and instant messaging screen name. Once 
a thief has access to this information, there are several ways the 
information may be used. 
 The most severe form of identity theft is a complete identity 
take over. This occurs when a key piece of personal identifying 
information is stolen and used by a thief to take control of every 
aspect of the victim’s life. A complete identity take over usually 
begins with a stolen SSN or mother’s maiden name. Either piece 
of personal information can be used to obtain a breeder docu-
ment, a government-issued identification record that leads to the 
issuance of additional identification documents. 
 A common scenario of a complete identity take over in-
volves a stolen mother’s maiden name. This is a critical piece of 
information that is required to apply for a duplicate birth certifi-
cate (i.e., a breeder document). Once obtained, a duplicate birth 
certificate can be used as identification for getting a Social Secu-
rity card and driver’s license in the victim’s name. Then, these 
fraudulent government identity documents can be presented 
as identification for opening financial accounts, applying for a 
passport, securing employment, procuring utilities, and acquir-
ing an array of goods and services. In essence, the thief can now 

What Is Identity Theft? 3
live under the newly assumed identity as if he or she actually is 
that person. 
 Social Security numbers are another key piece of personal 
identifying information. Each number is unique and permanently 
assigned to one individual. A stolen SSN can facilitate a complete 
identity take over in the same manner as a stolen mother’s maiden 
name. Unfortunately, victims have very few options if their num-
bers are stolen and used to commit fraud and/or other crimes. 
They may request a new number (SSA 2002). However, the process 
for securing a new number requires an extensive amount of time 
and paperwork. In addition, identity theft issues may resurface in 
the future. Problems may arise when the old and new numbers 
are associated in various databases, such as those maintained by 
the credit bureaus. 
 Business Identity Theft 
 Thieves also steal the identities of businesses. The term  businesses 
refers to small companies, corporations, financial institutions, 
healthcare related organizations, and government entities. Busi-
ness identity theft involves the use of a business identifier without 
permission and with the intent to aid or abet in any unlawful activ-
ity such as fraudulently obtaining services, merchandise, money, 
and/or credit. This also occurs when business-identifying infor-
mation is used to file for bankruptcy or to aid in the commission 
of other felonies and/or misdemeanors. Business identifying in-
formation distinguishes one business from all others and includes 
the name of the business, its address, telephone number, e-mail 
address, logo, trademark, Web site, corporate credit card number, 
checking account number, and tax identification numbers. 
 In some cases, the identifying information of businesses is 
stolen in order to gain access to the company’s financial accounts 
(Collins and Hoffman 2004). Business checking accounts are 
often targeted by identity thieves. For example, criminals may 
steal a business check and duplicate it electronically. The checks 
are often cashed or used to make purchases without being de-
tected because they bear a legitimate account number or busi-
ness name. The business owner may not find out about the fraud 
until they balance the accounts, verify the account activities on-
line, or receive notification that the account is overdrawn. The 
following case illustrates how businesses are victimized in this 
manner. 

4 Background and History
 According to reports, Justine Coppolino was the ringleader 
of a network of Utah-based identity thieves (Deseret News 2008). 
The indictment states that she stole the identities of both busi-
nesses and individuals (U.S. Attorney 2007). The identities were 
used to manufacture payroll checks that Coppolino and her co-
conspirators cashed at Salt Lake City-area businesses. Over 80 
computer-generated payroll checks were printed, each displaying 
the names and logos of legitimate businesses stolen from many 
sources, including telephone books. To ensure that the checks ap-
peared legitimate, Coppolino scanned the signatures belonging 
to real people into her computer and affixed them to the checks. 
For her role in the counterfeit check scheme, she was sentenced 
to almost six years in prison and ordered to pay over $50,000 in 
restitution (Desert News 2008). 
 This case is representative of thousands of similar incidents 
that occur in the United States every year. However, identity 
thieves target business credit card accounts as well as checking 
accounts. A thief may make unauthorized charges on an existing 
account, open a new account, or add themselves as an authorized 
user of a business credit card. Why do criminals seek out this ac-
count information? It is simple. Business credit cards usually have 
higher credit limits than personal accounts, and business checking 
accounts are more likely to carry a higher balance than personal 
accounts. To help avoid detection, thieves typically strike swiftly, 
using stolen account information during a short span of days or 
weeks and may make several transactions per day. Thus, business 
accounts are often targeted because of the high returns that can be 
obtained quickly. 
 Another form of business identity theft occurs when a com-
pany’s employer identification number (EIN) is stolen and used 
to obtain credit, take out loans, or to file tax returns. The Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) assigns EINs for tax purposes. As a busi-
ness identifier, it is comparable to an SSN, a personal identifier. 
Both numbers are associated with credit reports, taxes, and finan-
cial accounts. 
 Most cases of business identity theft are committed, however, 
to gain access to one of the most important assets of any busi-
ness: the identifying information of the business’s customers, cli-
ents, employees, patients, or vendors (Collins and Hoffman 2004). 
Many methods are employed to steal these assets. Owners may 
even use their legitimate businesses as the source for stealing per-
sonal identifying information. For example, the owner of several 

The History of Identity Theft 5
Los Angeles–area tax preparation businesses was sentenced in 
January 2009 to 11 years in prison after admitting to an elaborate 
fraud scheme (U.S. Attorney’s Office 2009). Abdul Wahid pled 
guilty to several felonies, one of which was aggravated identity 
theft, after stealing the identities of several of his clients, including 
businesses and individuals. In one case, Wahid filed a bogus tax 
return in another person’s name. The IRS sent the refund check to 
Wahid, who then deposited it in his own account. 
 Dishonest employees also steal identities from their work-
places. Sometimes the stolen information is passed on to other 
people. In one case, a hotel clerk stole the credit card numbers 
of several customers and exchanged them for a gift card. Noel 
Miller was employed as a clerk at a Hilton Hotel (U.S. Attorney 
2006). During the course of her employment, she stole 25 credit 
card numbers belonging to guests. Miller gave the account infor-
mation to another person instead of using it herself. In exchange, 
the co-conspirator gave her a $300 Wal-Mart gift card. In the end, 
more than $60,000 worth of fraudulent purchases were charged 
to the credit cards Miller had stolen. Miller was arrested and pled 
guilty to fraud charges. In October 2006, she was sentenced to six 
months in federal prison, six months of house arrest, and ordered 
to pay $60,000 in restitution. 
 In summation, identity thieves target both businesses and 
individuals, and often there is a connection between the two. 
Sometimes the identities of businesses are stolen. Other times, 
businesses are exploited in order to gain access to the personal 
identifying information of individuals related to the business. 
Identity theft, whether business or personal, is an old crime. The 
next section explores the history of its evolution so as to help read-
ers gain a better understanding of the consequences of the crime 
as it relates to modern life. 
 The History of Identity Theft 
 Identity theft is a relatively new name for an age-old phenom-
enon. Early accounts of the crime were a simple form of imper-
sonation. In the legal sense, impersonation is the act of imitating 
another person with the intent to defraud others for personal 
gain (Garner 1999). Imposters assumed the identities of others by 
imitating how their subjects dressed, behaved, and talked. Over 
time, impersonation became ineffective as other forms of personal 

6 Background and History
 identifying information came into being. Forged, stolen, and fic-
titious identification documents, as well as financial account in-
formation, became the catalyst for identity theft. Furthermore, 
technology has changed the way personal information is used, 
collected, and stored. As identity theft evolved from simple im-
personation to a technology-driven identity, the methods used to 
commit the crime also evolved. The following incidents span hun-
dreds of years and demonstrate how identity theft evolved into 
the crime that is known today. 
 Jacob and Esau 
 Identity theft is most often committed for personal financial gain. 
An example is found in early Biblical writings (Tenney 1969). 
In the book of Genesis, a young man named Jacob imitated his 
brother so he could inherit the family estate. Jacob and Esau were 
the twin sons of Isaac and Rebecca. To be precise, Esau was the 
oldest; he was born a few minutes before his brother. As he aged, 
Isaac’s health and eyesight faded. He realized it was time to pre-
pare for his death. Thus, Isaac made arrangements to transfer the 
family estate to his oldest son, Esau. 
 Rebecca found out about her husband’s plans, and was de-
termined that Jacob, not Esau, should receive the inheritance 
(Tenney 1969). Rebecca devised a scheme to take advantage of 
her husband’s failing eyesight by enlisting Jacob to impersonate 
his brother. On the appointed day, Jacob met with his father and 
pretended to be Esau. He dressed in Esau’s clothing so he would 
smell like his brother, and since Esau had ample body hair, Jacob 
applied goatskins to his hands and arms to fool his father’s sense 
of touch. He imitated Esau’s manner of speech and spoke about 
the topics that were important to his brother. The guise was suc-
cessful, Jacob received his father’s blessing, and inherited the 
family estate. 
 Cade’s Rebellion of 1450 
 A person suspected of committing a crime may use identity theft 
to avoid detection by authorities. One incident that occurred dur-
ing the late Middle Ages is an example of how a murder suspect 
can imitate another to avoid apprehension. John Aylmer practiced 
medicine in England during the 1440s (Miller 2003). He fled to 
France in 1449 after being accused of murdering his mistress, and 

The History of Identity Theft 7
about a year later, Dr. Aylmer resurfaced in Kent, England. He did 
not use his real name, but instead he claimed his name was Jack 
Cade. 
 Aylmer began organizing an army of dissidents to overthrow 
King Henry VI (Miller 2003). Perhaps to appear more credible to 
potential recruits, he changed his name again, this time claiming 
to be John Mortimer, a relative of Richard, Duke of York. Aylmer 
and his army of knights, squires, merchants, poor farmers, and 
small property owners successfully defeated the king’s soldiers 
in a skirmish at Kent. From there, they marched into London and 
briefly seized control of the city. Mayhem, pillaging, and murder 
followed. As a result, most rebels disassociated themselves from 
Aylmer. The army collapsed. The king pardoned all who took part 
in the uprising. Nevertheless, Aylmer was killed by the Sheriff of 
Kent. 
 Some historians conclude that the rebel leader was an oppor-
tunist who was motivated by his need for personal glorification 
(Miller 2003). Nonetheless, it is clear that the imposter took advan-
tage of England’s economic conditions and political climate for 
reasons that have been lost to history. Although Aylmer’s attempt 
to oust the king failed miserably, he achieved notoriety; William 
Shakespeare preserved the rebel’s exploits in the play  Henry VI by 
basing one of the characters upon him (Ross 2001). 
 Sarah Wilson in Colonial America 
 At times, identity theft is committed to escape an unpleasant sit-
uation and to avoid one’s obligations. One documented case in 
early American history demonstrates how an indentured servant, 
motivated by her desire for a lavish lifestyle, used identity theft 
to escape servitude and begin a new life. Sarah Wilson was born 
in 1754 in the county of Staffordshire, England (Haughton 2002). 
At the age of 16, she left home, went to London, and secured em-
ployment as a maid to Caroline Vernon, lady-in-waiting to Queen 
Charlotte, the wife of King George III. However, Sarah was caught 
stealing the queen’s personal belongings and was sentenced to 
death. Vernon, lady-in-waiting, liked Sarah and begged that her 
life be spared, thus her sentence was reduced to transportation to 
the colonies. 
 Sarah, designated as an indentured servant, arrived in Bal-
timore, Maryland in 1771 aboard a prison ship (Haughton 2002). 
She was sold to a Virginia plantation owner, Mr. Devall, who took 

8 Background and History
Sarah to work on his estate. Much to her owner’s chagrin, she 
ran away. Sarah fabricated a new identity for herself, and resur-
faced as Princess Susanna Caroline Matilda. She pretended to be 
the sister of Queen Charlotte. Sarah dressed as if she was a prin-
cess, as she somehow had managed to steal a dress and ring from 
the queen and smuggle them across the ocean. By sharing inti-
mate details about the royal family, Sarah convinced many Vir-
ginia aristocrats of her noble heritage, and they lavished her with 
money and gifts. 
 While Sarah was fashioning a new life for herself, Devall 
wanted her back (Haughton 2002). He circulated advertisements 
debunking Sarah’s claim of royalty, identifying her as a servant, 
and offering a reward for her return. Eventually, she was found 
and brought back to the plantation. When Devall left to fight in 
the Revolutionary War, Sarah seized upon the opportunity to es-
cape again. She was too well-known in Virginia to travel there, 
so she fled north. This time, she assumed the identity of a real 
person, an indentured servant who had recently arrived in Mary-
land. Both women shared the same name, Sarah Wilson. 
 Sarah traveled to New York where she met and married a 
British Army officer. After the Revolutionary War ended, Sarah’s 
husband opened a business financed with the money Sarah had 
stolen from the Virginia aristocrats during her masquerade as 
Princess Susanna. Sarah lived the remainder of her life in the style 
that she had longed for since her youth. 
 Czar Nicholas II and His Family 
 From time to time, the identities of deceased persons are stolen. 
In one fascinating case, identity theft was committed to achieve 
fame and to obtain the rights to an alleged fortune. Russian Czar 
Nicholas II was overthrown in a coup in 1917 (Lyzhina 2004). 
He, his immediate family, their doctor, and household servants 
were executed by the Bolshevik police in 1918, but rumors im-
mediately spread throughout the world that some of his children 
had escaped death. Over the next several decades, numerous 
men and women claimed to be the children and grandchildren 
of Nicholas II. 
 The youngest daughter of the czar, Anastasia Nikolayevna 
Romanova, was imitated most often. Her most convincing impos-
ter emerged in 1920 (Lyzhina 2004). The story began with an ap-
parent suicide attempt when a woman jumped off of a bridge in 

The History of Identity Theft 9
Berlin. She was rescued by a patrolman and taken to a mental in-
stitution, where she told the doctor that her name was Anastasia. 
German authorities were skeptical so they issued identification 
documents to her bearing the name of Anna Anderson. 
 The incident was reported around the world, and as a re-
sult, many friends and relatives of the czar’s family traveled to 
 Germany to interview Anna (Lyzhina 2004). Some were convinced 
she was, indeed, Anastasia, but others were adamant that she was 
an imposter. The Romanov relatives tried to settle the matter once 
and for all in 1927 when they declared that Anna Anderson was 
not Anastasia. Anna tried repeatedly over the years to prove in a 
court of law that she was Anastasia. Her last effort was in 1970. 
The court did not find enough evidence to confirm or refute her 
identity. Fourteen years later, Anna died in the United States. 
 When a mass grave was unearthed in Russia in 1991, the 
 decades-old mystery finally seemed to be solved (Gill et al. 1994). 
The grave contained the skeletal remains of nine people; DNA 
testing identified them as those of Nicholas II, his wife, three of 
their five children, their physician, and three of their servants. 
Further testing showed that Anna Anderson was not related to 
the royal family. She was simply an imposter (CRF 1997). Despite 
the DNA evidence, debate continues today over the identity of 
Anna Anderson and she and her case have been the subject of 
many books, movies, plays, and documentaries. 
 The Great Imposter 
 In the previous examples, identities were assumed based upon 
the imposters’ ability to imitate their victims’ behaviors, cloth-
ing, and so forth. By the 20th century, the creation of and reliance 
upon identification documents lead to changes in how identity 
theft was committed. Forged, stolen, and fictitious identification 
documents became the instruments for perpetrating identity theft. 
One well-known case is the subject of the book and movie,  The 
Great Imposter,  which is based upon the life of Ferdinand Waldo 
 Demara, Jr. (Lawrence Public Library n.d.). 
 Demara was born in Massachusetts in 1921 (Lawrence Pub-
lic Library n.d.). He dropped out of high school, ran away from 
home, and joined a monastery (Time 1951). A few years later, 
Demara abandoned his career as a monk and subsequently held 
many prestigious positions. He posed as a college instructor, doc-
tor, hospital orderly, and school teacher, but Demara eventually 

10 Background and History
began living as a monk again, this time joining a monastery in 
Canada (Peate n.d.). It was there where he met and befriended a 
surgeon, Dr. Joseph Cyr. Unbeknownst to the surgeon, Demara 
stole Cyr’s medical credentials. In March 1951, Demara joined the 
Royal Canadian Navy posing as Dr. Cyr and was assigned to a 
ship that was stationed in the midst of the Korean conflict. Even 
though he had no formal medical training, Demara performed 
many successful surgeries while onboard (Lawrence  Public 
 Library n.d.). 
 Cyr’s mother discovered the fraud when she was reading a 
story in the newspaper about the doctor’s heroic wartime surgi-
cal accomplishments and noticed that the picture in the paper 
was not her son (Peate n.d.). She contacted her son who, in turn, 
contacted the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Demara was im-
mediately discharged from the Navy and deported. He returned 
to the United States where he continued his career of deception 
(Lawrence Public Library n.d.). Demara’s identities included a 
 zoologist, law enforcement officer, scholar, medical researcher, 
hospital orderly, and school teacher. He was arrested several times 
over the years for fraud, embezzlement, theft, and forgery, but 
was not deterred. By his own admission, he did not choose a life 
of deception for financial gain. Rather, he enjoyed the challenge 
and expressed his motive as unadulterated mischief. 
 The Most Misused Social Security Number in History 
 The advent of Social Security numbers brought about a new 
type of identity theft. On August 14, 1935, President Franklin D. 
Roosevelt signed the Social Security Act into law (SSA 2003). At 
the time, the United States was suffering from the worst economic 
crisis in history, the Great Depression. The purpose of the act was 
to help restore economic security and to ensure stability in the 
future. For record-keeping purposes, the Social Security number-
ing (SSN) system was developed, and the first Social Security card 
was issued in November 1936 (SSA n.d.-a). By the end of 1937, 
about 30 million people had been assigned SSNs (SSA 2005). The 
program was still in its infancy when an incident foretold how 
vulnerable SSNs were to being grossly misused. 
 The E. H. Ferree Company manufactured and distributed 
wallets to department stores across the United States (SSA n.d.-b). 
In 1938, the company launched a campaign to market a unique 
feature of their product, a small slot made specifically to hold a 

The History of Identity Theft 11
Social Security card. For demonstration purposes, a sample card 
was placed in every wallet. The SSN on the card, however, was 
an actual number that belonged to Hilda Schrader Whitcher, a 
secretary for E. H. Ferree Company. By 1943, nearly 5,800 people 
were using Whitcher’s number as their own. The Social Security 
Administration (SSA) cancelled the number and issued Whitcher 
a new one. Despite these efforts, the number continued to be mis-
used over the next 40 years by more than 40,000 people. 
 In retrospect, the incident predicted the risks surrounding the 
use of SSNs as identifiers, but the warning signs went unheeded. 
SSNs soon became identifiers for employees, taxpayers, patients, 
and military personnel (SSA 2005). The problems became even 
more apparent by 1971 when a report was issued by a SSA task 
force. It recommended that the SSA refrain from encouraging the 
use of SSNs for identification purposes. Unfortunately, it was too 
late. SSNs were already being widely used and misused as identi-
fiers in the public and private sectors. 
 The Chicago Debacle 
 The introduction of credit cards spurred another new type of 
identity theft. The first credit cards were issued in the 1920s by 
gasoline companies, department stores, restaurants, and hotels 
(Jabaily 2004). Each establishment had their own credit card, 
which meant that a person had to carry several different cards. 
The Diners Club issued the first versatile credit card in 1950. It 
could be used at any restaurant or hotel that was a member of the 
Diners Club network. Franklin National Bank was the first bank 
to offer a credit card that could be used to charge purchases at any 
establishment located anywhere in the nation. A few years later, 
Bank of America introduced a multipurpose credit card. In 1958, 
the bank mailed out nearly 60,000 unsolicited cards to people 
living in Fresno, California (Stein n.d.). Recipients could use the 
cards right away, as no action was required to activate the cards. 
The marketing ploy was so successful that it triggered fierce com-
petition among the banks. It culminated in  the Chicago Debacle . 
 Prior to the 1966 holiday shopping season, several banks 
mailed 5 million unsolicited credit cards to addresses in the Chi-
cago area (O’Neil 1970). The banks were immediately swamped 
with complaints. Individuals who never received the credit cards 
received bills for purchases they did not make; furthermore, chil-
dren and pets received cards in their names. Credit cards were 

12 Background and History
mailed to convicted felons who went on shopping sprees and 
then failed to pay their bills. Many credit cards were stolen out of 
mailboxes, and postal workers were accused of stealing the cards 
and selling them. Eventually, organized criminal enterprises got 
involved in the credit card fraud business. Consumers were out-
raged (Stein n.d.). Many citizens and legislators advocated ban-
ning credit cards altogether. Congressional hearings ensued, but 
the controversy subsided over the next few years. By 1978, credit 
cards were commonplace in American households. 
 The First Documented Multinational 
Internet Bank Robbery 
 Identity theft existed long before computers, the Internet, or the 
World Wide Web. However, one of the most drastic changes in the 
history of identity theft coincided with the technological develop-
ments of the 1990s. Between 1992 and 1995, technology made it 
possible for financial institutions to offer their services online, and 
databases became a necessity for managing the exchange of mas-
sive amounts of personal information. As technology evolved, 
criminals devised new methods to exploit its weaknesses. 
Breaches occurred at the same time financial institutions were try-
ing to persuade customers to conduct their banking transactions 
online, but one incident eroded customer confidence to the point 
that the future of online banking was in jeopardy. It involved an 
international ring which exploited technological weaknesses and 
resulted in one of the largest known online bank robberies in 
 history. 
 Vladimir Levin, a 1971 graduate of Tekhnologichesky Uni-
versity, lived and worked in St. Petersburg, Russia (Smart Com-
puting n.d.). At age 23, he discovered a flaw in Citibank’s online 
security that allowed him to transfer money from Citibank’s cus-
tomer accounts to his personal account in Finland. Recognizing 
the potential for great wealth, Levin recruited several accomplices 
to help him rob the bank. In July 1994, members of the ring used 
stolen usernames and passwords to log onto Citibank’s computer 
network and quickly transfer millions of dollars to financial in-
stitutions located around the world. In August, bank officials no-
ticed two suspicious wire transfers totaling about $400,000 and 
reported it to the FBI. With the help of Russian authorities, the FBI 
traced the activities to Levin’s home. Since no extradition agree-
ment pertaining to electronic crimes existed between Russia and 

The History of Identity Theft 13
the United States, Levin could not be brought to the United States 
to stand trial, so authorities watched his every move and waited 
for the opportunity to bring him to justice. 
 On March 3, 1995, an Interpol agent arrested Levin as he got 
off of a plane in the United Kingdom (House of Lords 1997). He 
was extradited to United States to face charges of stealing nearly 
$12 million (Smart Computing n.d.). Through a plea agreement, 
Levin pled guilty to stealing a lesser amount of $3.7 million 
and was sentenced to three years in prison and ordered to pay 
$240,000 in restitution to Citibank. Although bank customers may 
have been inconvenienced, they did not experience any direct 
monetary losses due to the breach. 
 This was the first time that a breach of this magnitude was 
publicly acknowledged by a financial institution. However, it may 
not have been the very first Internet bank robbery. Up until that 
time, most financial institutions were reluctant to report breaches 
to law enforcement authorities, their customers, or the media for 
two main reasons: the publicity could result in a loss of customers 
or stop customers from entering into online transactions and they 
feared that the publicity might encourage criminals to compro-
mise databases for the sake of notoriety (Golden 1999). 
 This incident, in conjunction with others, reinforced many 
known shortcomings and brought new security issues to light. 
Although financial institutions were concerned about protecting 
themselves and their customers from network intrusions, only a 
small portion of their budgets was allocated to information tech-
nology (IT) security (Golden 1999). The long-held belief that in-
siders, those within organizations, were responsible for the thefts 
of proprietary information was no longer accurate. Outsiders 
also posed a threat. Identity theft had evolved into a global crime 
 facilitated by the exploitation of technology. 
 An Early Case of Credit Card Fraud 
 During the 1990s, retailers embraced the migration of their busi-
nesses to the World Wide Web. This offered convenience to cur-
rent customers and served as a platform for attracting new ones. 
Many merchants found that a brick and mortar storefront was 
no longer necessary. Instead, businesses operated solely on the 
World Wide Web, but business owners and their customers were 
confronted with the same issues as those experienced by the fi-
nancial industry. As e-commerce exploded, security breaches did 

14 Background and History
too. Many of the breaches resulted in credit card fraud, a type of 
identity theft. As merchants lured customers to their Web sites, an 
incident  occurred that threatened the future of e-commerce. 
 On March 28, 1997, employees of an Internet service pro-
vider (ISP) found suspicious software on one of their servers; the 
software was designed to steal usernames and passwords (Cryp-
tome JYA Archives 1997). As the employees worked to secure the 
server, they noticed that the hacker was logged onto the server 
and in the midst of erasing traces of the intrusion. Also logged 
onto the server was one of the ISP’s legitimate customers. The 
customer, identified as “C. W.” in court documents, was chatting 
with “Smak,” the trespasser. Smak told C. W. that he had hacked 
into the server and stolen all of the credit card numbers used on 
an e-commerce site. He offered to sell them to C. W. Smak bragged 
that he also had another 60,000 credit card numbers that he had 
stolen from various sources and offered to them to C. W. as well. 
 With the help of C. W., the FBI launched an investigation 
(Cryptome JYA Archives 1997). C. W. purchased 710 valid credit 
card numbers from Smak and later purchased 580 more. When 
Smak offered to sell an encrypted CD containing over 100,000 sto-
len credit card numbers, C. W. expressed interest. They met at San 
Francisco International Airport to finalize the deal, but instead of 
leaving the airport a wealthy man, 36 year-old Carlos Felipe Sal-
gado, Jr., aka Smak, was arrested. He chose to enter guilty pleas 
to four federal charges rather than face a trial. Salgado pled guilty 
to unauthorized access of a computer in furtherance of fraud, un-
authorized access of a computer causing damage, trafficking in 
stolen credit card numbers, and possessing more than 15 stolen 
credit card numbers with intent to defraud. 
 This incident was highly publicized, but unlike the bank-
ing breach, the names of the ISP and the merchants were never 
revealed. Consumer advocates voiced their disdain concerning 
nondisclosure practices. Adding insult to injury, the ISP and the 
merchants were referred to as “victims” in the court documents. 
The individuals whose credit card accounts were compromised 
knew something that no one seemed willing to acknowledge—
they were victims, too. Identity thieves learned many lessons 
from this case and similar ones throughout the 1990s. They no 
longer had to rummage through dumpsters or purchase identi-
ties from insiders; the crime can be committed online, and soft-
ware could now perform some of the tasks needed to facilitate it 
(i.e., stealing usernames and passwords). Hardware and software 

The History of Identity Theft 15
allow  identities to be stored in many locations, such as on a CD 
or in a database. In conclusion, there are many ways to exploit 
technology, and technology is now firmly established as part of 
the process of stealing, buying, selling, trading, or giving away 
proprietary information. 
 The First Internet Murder 
 Some crimes are committed online, while others are committed off-
line but involve the use of online resources. A 1999 case, dubbed 
“the Internet Murder,” shocked the United States as it was the first 
case of offline stalking and murder involving the online purchase 
of personal information (Wright 2000). Liam Youens was obsessed 
with Amy Boyer, and maintained several Web sites where he 
chronicled his fixation and plotted her murder. 
 There is no indication that Liam and Amy were friends or 
that they ever had a conversation (AmyBoyer.org 2004). He wrote 
on his Web site that they were in the same church group while in 
the 8th grade, but it appears that his obsession began when they 
were in a 10th grade algebra class together. After graduating from 
high school in 1997, Liam left his hometown to attend college in 
Rochester, New York (Wright 2000). He stalked Amy when he was 
home on breaks from school. After one year, Liam dropped out of 
college and returned home to live with his mother. Shortly there-
after, he was convicted of domestic violence upon his mother. In 
spite of the conviction, Liam was able to purchase several guns 
and ammunition, and he continued to write about Amy on his 
Web site (AmyBoyer.org 2004). At one point, he thought he had 
lost track of her, so he purchased a background check from an 
online firm, 1-800 US Search. It confirmed Amy still lived at home, 
but Liam wanted to know where she worked. He was ecstatic 
about the information he bought from another online information 
broker, Docusearch. Liam purchased her SSN, the name of her 
employer, and her employer’s address. On October 15, 1999, he 
made his last Web site entry and then got into his car and drove to 
where 20-year-old Amy was employed (Wright 2000). He waited 
in his car for her to leave work, and when she got into her car, 
Liam pulled up to the driver’s side and shot her numerous times 
before shooting and killing himself. 
 Two days after her death, Amy was victimized again when 
she became a victim of identity theft (AmyBoyer.org 2004). Her 
loved ones were devastated, outraged, and frustrated. Prior to 

16 Background and History
the murder, Amy’s purse had been stolen. It contained checks, a 
credit card, and her Social Security card. Amy reported the theft 
to the police, cancelled her credit card, and put a stop payment 
on the checks. When her murder was reported in the news, the 
thieves took advantage of the situation. They manufactured a 
driver’s  license in her name and used the information to make 
fraudulent credit card purchases. They also cashed nearly $5,000 
in counterfeit checks in her name. 
 Amy’s mother sued Docusearch. Almost four years after 
Amy’s murder, the Supreme Court of New Hampshire issued their 
findings ( Helen Remsburg v. Docusearch ). The court ruled that, when 
an information broker or private investigator receives a request 
from a client for a third party’s personal information, the identity 
of the client and the purpose of the request must be determined 
before selling the information. The court also ruled that an informa-
tion broker or private investigator is intruding upon a person’s pri-
vacy if they obtain and sell his or her SSN, without permission, to a 
client. Docusearch settled the lawsuit by agreeing to pay $85,000 to 
Amy’s estate, however the heinous crime brought to the forefront 
the privacy, legal, moral, and ethical issues surrounding the role of 
technology, including online data brokers, in supporting criminal 
activities (Ramer 2004). These same issues are still debated today. 
 History is replete with incidences of identity theft. Although 
only a few are cited here, they provide a brief profile of the people 
who commit this crime. Identity theft, however, cannot be pre-
vented unless the characteristics of the perpetrators, motive, and 
modus operandi are addressed. 
 Who Are the Perpetrators? 
 Information regarding the perpetrators of identity theft is lim-
ited because most research focuses on victims of the crime. This 
section reviews existing data in order to better understand who 
commits identity theft and why and how they commit it. Motives 
explain why individuals commit crimes and are the underlying 
needs that compel an individual to act in a manner that will sat-
isfy those needs (Casey 2001). The underlying needs may be ma-
terial, emotional, and/or psychological. Historically, the motives 
for committing crimes have not changed. 
 In contrast, the modus operandi change and evolve over time 
(Casey 2001). A modus operandi (MO) refers to how individuals 

Who Are the Perpetrators? 17
commit crimes. They are the actions taken by perpetrators to en-
sure that the crime can be carried out successfully, to guarantee 
they will not be caught during the act(s) of preparing for and com-
mitting the crime, and to avoid being identified as the person who 
committed the crime. Given that MOs change and evolve over 
time, further discussion of those methods most commonly used 
to obtain identifying information is presented in chapter 2, but the 
following case illustrates why and how one woman committed 
identity theft. 
 According to reports, a background check would have re-
vealed that Shovana Sloan was on probation and had a history 
of identity theft and fraud-related convictions at the time she ap-
plied for a job through a temporary employment agency (Seal 
2006b). The agency placed Sloan in the billing department of a 
hospital in Manassas, Virginia. She was given access to the pa-
tients’ personal identifying information in order to perform her 
job’s tasks. In 2003, she stole and used the SSN of a patient named 
Susanne Sloane ( Suzanne Sloane v. Equifax Information Services ). For 
months, Sloan pretended to be Suzanne and incurred over $30,000 
of fraudulent debt in her victim’s name. 
 Sloan was arrested in March 2004 (Seal 2006a). Her written 
confession reveals not only her motives for committing identity 
theft but also her methods. Since she had unfettered access to the 
identities of many patients, one might wonder how she chose her 
victim. She explained that she stole Suzanne’s identity because 
their names were similar. Perpetrators often choose a victim with 
a similar or the same name to minimize the risk of slipping up 
and getting caught. Sloan also admitted that she needed assis-
tance with reestablishing her financial stability and to afford the 
lifestyle she wanted. She understood that it was highly unlikely 
that a recently released convicted felon could obtain over $30,000 
of credit in her own name. 
 Sloan was convicted once again and sentenced to prison 
(Virginia Department of Corrections). One question remains un-
answered: did Sloan accept the job at the hospital intending to 
steal identities, or did she take advantage of an opportunity that 
presented itself to her? 
 Opportunity Takers or Makers 
 A typology developed by Robert Morris II at Sam Houston Uni-
versity in Huntsville, Texas, suggests that identity thieves take 

18 Background and History
advantage of opportunities that are present or create opportuni-
ties when none exist (Morris 2004). In the exploratory research 
titled “The Development of an Identity Theft Offender Typology: 
A Theoretical Approach” and published in  The Graduate Research 
Journal,  Morris divides identity thieves into four major categories: 
the circumstantial identity thief, the semi-pro, the professional, 
and the survivalist. 
 The first category, the circumstantial identity thief, is the 
starting point for most identity thieves (Morris 2004). Several cir-
cumstances must exist in unison for the crime to take place. The 
offender must be presented with an opportunity to perpetrate the 
crime, such as finding a wallet containing a credit card. Then, he 
must have an opportunity to use the card. For example, the of-
fender might be a clerk at a store where he can process credit card 
transactions. It is important to note that under different circum-
stances the offenders, such as the clerk, may not commit identity 
theft. If they do, it could be limited to one incident. On the other 
hand, offenders who continue to perpetrate identity theft prog-
ress to the next category. 
 The semi-pro identity thief learns new techniques from each 
experience (Morris 2004). They find that the incentives for com-
mitting identity theft outweigh the incentives for not committing 
the crime and that the financial and nonfinancial benefits are sub-
stantial because identity theft is easy to commit and there is little 
chance of apprehension by law enforcement. Perpetrators in this 
category do not wait for opportunities to arise; instead, they in-
tentionally engage new methods for acquiring and using stolen 
personal identifying information. Offenders tend to commit the 
crime with more and more frequency as time passes. For example, 
offenders in this category may recruit others to steal personal in-
formation from their workplaces. As the offender finds new ways 
to use the information, the recruits are called upon to steal more 
and more frequently. The offender might also develop a network 
of customers to purchase stolen information. Unsold informa-
tion is used in new ways such as opening utilities, telephone, and 
cell phone accounts. After a while, the perpetrator acquires the 
skills, methods, and knowledge needed to advance to the next 
category. 
 The professional identity thief may regard identity theft as 
an occupation (Morris 2004). Offenders in this category utilize a 
vast array of methods, ranging from stealing mail to hacking da-
tabases, to obtain personal information. They are adept at hiding 

Who Are the Perpetrators? 19
their true identities. In order to remain invisible for long periods 
of time, some professional identity thieves completely take over 
the identities of other people and often enlist others, called co-op 
identity thieves, as partners in carrying out the crimes. 
 The last category is the survivalist identity thief (Morris 
2004). Those in this category jeopardize the safety and security of 
U.S. citizens and law enforcement personnel. The survivalist may 
hide behind another person’s identity to avoid being arrested. He 
may be a suspect in a criminal case or an escapee from jail. If a sur-
vivalist is arrested, he may use another person’s information to 
conceal his true identity and may even resort to violence in order 
to keep his true identity concealed. Terrorists are also classified 
as survivalist identity thieves. They may be in the United States 
illegally, and their purpose for utilizing identity theft is often to 
conceal their identities as they plan or carry out terrorist acts with 
the intent to kill or injure others. 
 The research typology outlined here is useful for understand-
ing the differences between a one-time offender and a terrorist 
who perpetrates identity theft. Nonetheless, other personal char-
acteristics, such as age and gender, must also be taken into con-
sideration when building a comprehensive profile of an identity 
thief. 
 Gender 
 Existing research can help to ascertain if there is a link between 
certain demographic characteristics and the likelihood of commit-
ting crime. Statistics demonstrate, for instance, that one gender is 
more likely to carry out a crime than the other. The “Sourcebook 
of Criminal Justice Statistics” contains information derived from 
over 100 criminal justice sources (Pastore and Maguire n.d.). Even 
though it does not contain statistics explicitly for identity theft 
offenders, it provides the gender of persons arrested and charged 
with all types of crimes. According to the statistics, more males 
than females are arrested and charged with committing crimes. 
From 2002 through 2006, 76.5 percent of all arrestees were male; 
only 23.5 percent were female. Given these statistics, one would 
expect available research to confirm that more males than females 
commit identity theft. Interestingly, research results are mixed. 
Two studies found that more males than females commit iden-
tity theft; yet a third study shows more females commit identity 
theft. 

20 Background and History
 The most recent study, “Identity Fraud Trends and Patterns: 
Building a Data-Based Foundation for Proactive Enforcement,” 
was conducted at Utica College’s Center for Identity Management 
and Information Protection (CIMIP) in Utica, New York (Gordon 
et al. 2007). The results of the research were released in October 
2007 at a conference held by the Economic Crime Institute of Utica 
College. Researchers analyzed 517 cases that were investigated by 
the United States Secret Service (USSS) from 2000 through 2006. 
The study found that 67.4 percent of identity theft perpetrators 
were male. 
 Exploratory research conducted by the Identity Theft Part-
nerships in Prevention, an outreach initiative at Michigan State 
University (MSU), School of Criminal Justice in East Lansing, 
Michigan, showed similar findings. The unpublished study, 
“Identity Theft: Predator Profiles,” ascertained that 64 percent of 
identity thieves were male (Collins and Hoffman 2004). The study 
examined randomly selected reports of arrests or convictions of 
1,037 perpetrators from 1999 to mid-April 2002. The data were re-
trieved from the Web sites of state, local, and federal law enforce-
ment agencies, other government entities, and media reports. 
 The third study, “Exploring the Crime of Identity Theft: Prev-
alence, Clearance Rates, and Victim/Offender Characteristics,” 
used a case study approach. It was conducted by researchers at 
the University of South Florida (USF) who used information col-
lected from a sizeable police agency for cases that resulted in an 
arrest (Allison et al. 2005). This analysis found that females were 
more likely to commit identity theft than males. Of the 52 offend-
ers in the study, 63 percent were female. 
 Given the differences in the methodologies of the three stud-
ies, more research is needed to determine if, indeed, gender plays 
a significant role in the commission of identity theft. However, 
there may be other factors that contribute to the statistical differ-
ences such as where the cases originated. The data used in the 
Utica College study were collected from a federal agency, while 
the data used in the USF study were collected from a police de-
partment. Cases investigated by the USSS are generally referred to 
them by state and local law enforcement agencies located across 
the United States and must meet stringent USSS thresholds. The 
cases in the USF study are concentrated in specific area of one 
state. 
 Available research also suggests that while females com -
mit fewer crimes than males, females commit identity theft more 

Who Are the Perpetrators? 21
often than most other types of crimes. The research conducted at 
Utica College found that 32.6 percent of offenders were female 
(Gordon et al. 2007). “Identity Theft: Predator Profiles,” a study 
done at MSU, concluded that 36 percent of perpetrators were fe-
male (Collins and Hoffman 2004). Both studies indicate that more 
females commit identity theft as compared to overall crimes at-
tributed to women. According to the “Sourcebook of Criminal 
Justice Statistics,” females accounted for 23.5 percent of those ar-
rested and charged with crimes in general from 2002 through 2006 
(Pastore and Maguire n.d.). The study conducted at Utica College 
shows that the number of females committing identity theft is 
9.1 percent higher than the overall crime rate for women, 32.6 
percent compared to 23.5 percent; while MSU’s numbers exceed 
the overall crime rate by 12.5 percent. Hence, research indicates 
that females commit identity theft more frequently than all other 
crimes in general. 
 The findings of the Utica College and MSU research are sub-
stantiated in a report released by the U.S. Department of Justice, 
Bureau of Justice Statistics. The report, “Women Offenders,” does 
not provide specific identity theft conviction statistics (Greenfeld 
and Snell 1999). However, property offenses such as burglary, 
larceny, and fraud are discussed. Stolen identities are often an 
element of many types of fraud, including forgery and embez-
zlement (U.S. Congress 2002). “Women Offenders” suggests that 
more females were convicted in state courts of property felonies 
than violent and drug felonies between 1990 and 1996 (Green-
feld and Snell 1999). Within the category of property felonies, the 
number of females convicted of fraud rose 55 percent (Greenfeld 
and Snell 1999). The statistics for one year, 1996, show that women 
made up 41 percent of the felons convicted of fraud, forgery, and 
embezzlement. 
 Identity theft is considered not only fraud but also a white-
collar crime. Although the definition of white-collar crime has 
been debated since the late 1940s, it is widely accepted that it oc-
curs when an individual or entity violates a position of trust or re-
sponsibility and the violation results in personal gains or benefits 
a particular organization (Helmkamp et al. 1996). White-collar 
crime statistics, therefore, must be taken into account when deter-
mining the role of gender in identity theft. 
 A report issued by the National White Collar Crime Center 
(NW3C), “White Collar Crime Statistics,” contains detailed data 
on arrests and case dispositions from 1990 to 2005 (NW3C 2007). 

22 Background and History
White-collar crimes are divided into three categories: fraud, forg-
ery/counterfeiting, and embezzlement. In the report, the fraud 
category is divided into 18 types of offenses: tax; financial insti-
tutions; securities and exchange; mail; wire, radio, or television; 
bankruptcy; Social Security; false impersonation; citizenship and 
naturalization; passport; identification documents and informa-
tion; false claims and services–government; false statements; con-
spiracy to defraud the United States; unauthorized access devices; 
computer; health care; and other. Arrestees are delineated by 
gender as well as by the category and type of white-collar crime 
 associated with the arrests. 
 According to the report, there were 182,752 fraud arrests in 
1990 compared to 231,721 in 2005 (NW3C 2007). Males accounted 
for over half of the arrests in both 1990 (54%) and 2005 (55%). 
Forgery/counterfeiting arrests totaled 50,403 in 1990 and 87,346 in 
2005. In 1990, 64 percent of the arrestees were men. That number 
declined to 60 percent in 2005. Conversely, the number of women 
arrested for forgery/counterfeiting increased 4 percent between 
1999 and 2005 from 36 percent to 40 percent. There were 7,708 
embezzlement arrests in 1990 compared to 14,097 arrests in 2005. 
Nearly 60 percent (58%) of the arrestees in 1990 were male com-
pared to 50 percent in 2005. In other words, females were arrested 
for embezzling at the exact same rate as males in 2005. The report 
clearly shows that although more males are arrested for white-
collar crimes, arrests among females have risen over the 16-year 
period. The only category representing a decline in women arrest-
ees is in the category of fraud. The number of arrestees decreased 
from 46 percent in 1990 to 45 percent in 2005. 
 It is important to note that although identity theft is a white-
collar crime, not all white-collar crimes are identity theft or even 
involve identity theft at all. Perjury, lying under oath in a legal 
proceeding, is an example of a white-collar crime that is not iden-
tity theft. However, the 18 types of fraud offenses recognized in 
the report, “White Collar Crime Statistics,” are very similar to the 
identity theft fraud offenses that are tracked by the Federal Trade 
Commission (FTC). Complaints of identity theft are collected by 
the FTC from victims of the crime. The complaints are classified 
by the type of fraud reported by the victims, that is, credit card, 
government documents or benefits, employment-related, phone 
or utilities, bank, loan, other, and attempted identity theft. 
 In summation, research suggests that gender plays a role 
in the likelihood of committing identity theft. More research, 

Who Are the Perpetrators? 23
 however, is warranted to determine if males tend to commit iden-
tity theft more often than females and if females commit identity 
theft more frequently than other types of crimes. 
 Age 
 Research indicates that age is a factor in identity theft as well 
as in other crimes. The “Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statis-
tics” contains data on the ages of individuals at the time they 
were arrested (Pastore and Maguire n.d.). It suggests that the 
number of arrests tends to decrease as the age of the perpetra-
tors increases. In 2002, 5.2 percent of all arrestees were 14 years 
old and younger. The largest number of arrests (41.2%) occurred 
in the 15- to 24-year-old age group. There were fewer arrests 
(12.3%) in the next age group, 25- through 29-year-olds, and even 
fewer (10.9%) persons aged 30 to 34 years. Arrests declined to 
10.4 percent in the 35- to 39-year-old age group. There was a sub-
stantial decrease in the age group of 40- to 44-year-olds, which 
accounted for 8.9 percent of the overall arrests. Arrestees in the 
45- to 49-year-old age group fell to 5.5 percent. Those in the 50- 
to 54-year-old age group dropped to 2.9 percent. The number of 
arrests in the remaining age groups also declined, that is, 55- to 
59-year-olds (1.4%), 60- to 64-year-olds (0.6%), and 65-year-olds 
and older (0.6%). As the groups ad   vanced in age, the number of 
arrests declined significantly. However, the relationship of age to 
perpetrators when it comes to identity theft seems to differ from 
the pattern as it relates to crime in general, and research suggests 
that the aging-out process does not pertain to identity theft of-
fenders. Essentially, perpetrators may begin committing identity 
theft at an older age and continue it later in life as compared to 
other types of crime. 
 In the study conducted at MSU, “Identity Theft: Predator 
Profiles,” identity thieves ranged in age from 17 to 67 years , and 
20 percent of those arrested or convicted were between 17 and 24 
years (Collins and Hoffman 2004). However, most of the offend-
ers (43%) were in the 25- to 34-years-old age group. One third 
(33%) were 35 to 49 years old. Fourteen percent of the offenders 
were between 50 and 67 years old. 
 The results of the study conducted at Utica College, “Identity 
Fraud Trends and Patterns: Building a Data-based Foundation 
for Proactive Enforcement,” were similar. This study found that 
perpetrators ranged in age from 18 years to 65 years and older 

24 Background and History
 (Gordon et al. 2007). About 19 percent of the offenders were be-
tween the ages of 18 and 24 years old. The 25- to 34-year-old age 
group represented the highest number of offenders (42.5%). One 
third (33%)of the offenders were 35 to 49 years old. A significant 
decline was seen in the 50- to 64-year-olds (5.1%), and the num-
bers continue to decrease among those age 65 and older (0.09%). 
 A study from USF, “Exploring the Crime of Identity Theft: 
Prevalence, Clearance Rates, and Victim/Offender Characteris-
tics,” found a slightly older age range for offenders, but followed 
the same pattern as the previous two studies. In this study, the 
age of offenders ranged from 28 to 49 years of age, and the mean, 
or average, age of the perpetrators was 32 years old (Allison et al. 
2005). 
 In sum, research suggests that perpetrators begin committing 
identity theft at an older age and continue committing the crime 
later in life when compared to overall crimes in general. Those 
15 to 24 years old constitute the majority of arrests for crimes in 
general; however, this age group is not the largest for identity 
thieves; rather, most identity thieves are between the ages of 25 
and 34. Arrests for all crimes in general begin to decline signifi-
cantly with the 25 to 29 age group; whereas the most active iden-
tity thieves encompass and surpass these ages. 
 Ethnicity 
 Very little research is available regarding the ethnic background 
of identity thieves. According to the “Sourcebook of Criminal Jus-
tice Statistics,” the majority (69.7%) of those arrested in 2006 for 
crimes in general were Caucasian (Pastore and Maguire n.d.). Ar-
rests among the Hispanic population are included in this figure. 
 African American arrestees accounted for less than a third (28%) 
of all those arrested that year. The remainder included American 
Indians and Alaskan Natives (1.3%) and Asian or Pacific Islanders 
(1.1%). These numbers are consistent when compared to statistical 
data for those arrested for fraud. The ethnicity of persons charged 
with fraud offenses was comprised of 68.7 percent Caucasian, 30 
percent African Americans, 0.6 percent American Indians and Alas-
kan Natives, and 0.7 percent Asian or Pacific Islanders. In contrast, 
the results of two identity theft studies differ from these statistics. 
 The study done at USF, “Exploring the Crime of Iden-
tity Theft: Prevalence, Clearance Rates, and Victim/Offender 
 Characteristics,” concluded that only 27 percent of the offenders 

Who Are the Perpetrators? 25
were Caucasian, while 69 percent were African American (Allison 
et al. 2005). Furthermore, Asians and Hispanics each comprised 
only 1 percent of the offenders. The study also pointed out that 
Hispanics were underrepresented in the numbers of perpetra-
tors, as they comprised 19 percent of the city’s overall population 
where the research was conducted. 
 The research done at Utica College, “Identity Fraud Trends 
and Patterns: Building a Data-based Foundation for Proactive 
Enforcement,” found that over half (53.8%) of the identity theft 
offenders were African American (Gordon et al. 2007). Cauca-
sian (38.3%) and Hispanic (4.8%) defendants accounted for 43.1 
percent of the perpetrators, and Asians made up 3.1 percent of 
identity theft offenders. None of the defendants were classified 
as American Indian or Alaskan Native. When compared to the 
2006 data in the “Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics” for 
all fraud arrests, an obvious disparity emerges. The number of 
Asian defendants (3.1%) in the study was over four times more 
than the number arrested for fraud in general (0.7%), as indicated 
by the “Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics.” In the study, 
Caucasian offenders were 26.2 percent scarcer than the number 
of total fraud arrests among the Caucasian and American Indian 
or Alaskan Native ethic groups combined (i.e., 43.1%, compared 
to 69.3%, respectively). Conversely, African American offenders 
(53.8%) greatly exceeded the number of those arrested for fraud 
offenses in general (30%). 
 It is interesting to note that two studies indicate that there 
is a correlation between the ethnicity and gender of those who 
commit identity theft. According to the research conducted at 
Utica College, more African American females (61.6%) commit 
identity theft than Caucasian females (30.8%), Asian females 
(2.9%), or Hispanic females (4.7%) (Gordon et al. 2007). The study 
conducted at USF found that identity thieves are most likely to 
be  African American females (Allison et al. 2005). Still, more re-
search is needed to establish if ethnicity is a factor in determin-
ing the likelihood of committing identity theft. Moreover, further 
research is needed to ascertain if there is a correlation between 
gender, ethnicity, and identity theft. 
 Criminal History 
 Law enforcement agencies nationwide have noticed a steady 
rise in identity theft committed by offenders with prior criminal 

26 Background and History
 histories (White House 2006). Additionally, many of the offenders 
have an extensive record of major crimes such as drug  offenses. 
The study, “Identity Fraud Trends and Patterns: Building a Data-
Based Foundation for Proactive Enforcement,” found that 29.9 
percent of identity theft offenders had prior criminal histories 
(Gordon et al. 2007). Of those, the most common offense was 
larceny/theft (26.6%) followed by fraud (15%), forgery (12.8%), 
violent crimes   (12.6%), and drug offenses (9.4%). Over 5 percent 
(5.4%) had identity theft  offenses on their records. A few offenders 
had prior criminal histories of terrorism (2.2%) and immigration 
violations (2%). 
 Another study, “Identity Theft: Predator Profiles,” found that 
13.9 percent of the perpetrators had prior identity theft convic-
tions (Collins and Hoffman 2004). The study, however, did not 
take into account prior arrests or convictions for other crimes. 
Even so, both studies indicate that the majority of offenders have 
no prior criminal record of identity theft convictions. Since very 
little research is available in this area, more research is needed to 
determine if, indeed, most identities thieves do not have crimi-
nal histories at the time they are arrested or convicted of identity 
theft. 
 Country of Origin 
 Research indicates that the majority of U.S. identity theft offend-
ers are born in the United States. The study, “Identity Fraud 
Trends and Patterns: Building a Data-Based Foundation for Pro-
active Enforcement,” found that 75.9 percent were born in the 
United States (Gordon et al. 2007). Excluding the United States, 
the most often reported countries of origin were Mexico, Nigeria, 
the United Kingdom, Cuba, and Israel. The study, “Identity Theft: 
Predator Profiles,” found that only 9 percent of those arrested or 
convicted were either illegal immigrants or foreign nationals, 
however offenders’ countries of birth were not provided in the 
study (Collins and Hoffman 2004).
 Since the study, “Identity Fraud Trends and Patterns: Build-
ing a Data-Based Foundation for Proactive Enforcement,” found 
that nearly a quarter of the offenders were born outside of the 
United States, more research is recommended in this area. None-
theless, both studies seem to indicate that the majority of identity 
thieves in the United States are U.S. citizens. 

Who Are the Perpetrators? 27
 Affiliation with Other Crimes 
 Identity theft is often used to facilitate other crimes, both violent 
and nonviolent, and stolen identities are used to conceal criminals’ 
and terrorists’ true identities to help them avoid detection by law 
enforcement authorities. Identities are used to purchase services, 
such as cell phones, needed to carry out all types of crimes. Cash 
obtained by identity theft is used to purchase drugs and finance 
terrorist acts. Sometimes, the merchandise procured by identity 
thieves is sold to raise funds for these purposes. 
 The “Identity Theft: Predator Profiles” study found that, at 
the time of their arrest, 30 percent of perpetrators were charged 
with other crimes in addition to identity theft (Collins and Hoff-
man 2004). Fifteen percent were charged with violent crimes such 
as homicide or assault; another 15 percent were charged with 
drug-related offenses. On the other hand, “Identity Fraud Trends 
and Patterns: Building a Data-Based Foundation for Proactive 
Enforcement” discovered notably lower numbers (Gordon et al. 
2007). According to that study, drug possession and drug traf-
ficking combined accounted for 1.9 percent of offenses facilitated 
by identity theft; about 1 percent (0.9%) of the offenses involved 
weapons. Given the disparity between these findings, additional 
research is needed to determine the frequency and types of crimes 
that are facilitated by identity theft. 
 Affiliation with Other Criminals 
 Nationwide, law enforcement agencies have reported a continu-
ous rise in identity thefts attributed to motorcycle clubs, terrorist 
groups, street gangs, and organized criminal enterprises (Presi-
dent’s Identity Theft Task Force 2007). Although the structure of 
these organizations ranges from loosely knit to highly organized, 
there is evidence that identity theft often involves more than one 
individual. “Identity Theft: Predator Profiles,” the research con-
ducted at MSU, found that the majority (60%) of identity theft 
cases involved a network (Collins and Hoffman 2004). For clari-
fication, a network is defined as two or more individuals work-
ing together to perpetrate a crime. Since the study was conducted 
shortly after the 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States, re-
searchers analyzed the connection between Al Qaeda and identity 
theft. Five percent of those arrested or convicted had ties, or were 

28 Background and History
suspected of having ties, to the terrorist group. While this number 
may seem insignificant, it is important when the magnitude and 
nature of the attacks are considered. 
 Other research indicates that identity thieves do not belong 
to organized rings or that no evidence of networks was detected 
during the investigation of the cases. The study done at Utica Col-
lege, “Identity Fraud Trends and Patterns: Building a Data-Based 
Foundation for Proactive Enforcement,” concluded that the num-
ber of offenders per case ranged from 1 to 45 (Gordon et al. 2007). 
However, the majority of cases (57.6%) involved one perpetrator 
who worked alone in committing identity theft. Cases involving 
two offenders totaled 22.8 percent. The number of cases involv-
ing three individuals dropped significantly, to 7.9 percent. Only 
1 percent of the cases involved 13 to 45 defendants. 
 The results of the research “Identity Fraud Trends and Pat-
terns: Building a Data-Based Foundation for Proactive Enforce-
ment” is corroborated by the findings of a study conducted 
at USF, “Exploring the Crime of Identity Theft: Prevalence, 
Clearance Rates, and Victim/Offender Characteristics.” USF 
researchers found that 64 percent of identity theft cases were 
committed by a lone perpetrator, 33 percent of the cases involved 
two  perpetrators, and only 3 percent of the cases involved three 
perpetrators working together to commit identity theft (Allison 
et al. 2005). 
 One can devise a profile of an identity thief based upon the 
available research and statistical data, which suggests that most 
identity thieves operating in the United States are born in the 
United States, and that the majority are males between the ages of 
25 and 34. However, males tend to commit identity theft less fre-
quently than they commit other types of crimes. Females, on the 
other hand, tend to commit identity theft more often than all other 
types of crimes. In addition, there seems to be a correlation be-
tween thieves’ age, gender, and ethnicity. Although more research 
is needed in this area, indications are that most perpetrators are 
African American males. 
 Current research shows that most identity thieves do not 
have a criminal history of identity theft convictions. However, it is 
a crime that is often linked to other types of crime. More research 
is needed to determine the extent to which identity theft facilitates 
violent and nonviolent criminal acts. Research also indicates that 
the majority of identity thieves are not part of a criminal network. 
It is important, however, that more studies be done in this area 

Who Are the Victims? 29
given the impact the acts of criminal organizations can have upon 
the United States, such as terrorism. It is imperative to determine 
how and why these networks are formed as well as how they are 
sustained over time. 
 This section has explored one aspect of identity theft, the 
perpetrators of the crime, but is equally important to develop an 
understanding of those victimized by this crime. The next section 
focuses on the statistics and research pertaining to identity theft 
victims. 
 Who Are the Victims? 
 Victims were overlooked in the criminal justice system and in 
society prior to the 1970s. Since that time, however, there has 
been a growing interest in addressing their needs. This interest 
was prompted by the conservative, crime control nature of our 
society and by advancements made by the women’s movement 
 (Karmen 2003). One of the most alarming aspects of identity theft 
is that anyone can become a victim at any moment in time. Age, 
race, gender, and economic status do not deter the crime. Every-
one, ranging from infants to the deceased, is at risk. Some people, 
however, may be at greater risk for victimization than others. This 
section begins by addressing the types of identity theft perpe-
trated upon victims, followed by a general victim profile based 
on victimology theories. The study of victimology provides vast 
insight into crime and prevention and helps to determine who is 
most likely to be a target of crime, how to meet the needs of vic-
tims, and what steps can be taken to prevent the crime from hap-
pening in the future. For these reasons, examining identity theft 
victimization is important. 
 Types of Identity Theft 
 The FTC’s annual report, “Consumer Sentinel Network Data Book 
for January–December 2008,” states that 313,982 victims reported 
the theft of their identities during 2008 (FTC 2009). The number 
of complaints has increased by 282,842 since 2000 (FTC 2001). As 
stated previously, there are eight types of identity theft: credit card 
fraud, government documents or benefits fraud, employment-
related fraud, phone or utilities fraud, bank fraud, loan fraud, 
other identity theft, and attempted identity theft. Some victims 

30 Background and History
 experience several types of identity theft simultaneously. For ex-
ample, victims may discover that new credit card accounts have 
been opened in their name while at the same time withdrawals 
have been made from their checking accounts. 
 According to the FTC, credit card fraud was the most often 
reported type of identity theft (20%) in 2008 (FTC 2009). Of these 
cases, 12.3 percent of victims stated that their imposter opened 
new accounts in their name, as opposed to compromising an ex-
isting account (8%). Although the incidence of this specific type 
of identity theft has declined significantly in recent years, credit 
card fraud remained the most prevalent complaint filed every 
year from 2000 through 2008. As incidents of credit card fraud de-
creased, other types of identity theft increased; for example, com-
plaints of employment-related fraud and government document 
or benefits fraud grew in 2008 (FTC 2009). Government document 
or benefits fraud is now the second-most common type of iden-
tity theft, as complaints of this nature more than doubled between 
2001 and 2008, from 6 to 15 percent (FTC 2002). Fraudulent tax re-
turns, a sub-type of government or benefits fraud, increased from 
1.9 percent in 2001 to 12.2 percent in 2008. 
 Employment-related fraud accounted for 15 percent of the 
total complaints filed by victims in 2008 (FTC 2009); this repre-
sents an increase of 6 percent since 2001 (FTC 2002). Reports of 
phone or utilities fraud decreased significantly during this same 
time. In 2008, 13 percent of victims reported this type of identity 
theft, as compared to 20 percent in 2001. Bank fraud also slightly 
declined over the last eight years, accounting for 13 percent of the 
complaints filed with the FTC in 2001 as compared to 11 percent 
in 2008. However, it is important to mention that bogus electronic 
funds transfers (EFT), a sub-type of bank fraud, rose over the last 
eight years, climbing from 1.9 percent in 2001 to 4.6 percent in 
2008. 
 Another type of identity theft, loan fraud, has also declined 
in recent years. Fewer victims experienced loan fraud in 2008 (4%) 
than did in 2001 (7%). The FTC also received fewer complaints 
of attempted identity theft in 2008. Only 6 percent of victims re-
ported that an unsuccessful attempt was made by another person 
to use their personal identifying information; this represents a 4 
percent decline in this form of theft since 2001. The last type of 
identity theft, those crimes that cannot be classified as any of the 
types discussed thus far, includes, but is not limited to, victim re-
ports that their identities were used to evade law enforcement, 

Who Are the Victims? 31
obtain  medical care, rent a house or apartment, buy insurance, 
avoid paying child support, purchase magazines, and file for 
bankruptcy. Other identity theft cases made up 24 percent of the 
complaints filed in 2008; in 2001, 19 percent of victims experienced 
this type of identity theft. 
 To summarize, credit card fraud is the most prevalent type of 
identity theft, and based on FTC statistics, there is good reason to 
believe it will remain an issue in coming years, even though the 
volume of complaints has dropped over the last eight years. At 
the same time, more victims are finding that false tax returns are 
being filed in their names. Incidents of employment-related fraud 
are also on the rise; this is disconcerting, given that tax return 
fraud and employment-related fraud usually involve the abuse 
of SSNs. Although the numbers of complaints of EFT fraud have 
fluctuated over the last eight years, it remains the most reported 
sub-type of bank fraud. On a daily basis, thousands of financial 
transactions are processed electronically. EFT fraud, especially 
in the form of debit card misuse, continues to pose problems for 
 victims. 
 The FTC’s statistics provide valuable information about the 
types of identity theft to which victims are subjected and offer 
insight into the needs of victims following victimization. They 
also provide a framework for developing prevention guidelines. 
These issues are discussed in depth in chapter 2. However, there 
are other factors which may contribute to the likelihood of victim-
ization. The next section examines one of those factors, victims’ 
states of residence. 
 Geographical Location 
 Identity theft occurs in every state in the nation, but some states 
report higher victimization rates than others. In 2008, the 10 states 
where the most victims of identity theft resided were Arizona, Cal-
ifornia, Florida, Texas, Nevada, New York, Georgia, Illinois, New 
Mexico, and Colorado (FTC 2009). Of these, five states ranked in 
the top 10 every year from 2001 through 2008; they are: Arizona, 
California, Florida, Nevada, and New York. Additionally, Arizona 
surpassed all other states for the number of victims reporting to the 
FTC from 2003 through 2008. Texas ranked in the top 10 for seven 
years, 2002 through 2008. Colorado and Washington  appeared on 
the list for six years. One state, Georgia, was in the top 10 for a 
total of five out of eight years. Other states that  appeared on the 

32 Background and History
list at some time between 2001 and 2008 are Illinois, Oregon, New 
Mexico, Maryland, and the District of Columbia. 
 Research conducted by the Identity Theft Resource Center 
(ITRC) confirms that residents of some states may have a differen-
tial risk of victimization. The data revealed in the study “Identity 
Theft: The Aftermath 2004” was derived from surveys of con-
firmed victims who sought assistance through the center (ITRC 
2005). Victims were invited to take part in the online survey. The 
197 respondents resided in virtually all of 50 states. The study 
found that almost 19 percent of the victims lived in California, 9 
percent were in Florida, 6 percent in Texas, and 5 percent in New 
York. These results are consistent with the FTC data for 2004 (FTC 
2005). Each of these states was ranked in the top 10 for the number 
of victim complaints filed with the FTC; in addition, they were 
also in the top 10 in 2008 (FTC 2009). 
 Although there appears to be a correlation between geo-
graphic residency and victimization, many other issues warrant 
consideration. Perhaps some states have greater victim assistance 
resources available to their citizens, or law enforcement agencies 
are more actively involved in programs that teach citizens about 
the crime. Thus, a heightened level of awareness may account 
for the elevated numbers of victim complaints in those states. 
Another factor to consider is the population density in the states 
most affected by identity theft. Identity thieves who favor stealing 
mail, for example, may target victims living in populous states 
versus those in a less populated one, like South Dakota. In 2008, 
South Dakota ranked last (50th) for the number of victim com-
plaints (FTC 2009). Residents of states that have the highest rates 
of illegal immigration may also experience increased incidents of 
identity theft. In summation, more research is needed in order to 
fully assess the relationship of geographical location to victimiza-
tion. 
 Age 
 Age may be a factor in determining one’s likelihood of becoming 
a victim of identity theft. According to FTC statistics, victims aged 
70 and older accounted for only 5 percent of the complaints filed 
in 2008 (FTC 2009). This group was victimized less often than all 
other age categories. In contrast, 20- to 29-year-olds were the most 
common targets of identity thieves (24%), followed by 30- to 39-
year-olds (23%). Seven percent of the complainants were age 19 

Who Are the Victims? 33
or younger. Another 7 percent were 60 to 69 years old. Victims 
aged 40 to 49 comprised 19 percent of all identity theft complaints. 
Lastly, 14 percent of the complaints were filed by victims 50 to 59 
years old. 
 The ITRC study, “Identity Theft: The Aftermath 2007,” found 
similar results (ITRC 2008). Seven percent of the victims who re-
sponded to the ITRC’s annual survey reported they were 61 years 
old or older, compared to 12 percent reporting the same in the FTC 
data. The ITRC suggests that individuals under 18 years old are less 
likely to be victimized (4%) while young adults, those between the 
ages of 18 and 29, are more likely than all other age groups (28%) 
to be victimized. Those 30–39 years old ranked second in reporting 
the theft of their identities in both the ITRC study (26%) and ac-
cording to the FTC data (23%). Victims between 40 and 59 years old 
comprised one third of the complaints received by the FTC, com-
pared to nearly 35 percent of the respondents in the ITRC survey. 
 When the age groups are combined, a clearer picture of vic-
timization emerges. According to the FTC, 54 percent of complain-
ants were 39 years old or younger (FTC 2009). The remainder of 
victims (45%) was 40 years old and older. The results of the ITRC 
survey were similar. The majority (58%) of victims were 39 years 
old or younger (ITRC 2008). Respondents 40 years and older ac-
counted for 42 percent of victims. 
 Although everyone is at risk, those aged 39 and younger may 
be at greater risk of becoming victims than their elders as, in gen-
eral, the FTC statistics for an eight-year period show that those 
between the ages of 18 and 39 were most often victimized. More 
research is needed to determine why this age group is more vulner-
able than others, though financial lifestyles may contribute to vul-
nerability. Between the ages of 18 and 39 years, people are laying 
the financial foundation for the rest of their lives. They may be tak-
ing out student loans, submitting job applications,  applying for car 
loans, using credit cards, purchasing their first homes, and starting 
families. The level of financial activity is the highest amongst those 
in this age group, and all of these activities require applicants to 
divulge personal identifying information. Since credit reports are 
an important tool for detecting identity theft, research is needed 
to determine the age at which those in this group should begin 
reviewing the reports for fraudulent transactions. 
 Individuals in this age group may also take more risks than 
their older counterparts. Perhaps they are more open to changes 
in technology, even if it means that they may be exposed to greater 

34 Background and History
risk. For example, downloading music and movies is a very popu-
lar online activity. One of the dangers of downloading these files 
to one’s computer, known as file-sharing, peer-to-peer, and P2P, 
is that it can lead to identity theft. Those engaging in file-sharing 
may unintentionally expose the files stored on their computer to 
others. If the files contain personal information, it can be stolen 
and used to commit identity theft. 
 More research is recommended to ascertain the specific rea-
sons why 18- to 39-year-olds experience a higher rate of identity 
theft as compared to those age 40 and older. Despite this, a broad 
victim profile emerges from available research combined with 
FTC statistics. Most victims of identity theft tend to be young 
adults. They are more likely to experience credit card fraud as 
opposed to other types of the crime. Those residing in Arizona, 
California, Florida, Nevada, and New York may be at greater risk 
than people who live in other states. 
 References 
 Allison, Stuart F. H., Amie M. Schuck, and Kim M. Lersch. 2005. 
“Exploring the crime of identity theft: prevalence, clearance rates, and 
victim/offender characteristics.”  Journal of Criminal Justice 33 (1): 19–29. 
 AmyBoyer.org.  In loving memory of our daughter, sister and friend . 
October 10, 2004. Internet Archive Database. http://web.archive.org/
web/20041010044045/www.amyboyer.org/index.html. Accessed 
April 28, 2009. 
 Casey, Eoghan. 2001.  Digital Evidence and Computer Crime . San Diego: 
Academic Press. 
 Collins, Judith M. and Sandra K. Hoffman. 2004. Identity theft: Predator 
profiles. Unpublished Paper, School of Criminal Justice, Michigan State 
University. 
 Constitutional Rights Foundation (CRF). 1997. “Forensic evidence: The 
riddle of the Romanovs.”  Bill of Rights in Action 13 (3). http://www.crf-
usa.org/bill-of-rights-in-action/bria-13–3-a.html. Accessed April 28, 2009. 
 Cryptome JYA Archives. 1997. USA v. Carlos “Smak” Salgado. http://
jya.com/smak.htm. Accessed April 28, 2009. 
 Deseret News. “Woman gets 6 years in fed prison for ID theft.” 
August 11, 2008, http://www.deseretnews.com/article/content/
mobile/1,5143,700249935,00.html?printView=true. Accessed April 28, 
2009. 

References 35
 Federal Trade Commission. 2001. Identity theft victim complaint data: 
Figures and trends on identity theft, January 2000 through December 
2000. http://ftc.gov/bcp/edu/microsites/idtheft/downloads/
clearinghouse_2000.pdf. Accessed April 2, 2009. 
 Federal Trade Commission. 2002. Identity theft victim complaint 
data: Figures and trends on identity theft, January 1–December 31, 
2001. http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/microsites/idtheft/downloads/
clearinghouse_2001.pdf. Accessed April 3, 2009. 
 Federal Trade Commission. 2003. Identity theft victim complaint 
data: Figures and trends on identity theft, January 1–December 31, 
2002. http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/microsites/idtheft/downloads/
clearinghouse_2002.pdf. Accessed April 3, 2009. 
 Federal Trade Commission. 2004. National and state trends in fraud & 
identity theft, January–December 2003. http://www.ftc.gov/sentinel/
reports/sentinel-annual-reports/sentinel-cy2003.pdf. Accessed April 3, 
2009. 
 Federal Trade Commission. 2005. National and state trends in fraud & 
identity theft, January–December 2004. http://www.ftc.gov/sentinel/
reports/sentinel-annual-reports/sentinel-cy2004.pdf. Accessed April 3, 
2009. 
 Federal Trade Commission. 2006. Consumer fraud and identity theft 
complaint data, January–December 2005. http://www.ftc.gov/sentinel/
reports/sentinel-annual-reports/sentinel-cy2005.pdf. Accessed April 3, 
2009. 
 Federal Trade Commission. 2007. Consumer fraud and identity theft 
complaint data: January–December 2006. http://www.ftc.gov/sentinel/
reports/sentinel-annual-reports/sentinel-cy2006.pdf. Accessed April 3, 
2009. 
 Federal Trade Commission. 2008. Consumer fraud and identity theft 
complaint data: January–December 2007. http://www.ftc.gov/sentinel/
reports/sentinel-annual-reports/sentinel-cy2007.pdf. Accessed April 3, 
2009. 
 Federal Trade Commission. 2009. Consumer sentinel network data book 
for January–December 2008. http://www.ftc.gov/sentinel/reports/
sentinel-annual-reports/sentinel-cy2008.pdf. Accessed April 3, 2009. 
 Federal Trade Commission. n.d. Consumer Sentinel/Military. http://
www.ftc.gov/sentinel/military/index.shtml. Accessed April 6, 2009. 
 Garner, Bryan A., ed. 1999.  Black’s Law Dictionary . 7th ed. St. Paul, MN: 
West Group. 
 Gill, Peter, et al. 1994. “Identification of the remains of the Romanov 
family by DNA analysis.” Abstract.  Nature Genetics 6 (2): 130–35. http://

36 Background and History
www.nature.com/ng/journal/v6/n2/abs/ng0294–130.html. Accessed 
April 28, 2009. 
 Golden, Peter A. 1999. “Dangers without, dangers within. Network 
security in the age of e-commerce.” In  Electronic Business , May. http://
www.petergolden.com/Articles/PAG-Network%20security.htm. 
Accessed April 28, 2009. 
 Gordon, Gary R., et al. 2007. “Identity fraud trends and patters: Building 
a data-based foundation for proactive enforcement.” (October): 1–74. 
Presented at a conference at the Economic Crime Institute, Utica 
College. http://www.utica.edu/academic/institutes/ecii/publications/
media/cimip_id_theft_study_oct_22_noon.pdf. Accessed February 27, 
2009. 
 Greenfeld, Lawrence A. and Tracy L. Snell. 1999. Women offenders. 
Revised October 3, 2000. U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice 
Statistics. NCJ175688. www.ojp.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/wo.pdf. Accessed 
February 29, 2008. 
 Haughton, Brian. 2002. “Weird People—Impostors , Eccentrics & 
Hoaxes: Sarah Wilson—The Princess Susanna Hoax.”  Mysterious People. 
http://www.mysteriouspeople.com/princess_hoax.htm. Accessed 
April 28, 2009. 
 Helen Remsburg, Administrator of the Estate of Amy Lynn Boyer v. 
Docusearch, Inc., d/b/a Docusearch.com . (Sup. Ct. February 18, 2003). U.S. 
District Court Case No. 2002–255. http://www.nh.gov/judiciary/
supreme/opinions/2003/remsb017.htm. Accessed April 28, 2009. 
 Helmkamp, James, Richard Ball, and Kitty Townsend, eds. 1996. 
“Definitional dilemma: Can and should there be a universal definition 
of white collar crime?” Proceedings of the academic workshop of the 
National White Collar Crime Center and West Virginia University, 
West Virginia. http://www.nw3c.org/research/site_files.cfm?mode=p. 
Accessed April 3, 2009. 
 House of Lords, “Opinions of the Lords of Appeal for Judgment in 
the Cause in re Levin,”  Session 1997–98 , June 19, 1997, http://www.
publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld199798/ldjudgmt/jd970619/levin.
htm. Accessed April 28, 2009. 
 Identity Theft Resource Center. 2005. Identity theft: The aftermath 
2004. http://www.idtheftcenter.org/artman2/uploads/1/The_
Aftermath_2004_1.pdf. Accessed April 29, 2009. 
 Identity Theft Resource Center. 2008. Identity theft: The aftermath 
2007. http://www.idtheftcenter.org/artman2/uploads/1/
Aftermath_2007_20080529v2_1.pdf. Accessed April 29, 2009. 
 Jabaily, Bob, ed. 2004. Credit history: The evolution of consumer credit 
in America.  The Ledger , Spring/Summer. http://www.bos.frb.org/

References 37
education/ledger/ledger04/sprsum/credhistory.htm. Accessed April 2, 
2009. 
 Karmen, Andrew. 2003.  Crime Victims: An Introduction to Victimology. 5th 
ed. Belmont: CA. Thomsom Publishing. 
 Lawrence Public Library. n.d. “Ferdinand Waldo Demara Jr. (1921–
1982).” http://www.lawrencefreelibrary.org/english/demara.htm. 
Accessed April 28, 2009. 
 Lyzhina, Svetlana, and Zaghid Yusoupov, trans. 2004. The unsolved 
riddle of princess Anastasia.  Pravda (Russia), July 13. http://english.
pravda.ru/main/18/90/363/13367_Nicholas.html. Accessed April 3, 
2009. 
 Miller, Michael D. 2003. Jack Cade’s rebellion 1450. In  Wars of the roses: 
An analysis of the causes of the wars and the course which they took . http://
www.warsoftheroses.co.uk/chapter_39.htm. Accessed April 28, 2009. 
 Morris, R.G., II. 2004. “The development of an identity theft offender 
typology: A theoretical approach.”  The Graduate Research Journal . 1–20. 
http://www.shsu.edu/~edu_elc/journal/research%20online/re2004/
Robert.pdf. Accessed April 29, 2009. 
 National White Collar Crime Center. 2007. White collar crime statistics. 
http://www.nw3c.org/. Accessed February 27, 2008. 
 O’Neil, Paul. 1970. “A little gift from your friendly bank.”  Life Magazine 
(March 27, 1970). Reprinted in  Frontline . http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/
pages/frontline/shows/credit/more/life.html. Accessed April 28, 
2009. 
 Pastore, Ann L. and Kathleen Maguire, eds. n.d.  Sourcebook of 
Criminal Justice Statistics. Table 4.8 [Online]. http://www.albany.edu/
sourcebook/tost_4.html#4_l. Accessed August 27, 2009. 
 Peate, Les. n.d. “The case of the spurious sawbones.”  Esprit de Corps 
Magazine . http://www.kvacanada.com/stories_lpimposter.htm. 
Assessed April 28, 2009. 
 President’s Identity Theft Task Force. 2007.  Combating identity theft: 
A strategic plan . http://www.idtheft.gov/reports/StrategicPlan.pdf. 
Accessed May 3, 2007. 
 Ramer, Holly. 2004. “Mother of slain woman settles lawsuit against info-
broker.”  USA Today (March 3). http://www.usatoday.com/tech/news/
internetprivacy/2004–03–10-boyer-suit-settled_x.htm. Accessed April 4, 
2008. 
 Ross, David. 2001. “English history: Jack Cade’s Rebellion—1450.” 
 Britain Express: The UK Travel and Heritage Guide. http://www.
britainexpress.com/History/medieval/cade.htm. Accessed April 28, 
2009. 

38 Background and History
 Seal, Rob. 2006a. “A family fights for identity.”  InsideNoVa.com , 
http://www.timesdispatch.com/servlet/Satellite?pagename=
WPN%2FMGArticle%2FWPN_BasicArticle&c=MGArticle&cid=
1137833576776&path=!news. Accessed November 19, 2006. 
 Seal, Rob. 2006b. “Identity theft hits local home.”  Potomac News (January 
22). http://www.potomacnews.com/. Accessed November 19, 2006. 
 Smart Computing. n.d.  Smart computing encyclopedia: Vladimir Levin . 
http://www.smartcomputing.com/editorial/dictionary/detail.
asp?guid=&searchtype=&DicID=19495&RefType=Encyclopedia. 
Accessed April 28, 2009. 
 Social Security Administration. 2002. What can I do in a case of identity 
theft? http://ssa-custhelp.ssa.gov. Accessed June 11, 2007. 
 Social Security Administration. 2003. Historical background and 
development of Social Security. http://www.ssa.gov/history/
briefhistory3.html. Accessed April 28, 2009. 
 Social Security Administration. 2005. Social Security numbers: Social 
Security number chronology. http://www.ssa.gov/history/ssn/
ssnchron.html. Accessed April 28, 2009. 
 Social Security Administration. 2007. Birth of a child. http://www.ssa.
gov/gethelp2.htm. Accessed June 11, 2007. 
 Social Security Administration. n.d.-a. Social Security numbers: The first 
SSN & the lowest number. http://www.ssa.gov/history/ssn/firstcard.
html. Accessed April 28, 2009. 
 Social Security Administration. n.d.-b. Social Security numbers: Social 
Security cards issued by Woolworth. http://www.ssa.gov/history/ssn/
misused.html. Accessed April 28, 2009. 
 Stein, Robin. n.d. The ascendancy of the credit card industry.  Frontline . 
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/credit/more/rise.
html. Accessed April 28, 2009. 
 Suzanne Sloane v. Equifax Information Services, LLC. Case No. 062044.P 
(Va. Ct. App., 4th Cir. Dec. 27, 2007). http http://pacer.ca4.uscourts.gov/
opinion.pdf/062044.P.pdf. Accessed August 27, 2009. 
 Tenney, Merrill C., ed. 1969.  The Zondervan Pictorial Bible Dictionary . 
Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Publishing House. 
 Time. 1951. “All at sea.” December. http://www.time.com/time/
printout/0,8816,889381,00.html. Accessed April 28, 2009. 
 U.S. Attorney’s Office, Central District of California, “Tax preparer 
sentenced to 11 years in prison for running scheme that led to millions 
in losses.” Press release. January 12, 2009. http://www.usdoj.gov/usao/
cac/pressroom/pr2009/002.html. Accessed April 25, 2009. 

References 39
 U.S. Attorney, District of Utah, “Grand jury returns indictments in 
identity theft cases.” Press release. August 29, 2007. http://saltlakecity.
fbi.gov/dojpressrel/pressrel07/identitytheft082907.htm. Accessed 
April 25, 2009. 
 U.S. Attorney, Eastern District of California, “Hilton clerk sentenced 
to federal prison for stealing credit card numbers from hotel guests.” 
Press release, October 18, 2006. http://www.usdoj.gov/usao/cae/
press_releases/docs/2006/10–18–06Miller.Noel.j&s.pdf. Accessed 
April 21, 2009. 
 U.S. Congress. House.  Identity theft: Greater awareness and use of existing 
data are needed. June 2002. GAO-2–766. Available at: http://www.gao.
gov/new.items/d02766.pdf. Accessed June 27, 2007. 
 Virginia Department of Corrections-Inmate Status Information Center. 
http://www2.vipnet.org/cgi-bin/vadoc/doc.cgi/ (object name Sloan). 
Accessed June 24, 2007. 
 White House, “Fact sheet: The President’s Identity Theft Task Force.” 
News release. May 10, 2006. http://www.whitehouse.gov/. Accessed 
June 10, 2006. 
 Wright, Chris. 2000. “Murder.com: What happened last fall on this tiny 
New Hampshire street triggered a national debate on Internet crime. 
But was the Web really to blame for the death of Amy Boyer?”  Boston 
Phoenix , August 10–17. http://www.bostonphoenix.com/archive/
features/00/08/10/MURDER.html. Accessed November 18, 2005. 


41
 2 
 T
his chapter is designed to acquaint readers with many of the 
complex issues surrounding identity theft. It discusses the 
problems faced by victims of the crime and demonstrates 
the methods utilized by perpetrators to gain access to identi-
ties; it also explains how stolen identities are exploited. Next, the 
 chapter addresses potential solutions, including the efforts under-
taken by the judicial system, legislators, private businesses, law 
enforcement agencies, victims’ advocates, and private individuals 
working to combat identity theft. Although the crime cannot be 
completely prevented, information about personal and workplace 
security is provided to aid in minimizing the risk of becoming a 
victim. While this chapter focuses primarily on the United States, 
it offers some possible global solutions to the crime. A detailed 
discussion of the international implications of identity theft is of-
fered in chapter 3. 
 The Victims’ Experiences 
 Many variables determine the affects that identity theft has upon 
victims. Financial, social, medical, psychological, and familial 
costs may be associated with victimization. Upon discovery of 
the crime, victims are forced to confront and resolve the problems 
surrounding the theft of their identities. They must act quickly to 
stop the victimization, to clear their names of fraudulent activities 
and to reduce the risks of being victimized again. A great deal 
of time is often spent collecting information to help in investiga-
tions. Many victims must fill out numerous forms and/or write 
 Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions 

42 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
letters to credit bureaus, collection agencies, creditors, and gov-
ernmental agencies. At the same time, victims are making many 
telephone calls. Sometimes, victims have to take time off from 
work to handle problems in person. One of the effects of victim-
ization, therefore, is lost productivity in the workplace. This sec-
tion examines the problems that contribute to the difficulties most 
often encountered by victims. It is important to understand the 
impact of identity theft in order to implement viable solutions. 
 Methods of Detection and Time Lapse 
 Studies indicate that there is a greater likelihood of law enforce-
ment apprehending an offender if the crime is discovered shortly 
after its committed (Walker and Katz 2005). As a result, the least 
amount of time that elapses between a criminal act and discovery 
often leads to a reduction in the damage sustained by victims. This 
is especially true in identity theft cases. Additionally, research in-
dicates that the time spent resolving problems may depend upon 
the amount of time that elapses between onset and discovery. A 
study conducted by the Identity Theft Resource Center (ITRC), 
“Identity Theft: The Aftermath 2007,” suggests that more fraudu-
lent activities are committed when it takes longer to discover the 
crime (ITRC 2008). In turn, victims spend more time interacting 
with organizations such as creditors and collection agencies. 
 How do victims find out about the theft of their identities? 
There are many methods of discovery. In an earlier study done by 
ITRC, “Identity Theft: The Aftermath 2004,” victims were asked 
how they found out about the crime (ITRC 2005). A few (15%) 
were contacted by a business that had instituted early detection 
procedures. A subsequent study, “Identity Theft: The Aftermath 
2007,” found that the number of victims notified by a proactive 
business decreased from 15 percent in 2003 to 10 percent in 2007 
(ITRC 2008). Consequently, the overwhelming majority of victims 
do not discover the crime until it negatively impacts their lives. 
 Some victims discover the theft when they notice charges on 
their credit card statements that they did not authorize, and many 
find out upon receiving a telephone call from the fraud department 
of their credit card company (Collins and Hoffman 2003). A col-
lection agency may demand payment of delinquent bills that the 
victims did not incur. Some learn of the theft when they find un-
authorized activity on their cell or telephone bills.  Others find out 
when their utility services are interrupted.  Victims may  discover 

The Victims’ Experiences 43
the crime when they receive: credit cards for which they did not 
apply, telephone calls and letters from creditors about overdue 
bills that do not belong to them, or notification that checks have 
bounced when there should be sufficient funds in the account. 
Many find out about the crime after applying for a loan and it is 
denied because of a low credit score. Victims may also discover 
the crime when they find unauthorized withdrawals on their re-
tirement account statements. Some learn of the theft when they 
are denied employment or were not promoted in their current 
jobs. A few victims are arrested for crimes they did not commit. 
 A single case of identity theft may involve several instances 
of abuse of the victim’s personal information over time. The first 
time a victim’s identity is used is considered the first incident. 
For example, a thief may steal a credit card and use it to make 
several purchases. First, the card is used to buy gasoline. The next 
day, the imposter charges clothing to the victim’s credit card. The 
first time the card was compromised, to purchase gasoline, is con-
sidered the first incident. The time period between the first inci-
dent and discovery by the victim may be a determining factor in 
the amount of damage sustained. It may also contribute to the 
amount of time victims spend restoring their names. 
 The study, “Identity Theft: The Aftermath 2007,” analyzed 
the time lapse between the first occasion an identity was used and 
discovery by the victim (ITRC 2008). In addition, data gleaned 
from previous annual surveys, conducted from 2003 to 2006, was 
provided by researchers. In 2003, 47.7 percent of respondents in-
dicated that they realized they were victims in three months or 
less following the onset of the crime. However, 5.7 percent fewer 
victims discovered the crime in the same time frame in 2007 (42%) 
than in 2003. 
 The 2007 survey shows that 22 percent of the victims reported 
that 4 to 12 months elapsed between the initial victimization and 
discovery, compared to 2003, when 24.6 percent of respondents 
discovered the crime between 4 to 12 months after the first inci-
dent occurred (ITRC 2008). More victims in 2007 (17%) than in 
2003 (13.3%) learned that their identities were stolen more than 
one year, but less than two years, following the initial episode. 
Additionally, more victims reported that it took two years or lon-
ger to discover the crime in 2007 as compared to 2003 (20% and 
14.4%, respectively). 
 In conclusion, research indicates that fewer victims in 2007 
than in 2003 discovered the crime because of early fraud detection 

44 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
methods used by proactive businesses. Victims also reported that 
more time elapsed between the initial victimization and discovery 
of the crime in 2007 than in 2003. These findings are surprising 
given the heightened level of community awareness, legislative 
actions, strengthened business practices, and law enforcement ef-
forts since 2003. Although the economic recession may be a con-
tributing factor in the latter year, many unknown variables may 
also be contributing to the problem. Further research, therefore, 
is necessary to determine the relationship between the onset of 
the crime, discovery of victimization, and the extent of damages 
sustained by victims. 
 Types of Identity Theft and the Restoration Period 
 There is evidence that the time required to restore one’s name 
depends upon the type of identity theft committed. For exam-
ple, it generally takes significantly longer for a victim to clear a 
criminal charge from his or her record than it does to resolve a 
fraudulent charge on a credit card account. The study, “Federal 
Trade Commission-2006 Identity Theft Survey Report,” found 
that victims settled problems quicker when an existing credit 
card account was compromised as compared to other types of 
identity theft (Synovate 2007). Random telephone surveys were 
used to gather data for the study. Adults age 18 and older were 
interviewed between March 27, 2006 and June 11, 2006. Of the 
4,917 respondents, 559 stated they had been victims of identity 
theft between 2001 and the survey date. Their responses were 
categorized according to the severity of repercussions they ex-
perienced. As a result, researchers found three distinct types of 
identity theft. The first and most severe type was labeled  new 
accounts and other frauds . This included the use of victims’ identi-
ties to: open new bank, credit card, cell phone, and telephone 
accounts, rent properties, obtain loans, health care, automobile 
insurance, government documents, and employment, and to 
commit  misdemeanors and felonies. The second type of identity 
theft,  existing non-credit card accounts , involved the misuse of vic-
tims’ existing accounts, excluding credit card accounts. The last 
type,  existing credit cards only , pertains to victims whose credit 
card accounts were compromised. 
 Regardless of the type of identity theft, 23 percent of the re-
spondents indicated that they did not encounter difficulties clear-
ing their names or that they were able to do so within a day of 

The Victims’ Experiences 45
finding out that they had been victimized (Synovate 2007). Of 
those, 38 percent were victims of  existing credit card only identity 
theft, as compared to victims of  existing non-credit card accounts 
(18%) and victims of  new accounts and other frauds  (10%). Eleven 
percent of all respondents stated that it took three months or more 
from the date of discovery to handle the problems associated with 
the theft of their identities. Of those, 15 percent were victims of 
 new accounts and other frauds,  as opposed to victims of  existing non-
credit card accounts  (10%) and victims of  existing credit card fraud 
only  (8%). Thus, victims whose existing credit card accounts are 
compromised are more likely to experience a quicker resolution 
than victims of other types of identity theft. 
 Research conducted by the Identity Theft Resource Center 
(ITRC) confirms that victims spend more time resolving problems 
arising from new account fraud than they do handling existing 
account fraud issues (ITRC 2008). On average, the “Identity Theft: 
The Aftermath 2007” study found that it took victims 116 hours 
to restore their names after their existing accounts were misused. 
Clearing up problems resulting from new account fraud, crimi-
nal records, government document fraud, and medical fraud took 
much longer. The study also concluded that more victims were 
able to settle problems quicker in 2007 than in the previous three 
years. Nearly half of all respondents (49%) in 2007 stated it took 
them between one and six months to clear their names. In 2004, 
only 12.7 percent of victims were able to restore their names in 
the same amount of time. Thirty-three percent reported it took be-
tween 7 and 23 months in 2007 to attain resolution, as compared 
to 26.5 percent in 2004. The number of victims stating it took 
from two and more than five years to undo the damage caused 
by thieves dropped significantly (i.e., from 39% in 2004 to 19% in 
2007). 
 The amount of time that victims devote to resolving prob-
lems associated with the theft of their identities varies. Research 
shows that there is a correlation between the type of identity theft 
experienced by victims and the length of the restoration period. 
Moreover, there may be other interrelated contributing factors. 
Available research indicates that the time lapse between the initial 
victimization and discovery, the type of identity theft committed, 
and the method of detection may determine how quickly victims 
clear their names. In addition to the time required for problem-
solving, other aspects of a victim’s life are also affected. The fol-
lowing sections address some of these problems. 

46 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 Effects on Relationships 
 Many victims must contend with issues affecting their personal 
relationships as a direct result of identity theft. As stated previ-
ously, victims are typically preoccupied with the crime. They are 
busy stopping fraudulent activities, restoring their identities, and 
protecting themselves from being re-victimized. Thus, relation-
ships with friends, co-workers, and family members are often im-
pacted. The study, “Identity Theft: The Aftermath 2007,” found 
that nearly half (49%) of the respondents indicated that the crime 
produced stress within their families (ITRC 2008). Twenty-three 
percent reported a lack of understanding by family members, 
and 22 percent of the respondents stated that the crime had an 
effect on their children. Some victims (12%) reported that their 
relationships with significant others were in trouble or that the 
relationships were over. At the same time, the majority (51%) of 
 respondents indicated that their family members supported them 
as they worked through problems. 
 The relationship between the victim and the offender must 
also be considered. Research shows that victimization by an imme-
diate family member, significant other, ex-spouse, relative, or friend 
presents unique challenges for victims. The study, “Federal Trade 
Commission-2006 Identity Theft Survey Report,” found that the 
majority (84%) of victims did not have a personal connection to the 
thief (Synovate 2007). Sixteen percent reported that the thief was a 
member of their family, a relative, friend, co-worker, neighbor, or 
household employee. The study suggests that a victim/offender re-
lationship may also influence the type of identity theft perpetrated. 
The respondents who knew their offenders experienced  new ac-
counts and other frauds  or  existing non-credit card account  fraud more 
often than  existing credit card only  identity theft. In other words, vic-
tims who knew their perpetrators were most likely to be subjected 
to the types of identity theft that take longer to detect and resolve. 
 Victims of familial identity theft are confronted with prob-
lems exclusive to their situation, and emotions often influence 
their decisions. Since the bond between the victim and offender 
has been violated, it may be more difficult for victims to deal with 
the emotional aspect of the crime. As victims try to decide what 
to do about the crime, other family members may pull them in 
many different directions. Thus, victims of familial identity theft 
may experience conflicting emotions that directly impact their 
decision-making process. 

The Victims’ Experiences 47
 In the research, “Identity Theft: The Aftermath 2007,” the ef-
fects of the crime on victims whose perpetrator was a member 
of their family were assessed (ITRC 2008). Victims were asked to 
respond to a list of questions. The number of answers was unlim-
ited, depending upon the victim’s particular case. The majority 
(58%) of victims responded that the offender used identity theft as 
a means to spoil their reputation. Over half (52%) indicated that 
other family members were victimized by the same offender. In 
addition, 52 percent of the thieves were reported to have an addic-
tion. Fifty-two percent of victims also stated that their perpetrator 
had committed other crimes in addition identity theft. 
 Victims were asked questions about their interactions with 
other family members as they tried to decide how to remedy the 
situation (ITRC 2008). Fewer than half (42%) indicated that family 
members would back their decision to hold the imposter account-
able for the crimes. The same percentage reported that their fami-
lies were in favor of filing a complaint with a law enforcement 
agency. Twenty-seven percent indicated they were uncomfortable 
filing a complaint against a member of their own family. A few 
victims (18%) were concerned about becoming outcasts in their 
own families if they took steps to resolve the situation. Some vic-
tims (12%) stated that family members discouraged them from 
pursuing the case. 
 Emotional and Medical Concerns 
 Research suggests that most victims of identity theft experience 
emotions comparable to victims of violent crimes. Some victims 
endure these emotions for a longer period of time than others. A 
few victims experience deteriorating physical health. The study, 
“Identity Theft: The Aftermath 2007,” found that the majority 
(80%) of victims become outraged or angry upon discovering 
the crime (ITRC 2008). Other common responses were feelings 
of frustration (74%) and annoyance (66%). These emotions are 
not surprising, since victims are thrust into the position of hav-
ing to prove that they are innocent and that a crime has been 
committed against them (Collins and Hoffman 2003). Over half 
(56%) of the victims in the study indicated that they were wor-
ried about their financial security (ITRC 2008). The majority 
(57%) felt powerless. It is important to note that victims often 
feel that they are totally at the mercy others, such as the perpe-
trators, creditors, and credit bureaus. The study also found that 

48 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
nearly half (48%) of the  respondents reported feeling betrayed. 
This is especially true if the offender is someone the victim 
knows personally. 
 Some victims experience lasting emotional repercussions. 
In addition, medical problems may develop or preexisting con-
ditions may be exacerbated. The following case illustrates how 
identity theft impacted one victim who was dealing with health 
problems at the time of discovering the crime. 
 Shortly after Phillip retired, he suffered a heart attack. He 
had bypass surgery and returned home to recover. He grappled 
with mild depression and was physically weak. One day, Phillip 
opened his retirement account statement and discovered that his 
life savings was almost gone. He tried to deal with the problems 
created by his imposter, but his depression worsened. Eventu-
ally, he was diagnosed as clinically depressed. Brenda, Phillip’s 
wife, tried frantically to take care of the problems, but she soon 
realiz  ed that she could do very little. The organizations Brenda 
had to  contact would not cooperate with her because, she was 
told,  Phillip was the victim and she was not, as Phillip’s retire-
ment account was in his name only, therefore, the company could 
not discuss the account with her. It took a legal power of attorney 
and several weeks of due diligence to have his account restored. 
 In addition to depression, many victims also report linger-
ing sleep disorders . The survey, “Identity Theft: The Aftermath 
2007,” found that 40 percent of the respondents suffered sleep 
disorders for two or more months following victimization (ITRC 
2008). The majority of victims were still experiencing feelings of 
being frustrated (63%), annoyed (58%), and fearful for their fi-
nancial security (50%). Two months or more following victimiza-
tion, 29 percent of victims indicated that they stopped trying to 
clear their names. In 2006, 34 percent of victims gave up trying 
to resolve the problems associated with the crime. Although the 
number was down in 2007, this may be an indication of an acute 
systemic problem when over a quarter of the victims give up try-
ing to restore their names. More research is needed to identify the 
obstacles that cause some victims to surrender rather than com-
plete the process of restoration. In addition, research should con-
tinue in the area of the emotional and medical impact of identity 
theft, in order to learn how to assist victims more effectively and 
efficiently. There are other issues associated with identity theft 
victimization. One of them is the monetary expenses that may be 
incurred as a direct result of the crime. 

The Victims’ Experiences 49
 Financial Losses 
 Victims are generally not held responsible for the debts incurred 
by their imposters, yet there may still be costs associated with the 
crime. Victims may have expenses for long distance telephone 
calls, photocopies, certified mailings, travel, babysitting, lost 
wages, and attorneys’ fees. Sometimes, victims decide to pay the 
debts incurred by their imposters. The research, “Federal Trade 
Commission: 2006 Identity Theft Survey Report,” found that 
59 percent of all respondents did not incur any expenses (Syno-
vate 2007). Of those, 80 percent reported that their existing credit 
card accounts were compromised. Twenty-five percent of victims 
who incurred expenses of $1,000 or more were in the  new accounts 
and other frauds  category. Another study confirms that expenses 
are greater if new accounts are opened in the victim’s name, as 
opposed to the use or take over of an existing account. The study, 
“Identity Theft: The Aftermath 2007,” concluded that victims of 
new account fraud spent an average of $1,826.27 clearing their 
names (ITRC 2008). Conversely, victims whose existing accounts 
were compromised spent an average of $550.39. 
 Although the amount of expenses incurred by victims differs, 
there seems to be a direct correlation between expenses and type 
of identity theft involved. There is evidence that it costs victims 
more to resolve problems associated with new account fraud than 
it does those who suffered existing account fraud. More research 
is warranted to determine the connection between expenses in-
curred by victims and the variables discussed in this chapter (e.g., 
the amount of time victims devote to clearing their names, time 
lapsed between initial victimization and discovery, the method 
of detection, relationship of victim to perpetrator, and the emo-
tional and medical issues associated with the crime). In summa-
tion, identity theft impacts victims in many ways and to varying 
degrees. Some victims, however, are victimized again by those 
they rely upon to help them through the process of restoring their 
good names. 
 The Second Insult 
 Victimology theories provide evidence that victims are often vic-
timized twice for the same crime. The first victimization takes 
place when the actual crime occurs. The second victimization 
is referred to as  the second insult . Historically, the second insult 

50 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 describes the victim’s experience within the criminal justice sys-
tem. In the past, victims were not afforded the level of support or 
information they needed (Doerner and Lab 2005). Today, identity 
theft victims often encounter similar responses. However, the sec-
ond insult is not limited to the criminal justice system. Creditors, 
credit reporting bureaus, collection agencies, and governmental 
entities may also be less than supportive of victims. These orga-
nizations sometimes make it difficult, or even impossible, for vic-
tims to remove fraudulent financial and/or criminal information 
from their records, and even if it is removed, the information often 
reappears on records in the future. Adverse information eventu-
ally ends up in private and government databases, and as a result, 
the second insult reverberates throughout every aspect of victims’ 
daily lives. 
 Research indicates that victims are generally dissatisfied with 
the treatment and services they receive following an incident of 
identity theft. The majority (64%) of respondents surveyed in the 
“Identity Theft: The Aftermath 2007” study indicated that they 
were refused credit (ITRC 2008). Over half of the victims (53%) 
were pressured by collection agencies to pay the debts incurred 
by their imposters. Thirty-six percent reported that their credit 
card interest rates rose. Twenty-seven percent stated that credit 
cards companies cancelled their cards for no reason. Some victims 
had trouble obtaining employment (18%) or housing (14%), and 
14 percent indicated that their insurance premiums increased. 
Seven percent were unable to clear fraudulent misdemeanors or 
felonies from their records. 
 Overall, 63 percent of the respondents were unable to get 
adverse information permanently removed from their credit bu-
reau files (ITRC 2008). Nearly one third (32%) indicated that the 
credit bureaus simply refused to take the fraudulent information 
off their records. Almost one third (31%) were able to get the in-
formation removed only to have it reappear on their files at a later 
date. Many other problems prevented victims from clearing their 
names: the offenders continued to obtain credit in the names of 
the victims, creditors refused to give victims copies of documen-
tation related to bogus accounts bearing their names, and some 
victims stated that a police report was not accepted as proof of 
victimization. 
 The research to date shows that victims of identity theft may 
be victimized twice for the same crime. It is evident that more can 
be done to assist victims, beginning at the moment of  discovery 

Sources and Methods Used by  Perpetrators to Access Identities 51
through the restoration process. However, the problems sur-
rounding identity theft cannot be addressed without understand-
ing where identities are found and how identities are stolen in the 
first place. 
 Sources and Methods Used by 
 Perpetrators to Access Identities 
 Personal identifying information is an integral part of modern 
society. It is required in order to, among other things, accept em-
ployment, open a bank account, purchase a home, turn on utili-
ties, acquire phone service, receive health care, vote in elections, 
and obtain credit. In short, identities are valuable. When personal 
information is required to open a credit card account, for exam-
ple, the card company is tasked with keeping it safe. The problem 
is that sensitive information is vulnerable to theft wherever it is 
stored. Thieves steal identities from many sources and use a vari-
ety of techniques to gain access to them. 
 In the survey, “Federal Trade Commission-2006 Identity 
Theft Survey Report,” victims were asked if they knew how their 
 identities were stolen (Synovate 2007). Over half (56%) of the re-
spondents were unable to determine how their imposter gained 
access to their personal identifying information. A few victims 
(1%) reported that their identities were stolen after answering 
a phishing e-mail. Another 1 percent stated that their computer 
had been hacked. Mail theft was cited as the point of compro-
mise by 2 percent of the respondents. Five percent knew that their 
information was stolen from business records’ point of storage. 
Another 5 percent reported that their purse or wallet had been 
stolen. Seven percent became victims after doing business in a 
store, through the mail, or on the Internet. Seven percent reported 
their identities were stolen by various other methods. The most 
frequently cited source of theft, however, was by a person with 
whom the victim had a personal relationship (16%). 
 The “Identity Fraud Trends and Patterns: Building a Data-
Based Foundation for Proactive Enforcement” study found that 
34.1 percent of perpetrators stole personal information from 
their workplace (Gordon et al. 2007). Of those, 43.8 percent were 
employed in the retail industry. About 21 percent of perpetra-
tors worked for private businesses. Employment in the financial 

52 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 industry was the source for stolen identities for 23.8 percent of 
thieves. Other sources for identities included governmental en-
tities (5.1%), educational institutions (3.4%), and the insurance 
industry (3.4%). The majority (65.9%) of perpetrators, in other 
words, did not steal identities from their place of employment. 
 The study, “Identity Theft: Predator Profiles,” indicates 
that 47 percent of perpetrators stole identities from individuals 
( Collins and Hoffman 2004). In addition to stealing personal in-
formation from friends or family members, offenders employed 
several other low-tech methods. They rummaged through gar-
bage in trash cans, dumpsters, and landfills. They stole purses and 
wallets from unattended automobiles, backpacks, and shopping 
carts. Unlocked and unattended mailboxes were another source 
of identities. However, the majority of perpetrators (51%) were re-
ported as having stolen identities from a workplace. These crimi-
nals stole information belonging to customers, clients, patients, 
employees, vendors, management personnel, co-workers, and the 
business itself. Two percent stole identities from both individu-
als and businesses. Furthermore, employers or business owners 
were the most frequent perpetrators of identity theft in the work-
place. However, the research did not delineate between the busi-
ness owners who used their business as a source for identities and 
those who created bogus businesses to gain access to proprietary 
information. The study was conducted before the well-known 
ChoicePoint incident occurred. Nonetheless, it is a good example 
of how thieves form bogus businesses to gain access to identities. 
 ChoicePoint was a data broker that owned and maintained 
a database of reports on virtually every adult consumer in the 
United States (United States of America v. ChoicePoint Inc. 
2006b). Each report contained an individual’s name, address, So-
cial Security number (SSN), date of birth, financial account num-
bers, property records, criminal history, telephone number, and 
much more. Over the years, ChoicePoint sold one of its products, 
background checks, to thousands of private and public entities. In 
2005, the company faced a major security breach (United States of 
America v. ChoicePoint Inc. 2006a). The personal information of 
over 160,000 individuals had been sold to a network of identity 
thieves. Approximately 50 fake business accounts were opened 
by the thieves for the sole purpose of stealing sensitive informa-
tion, including credit reports. Hundreds of people became vic-
tims of identity theft. Consequently, a civil case was filed against 
ChoicePoint in 2006, and the company was fined $10 million and 

Trends and Special Issues 53
ordered to provide $5 million to reimburse victims for expenses 
they incurred in clearing their names (United States of America 
v. ChoicePoint Inc. 2006b). This case also resulted in tighter con-
trols on access to personal identifying information. Among other 
security measures, ChoicePoint was mandated to screen potential 
clients thoroughly before selling them access to their database. 
 The “Identity Theft: Predator Profiles” study found that 
identities are most often stolen from financial institutions (15%), 
healthcare facilities (15%), and government entities (11%) (Collins 
and Hoffman 2004). Financial institutions include banks, credit 
unions, mortgage companies, and collection agencies. Healthcare 
facilities include home healthcare providers, medical laboratories, 
hospitals, clinics, doctors’ offices, and nursing homes. Govern-
ment entities include driver’s license bureaus, post offices, Social 
Security offices, and so forth. Other sources for stealing identities 
are: automobile rental agencies and dealerships (5%), retail estab-
lishments (3%), insurance companies (3%), credit card companies 
(2%), eateries and bars (1%), and communications businesses 
such as telephone companies, cell phone companies, and Internet 
service providers (1%). Other points of compromise include land-
lords, real estate agencies, universities, gambling casinos, employ-
ment agencies, factories, and so on (14%). Twenty-nine percent of 
perpetrators stole identities from more than one of these sources. 
 Even though research results vary, these statistics offer some 
insight into where thieves find identities and how sensitive in-
formation is stolen. Identifying information can be found in a 
multitude of places, ranging from mailboxes to online databases. 
Thus, the methods used to steal identities are adapted to exploit 
weaknesses in security. More research is needed in this area to 
determine effective measures for securing personal information. 
However, there are several trends and issues that must be taken 
into account when considering ways to reduce the incidences of 
identity theft. 
 Trends and Special Issues 
 The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has collected data from 
identity theft victims since 1999 to learn more about the crime, 
and other public and private entities have conducted research on 
the topic as well. Over the years, developing trends have been 
identified and many important issues deserving consideration 

54 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
have come to the forefront. The following sections explore trends 
in how identities are stolen and how they are used. Also discussed 
are the risks and controversies posed by offshoring identities and 
data breaches. Lastly, an overview of the hidden costs of identity 
theft is presented. 
 Tax Fraud 
 Incidents of income tax fraud have nearly doubled in recent years 
(FTC 2009). In 2006, 6.3 percent of the victims who filed com-
plaints with the FTC stated that their identities were used to file 
fraudulent tax returns. By 2008, that number increased to 12.2 per-
cent. Most victims discover the fraud after they file their own, 
legitimate income tax returns. In some cases, perpetrators use an-
other person’s SSN to obtain employment. The following case is 
an illustration of this type of identity theft. 
 Cathy, a resident of Los Angeles, California, filed her 2000 
income taxes in a timely manner. But instead of receiving a refund 
check as she expected, she received a letter from the Internal Rev-
enue Service (IRS) stating that she had not reported the income 
she earned from her work at a cannery. Furthermore, the letter 
demanded that she pay taxes on the income. Cathy had never 
worked in a canning factory; she was employed full-time as a 
nurse. Many years later, it was discovered that Cathy’s SSN was 
used by an undocumented worker to get the job at the cannery. 
 In other cases, imposters file income tax returns in the vic-
tims’ names, so that when the victims file a true return, it is re-
jected by the IRS. The following case demonstrates this common 
type of identity theft. After his divorce in 2005, Jim moved from 
Ohio to a small town outside of Detroit, Michigan. He filed his 
tax return during the first week of April 2007. A few weeks later 
Jim received a letter from the IRS stating that a return had already 
been processed under his SSN. Additionally, a refund check had 
been issued in his name. An investigation revealed that the im-
poster was Jim’s ex-wife. 
 Medical Fraud 
 Medical fraud, also known as medical identity theft, is not a new 
occurrence. It happens when a person’s identifying information 
is used without his or her knowledge to pay for medical services, 
equipment, prescription drugs, or doctor visits. According to the 

Trends and Special Issues 55
FTC annual report, “Consumer Sentinel Network Data Book for 
January-December 2008,” 4,082 or 1.3 percent of the 313,982 vic-
tims reporting identity theft in 2008 complained that their iden-
tities were used to commit medical fraud (FTC 2009). Although 
complaints have decreased from the 2003 rate of 2 percent, this 
remains one of the most insidious types of identity theft, and 
the losses sustained because of medical fraud result in increased 
healthcare costs for all consumers. Additionally, the crime can 
have a devastating emotional, financial, and physical impact on 
victims. The following is an account of the ordeal one medical 
fraud victim endured for over three years. 
 In 2001 Kathleen Cox, an elderly grandmother, discovered 
that she was a victim of identity theft (AARP 2004). It began when 
her imposter was involved in a multiple-car accident. Cox received 
bills from a hospital demanding payment of $9,000 for injuries she 
allegedly sustained in the crash, and she was sued for $50,000 by 
a person who was injured in the wreck. She also discovered that 
there was a warrant out for her arrest. In reality, she was in her 
eighties and had not driven a car for over 50 years. In addition, 
the accident happened in Illinois and Cox lived in Maryland. She 
told her story to the police, but no investigation ensued. Cox had 
no choice but to track down the perpetrator by herself. Eventually, 
she learned that her imposter was a neighbor who happened to 
have the exact same name as she did. After providing this infor-
mation to police, the identity thief was finally apprehended. 
 Victims of medical fraud are also confronted with problems 
that are unlike those of other types of identity theft. Their health 
insurance benefits may be depleted by their imposter, and when 
the victim seeks medical services, payments to healthcare pro-
viders may be delayed or denied by their insurance carrier. A 
victim’s medical history may also reflect their imposter’s health 
problems. This can result in higher life and health insurance pre-
miums, or the victim may be denied insurance altogether. Medi-
cal identity theft also may cause a victim to lose opportunities for 
a  promotion or employment. When an employer or perspective 
employer does a background check, it can appear as though the 
victim is irresponsible and does not pay his or her bills. Thus, it 
may be determined that he or she is not the right person for the 
position. Delinquent bills may also result in a lower credit score, 
which impacts one’s ability to obtain credit. Thus, a victim of 
identity theft may be denied credit altogether or be forced to pay 
higher interest rates. 

56 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 Medical identity theft also poses a threat to victims’ physi-
cal well-being (Dixon 2006). Technology has made it possible for 
medical records to be maintained and updated instantaneously, 
and records are now more detailed than ever before in history. 
This helps healthcare professionals provide the best services pos-
sible, however victims of medical fraud are at a disadvantage. 
Their records often reflect the services, diagnoses, and treatments 
received by their imposters. Information that is vital during an 
emergency, such as allergies to medications, might be incorrect. 
Fraudulent health records may cause the wrong medical treat-
ment to be administered. At best, recovery could be slower; at 
worst, the wrong treatment could cause death. 
 Real Estate Loan Fraud 
 Stolen identities are used to obtain loans. Every year from 2004 
through 2007, 5 percent of the complaints received by the FTC 
stemmed from loan fraud (FTC 2008). Victims reported that their 
identities were used to acquire real estate, business, personal, 
auto, and student loans. In 2008, the total number of loan fraud 
complaints decreased 1 percent, to 4 percent. However, com-
plaints of real estate loan fraud have remained fairly constant 
from 2003 through 2008. It accounted for 1 percent of the com-
plaints received by the FTC in 2003, compared to 1.2 percent in 
2008. Victims of real estate loan fraud, also referred to as mort-
gage loan fraud, are often challenged to resolve problems involv-
ing large sums of money. They may find that mortgages or home 
equity loans have been obtained in their names, and some victims 
have even had their homes stolen from them. 
 A report issued by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 
“2007 Mortgage Fraud Report,” found that the problems created 
by mortgage fraud may cause much deeper and widespread prob-
lems; it is a potential threat to the U.S. economy (FBI 2008). The 
report warned that, if mortgage fraud is left unchecked, it could 
lead to the collapse of financial institutions which, in turn, would 
negatively impact the stock market. Since fewer mortgage prod-
ucts are available today, fraudsters are turning to other methods 
for obtaining real estate loans. The report found that identity theft 
is reemerging as a trend in the housing market and is being per-
petrated to procure home equity and mortgage loans. Home eq-
uity loans, often referred to as second mortgages or lines of credit, 
allow homeowners to borrow money by using the equity in their 

Trends and Special Issues 57
homes as collateral. The following case is an example of a scheme 
devised by one perpetrator to obtain both mortgage and home 
equity loans. 
 Between May and August 2007, Rory V. Porter targeted in-
dividuals who had vacant homes for sale in the Lake City and 
Gainesville areas of Florida (Attorney General of Florida 2009). 
He developed friendships with the homeowners in order to get 
information from them, and then searched public records for the 
remainder of the data he needed to steal the homeowners’ prop-
erties. Porter produced counterfeit documents and successfully 
transferred ownership of the homes, worth over $800,000, into his 
name. Since it appeared as though Porter was the rightful owner 
of the properties, he was then able to obtain more than $500,000 
in equity loans on the stolen properties. Porter was arrested in 
November 2007; he pled guilty to charges of grand theft, money 
laundering, and identity theft. 
 Offshoring Identities 
 The offshoring of identities is the practice of employing third-
party vendors in foreign countries to perform jobs requiring ac-
cess to the personal information of U.S. citizens. Current global 
economic trends have privacy advocates, lawmakers, and cor-
porations locked in a heated debate over the practice. Those in 
opposition of offshoring are concerned for many reasons, includ-
ing the following: the United States does not have jurisdiction in 
countries where identities may be stolen, laws in other countries 
may change resulting in weaker information security safeguards, 
many countries have no information protection laws at all, and 
the obligations of foreign companies to protect personal informa-
tion may be interpreted in the context of that country’s cultural, 
political, legal, and ethical structure rather than in the context of 
U.S. law (GalleryWatch 2004). 
 Supporters of offshoring argue that these fears are unfounded 
(Atkinson 2004). They claim that U.S. privacy laws are binding re-
gardless of where companies process personal information. Most 
companies doing business in foreign countries monitor their ven-
dors and insist on stringent security measures; in fact, some coun-
tries have stricter privacy laws than the United States. 
 The number of offshored jobs requiring access to personal in-
formation is expected to soar in the coming years. For example, 
more than 20 percent of employees in the banking industry are 

58 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
expected to be offshore by 2010 (Deloitte Research 2004). Where is 
personal information processed? Jobs requiring access to the iden-
tities of U.S. citizens are being performed in countries around the 
globe such as Australia, Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, China, the 
Czech Republic, Ghana, Guatemala, Hong Kong, Hungary, India, 
Ireland, Israel, Jamaica, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, 
the Philippines, Russia, Singapore, Taiwan, and  Thailand. What 
types of jobs are offshored? Some of the jobs are: credit bureau re-
cord maintenance, human resources functions, including payroll 
processing, patient record transcription for doctors and hospitals, 
telemarketing sales, mortgage loan processing, call centers for 
banks, credit card companies, social service agencies, and product 
support, account maintenance for banks, credit card companies, 
investment firms, and insurance companies, and tax process-
ing for accounting firms and some state and federal government 
 entities. 
 One of the first and most publicized offshore information 
breaches involved a disgruntled employee in Pakistan. Accord-
ing to reports, the University of California, San Francisco Medical 
Center (UCSF) outsourced the transcription of its patient records 
to a firm in the United States (Lazarus 2004b). The U.S. vendor, 
in turn, hired a woman in Pakistan to handle some of the work-
load without the approval of the hospital. When the offshore tran-
scriber was not paid as promised, she sent an e-mail to the hospital 
in October 2003 in which she threatened to expose patient records 
via the Internet. To reinforce her intent, she attached the confiden-
tial discharge records of two patients to the e-mail. This incident 
highlights the difficulty in controlling who has access to personal 
information after it is outsourced within the United States and 
ultimately exported. 
 U.S.-based entities are also subject to extortion attempts. 
Heartland Information Services located in Toledo, Ohio, tran-
scribes doctors’ dictated notes for several hospitals (Lazarus 
2004a). The company sent work to India for processing. Two off-
shore employees threatened to divulge patient information unless 
the company met their demands. In this case, Indian authorities 
intervened and thwarted the extortion attempt. 
 Infiltration by organized criminal syndicates poses a more 
worrisome threat to the identities of U.S. citizens (Becker 2005). 
Foreign criminal organizations have attempted to enter the lucra-
tive market of personal information processing; they have tried 
to purchase call centers, set up their own call centers, and have 

Trends and Special Issues 59
attempted to obtain personal information by bribing call center 
employees. Since call centers are in business to process volumes 
of personal identifying information, they are in danger of becom-
ing a point of compromise for identity theft. 
 Putting economic issues aside, two facts remain: offshoring 
personal information creates unique opportunities for stealing 
identities while at the same time, the chances of prosecuting the 
offenders are greatly diminished because the crimes take place be-
yond U.S. jurisdictional borders. Many lawmakers are concerned 
that the offshoring of U.S. citizens’ personal information poses a 
threat to national security since identity theft has been utilized in 
most, if not all, of the terrorist acts perpetrated against the United 
States (Markey 2004). 
 Data Breaches 
 Data breaches are of growing concern to privacy advocates, law-
makers, businesses, consumers, and law enforcement officials. A 
data security breach is defined as the act of creating the potential 
for hundreds or thousands of people to fall victim to identity theft 
due to lost, stolen, unsecured, or mishandled personal informa-
tion. The Identity Theft Resource Center (ITRC) has tracked dis-
closed information security breaches since 2005. Once collected, 
the data is categorized according to the year and type of entity 
where the breach occurred. As breaches are disclosed, the informa-
tion is added to the reports and made publicly available. There are 
five categories of data breaches:  banking/credit/financial, business, 
educational, government/military,  and  medical/healthcare . Breaches 
that occur in the  financial industry  category include banks, credit 
unions, credit bureaus, credit card companies, finance companies, 
and investment firms. The category  business  covers all types of 
private sector enterprises such as automakers, data brokers, in-
surance companies, stores, hotels, airlines, cell phone companies, 
telephone companies, and so forth. Breaches occurring in the  ed-
ucational  category include institutions ranging from elementary 
schools to universities. The  government/military  category encom-
passes breaches that occur at all government agencies, including 
military installations. Breaches in the  medical/healthcare category 
include doctors’ offices, clinics, laboratories, healthcare insurance 
providers, and hospitals (ITRC 2009c). 
 In 2005, there were 157 incidents involving 66,853,201 records 
containing sensitive information (ITRC 2009a). Breaches occurred 

60 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
most often at educational institutions (47.8%). In 75 separate inci-
dents, 1,996,583 records were exposed, putting individuals at risk 
of identity theft. Even though the financial industry had fewer 
breaches (12.7% of all those reported), more records where ex-
posed in this category than all others. There were 20 incidents in 
which 48,146,173 records were exposed. 
 In 2006, the number of breaches almost doubled from the pre-
vious year (ITRC 2009b). There were 321 disclosed incidents in 
2006, compared to 157 in 2005. However, the number of records 
involved declined from 66,853,201 in 2005 to 19,137,844 in 2006. 
Most breaches occurred in the  government/military  category, where 
98 incidents exposed 7,362,790 records. Breaches occurring at edu-
cational institutions ranked second; over 2 million (2,198,830) sen-
sitive records were exposed in 80 incidents. 
 There were 446 breaches disclosed in 2007 (ITRC 2007). In 
2005 and 2006 combined, there were 478 incidents. Thus, dis-
closed breaches increased dramatically in 2007. There may be two 
reasons for the increase: more breaches may have occurred in 2007 
than in previous years, or more information security breaches may 
have been disclosed to the public in 2007 than in 2005 and 2006. 
The  business  category accounted for 28.9 percent of all breaches 
in 2007. There were 129 incidents in which 105,544,377 records 
were exposed. In all, 127,717,243 records were exposed in 2007. 
Educational and government related breaches ranked second and 
third, with 111 and 110 incidents, respectively. The fewest number 
of breaches occurred in the  banking/credit/financial category. 
 In 2008, disclosed data breaches reached a high of 656 inci-
dents (ITRC 2009c). As a result, 35,691,255 sensitive records were 
exposed (ITRC 2009c). More than one third (36.6%) of the breaches, 
or 240 incidents, occurred in the private business sector and ex-
posed 5,886,960 records. Even though there were fewer incidents 
in the  banking/credit/financial  category, more records were exposed 
in it than in all other categories; there were 78 breaches in which 
18,731,947 records were exposed. Educational institutions ranked 
second in the number of incidents in 2008, but last for the number 
of records exposed, with 131 breaches in which 806,142 sensitive 
records were exposed. Government-related breaches ranked third 
with 110 incidents, during which nearly 3 million (2,954,373) re-
cords were exposed. 
 A clearer pattern emerges when the data for the last four years 
is combined. From 2005 through 2008, a total of 1,150 data beaches 

Trends and Special Issues 61
were disclosed. Of those, 461 were in the  business  category, fol-
lowed by the  educational  category with 397 breaches. The  govern-
ment/military  category was third with 339 disclosed incidents. The 
 medical/healthcare  category ranked fourth, with 223 breaches. The 
fewest number of breaches occurred in the  banking/credit/financial 
category. Overall, the number of reported breaches in each cat-
egory has risen over the four-year period, but, as stated previ-
ously, the actual number of breaches may not have increased. In 
earlier years, data breaches may have gone unreported. Today, 
disclosure law requirements may be responsible for the marked 
increase in known breaches. On the other hand, more breaches 
may have been voluntarily disclosed. 
 Between 2005 and 2008, a total of 249,399,543 records con-
taining personal information were exposed. The  business category 
ranked first with 119,388,987 records exposed during the last 
four years. The  banking/credit/financial  category was second with 
78,114,369 records exposed. In third place was the  government/mil-
itary  category, with 31,186,520 records exposed. The  medical/health-
care  category saw 14,523,537 records exposed due to data breaches, 
and the  educational  category had the fewest, with 6,186,130 records 
exposed. If each of the 249,399,543 breached records belonged to 
a different person, nearly 250 million people would have been at 
risk of becoming victims of identity theft. Should that happen, the 
FTC, law enforcement agencies, victims’ advocates, credit report-
ing agencies, the entities where the breaches occurred, and the 
U.S. economy would be overwhelmed. 
 According to the data, information security breaches have 
steadily increased over the last four years, and more will certainly 
be disclosed in the coming years. The data shows that private sec-
tor businesses had more breaches than all other categories. In ad-
dition, more records were exposed in the business category than 
in all other categories, accounting for nearly half of all records 
exposed. In other words, private sector businesses are more likely 
to put individuals at risk of identity theft than other entities. Al-
though the existing data brings weaknesses to light, it may be 
better utilized as a tool for developing effective policies and pro-
cedures for securing personal identifying information. In order to 
fully understand the impact of identity theft, however, it is also 
important to explore the hidden costs of the crime. Some busi-
nesses and financial institutions, as well as consumers, bear the 
financial losses resulting from identity theft. 

62 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 The Hidden Costs of the Crime 
 There are costs associated with security breaches even if the per-
sonal identifying information exposed is not used to perpetrate 
identity theft. Likewise, there are costs related to the use of stolen 
identities. As previously stated, victims of identity theft are gener-
ally not held responsible for the debts incurred by their imposters. 
If an individual’s credit card is stolen, the Fair Credit Billing Act 
limits the cardholder’s liability to $50 (FTC n.d.-b). Most credit 
card companies do not hold victims responsible for the $50 al-
lowable by law. However, many online merchants are at a disad-
vantage, as they usually absorb the losses created by the crime. 
If a stolen credit card is used to purchase goods, the fraudulent 
charge is removed from the individual’s account and charged 
back to the merchant’s account. In addition, the merchant may be 
charged processing fees for reversing the transaction. If the order 
has been shipped, the merchant loses again, as there is very little 
chance of recovering the stolen merchandise. 
 It is impossible to calculate the actual costs of identity theft to 
businesses, financial institutions, payment processors, and credit 
card companies, as little information is available from these en-
tities. One study commissioned by the FTC suggests that $47.6 
billion were lost due to identity theft in just one year (Synovate 
2003). Identity theft, however, is considered one of the expenses 
associated with doing business. Given this frame of reference, few 
cases are likely to be investigated. It may be less costly, less time-
consuming, and less difficult to absorb the losses than to pursue 
the criminals. In most cases, the costs are simply passed on to the 
consumer in the form of higher interest rates, fees, and prices for 
goods and services. The result is that identity theft takes money 
out of the pockets of consumers and is a drain on the U.S. econ-
omy. This costly crime affects every aspect of modern society. The 
next section of this chapter examines many of the responses to 
identity theft. 
 Solving the Identity Theft Problem 
 The greatest concern related to identity theft is how to prevent 
it from happening. The following section focuses on the many 
possible responses to this crime. First, the debate over whether 
or not victims play a role in their own victimization is examined, 

Solving the Identity Theft Problem 63
and then legislative responses aimed at combating identity theft 
are discussed. The last part of this section offers suggestions of 
identity theft prevention measures to individuals and suggestions 
for protecting sensitive information in the workplace. It is evident 
that solving the identity problem depends upon the coordinated 
efforts of individuals, public entities, and private organizations. 
 Responsibility Theories 
 There are several theories defining a victim’s responsibility for 
a crime that is committed against them. Some theories of vic-
timology focus on victim blaming, while others focus on victim 
defending. Victim-blaming theories concentrate on holding the 
injured party responsible for what happened to them. Victim-
 defending theories advocate that the injured party is not respon-
sible  (Karmen 2003). When applied to identity theft, these theories 
can greatly influence the manner in which victims are advised to 
protect themselves from being victimized again in the future. 
 The victim-blaming perspective implies that the victim 
played a role in his or her own identity being stolen. Therefore, 
the victim is in some way to blame for the crime taking place. This 
approach often times creates feelings of stress, anxiety, and hope-
lessness that are fostered by the responses received from others. 
An identity theft victim may come into contact with law enforce-
ment personnel, prosecutors, and representatives of the credit bu-
reaus, financial institutions, and creditors, and they may respond 
in a manner that makes the victim feel that no one is going to help 
resolve his or her identity theft problems. In addition, prevention 
measures specifically focus on what the victim must do to prevent 
the crime from occurring again. 
 The victim-defending perspective of identity theft, on the other 
hand, implies that the victim is not responsible for the wrongdoing. 
In this framework, the perpetrator is responsible for committing the 
crime and should be punished accordingly. Most often, this theory 
allows for a thorough exploration into the nature of the crime. The 
victim-defending approach facilitates a discussion on the societal 
level about how the crime can be prevented from occurring again 
and encourages victims to examine how the crime happened and 
how it can be prevented from recurring. This approach, however, 
does not negate any party’s responsibility in the crime. 
 In part, the President’s Task Force on Identity Theft is based 
upon the victim-defending approach (President’s Identity Theft 

64 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
Task Force 2007). The task force was established on May 10, 2006 to 
study identity theft and propose solutions for combating it. One of 
the problems the task force addressed was how personal identify-
ing information is collected, used, and stored. Recommendations 
included, for example, policies aimed at better protecting SSNs in 
the public and private sectors. The task force also suggested com-
pensating victims for the time and money they spend resolving 
their identity theft problems. From a victim-defending perspec-
tive, creating a task force implies that government agencies and 
private entities recognize that victims are not solely responsible 
for the theft of their identities. However, individuals cannot disas-
sociate themselves from the crime and be careless with their per-
sonal information. Likewise, it ought not to be construed that the 
government is solely responsible for the crime simply because it 
formed a task force dedicated to identity theft problems. 
 The victim-blaming and victim-defending theories are very 
different approaches to understanding the crime of identity theft, 
however both provide insight into potential prevention measures. 
Later in this chapter, methods for protecting sensitive information 
will be addressed. 
 Government Responses 
 Much of the legislation that has been enacted regarding identity 
theft focuses on large-scale governmental and corporate responsi-
bility to protect citizens and consumers. As established in chapter 1, 
identity theft is not a new crime, and it seemed to be rampant by 
the late 1990s. Almost daily, the media reported incidents of the 
crime and the problems it caused for victims. Consumer and pri-
vacy groups and victims’ advocates fought for tougher laws and 
victims’ rights. Government hearings were held in an effort to as-
sess the problem and recommend solutions, and as a result, a law 
was passed recognizing identity theft as a felony. What was lack-
ing, however, was statistical data that measured the scope, nature, 
and prevalence of identity theft in the United States. Later legisla-
tion mandated the collection and extrapolation of identity theft 
incident data and provided assistance to victims of the crime. 
 The Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998 
 The enactment of the Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence 
Act of 1998 made identity theft a felony. The Act amended and en-
hanced existing federal criminal code, 18.U.S.C. § 1028  pertaining 

Solving the Identity Theft Problem 65
to identity theft and identity theft facilitated crimes. Prior to the 
Act, legislation only dealt with the manufacture, possession, 
transfer, and use of fraudulent identification documents such as 
driver’s licenses, passports, and so forth; it did not address the fact 
that fraudulent documents often contained the stolen personal in-
formation of unsuspecting victims. The 1998 Act made it a federal 
crime for a person to knowingly transfer or use the personal iden-
tifying information of another with the intent to commit a crime 
or to aid in the commission of other crimes. It also enhanced the 
penalties when identity theft is committed in order to facilitate 
drug trafficking and violent crimes. The Act recognized that indi-
viduals were victims of identity theft, and ordered the creation of 
an identity theft complaint database. 
 The Identity Theft Clearinghouse 
 The Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998 man-
dated the establishment of the Identity Theft Data Clearinghouse 
under the auspices of the FTC. Created in 1914, the FTC is a fed-
eral government agency charged with helping protect consumers 
from fraud and ensuring a fair venue for businesses to sell their 
goods and services (FTC 2008). In November 1999, the Identity 
Theft Clearinghouse database was launched to collect identity 
theft complaints directly from victims of the crime. It is the only 
national database of its kind. 
 The information in the database is used for two main pur-
poses. First, all complaints are aggregated into the Consumer Sen-
tinel Network, a database accessible online to authorized officials 
only (FTC 2009). Those with the right to use it include local, state, 
and federal law enforcement agencies, state and federal attorney 
general offices, district attorneys offices, consumer protection 
agencies, some foreign law enforcement agencies, and U.S. De-
partment of Defense personnel. The Consumer Sentinel Network 
is a useful tool in case investigations, as it aids law enforcement 
agencies in identifying potential problems within their jurisdic-
tions. As a result, management decisions can be made to best uti-
lize available resources such as funds, personnel, and time. The 
FTC also has access to the data, and it is often used as the basis 
for introducing policies and procedures for dealing with identity 
theft concerns. 
 Second, annual statistical reports are generated from the data 
in the Identity Theft Clearinghouse and are publicly available on 
the FTC’s Web site (FTC 2009). The reports are very detailed and 

66 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
contain both national and state statistics. For example, complaints 
received in any given year are divided into eight types of identity 
theft: (1) credit card fraud, (2) phone or utilities fraud, (3) bank 
fraud, (4) employment-related fraud, (5) government documents 
or benefits fraud, (6) loan fraud, (7) other identity theft, and (8) at-
tempted identity theft. National data and a state-by-state tally of 
the complaints received for each type of identity theft are pro-
vided. The annual reports are valuable sources for identifying 
current trends and predicting future trends in the crime. Thus, 
victims’ advocates can implement assistance programs that de-
liver timely and effective services, and state and federal lawmak-
ers can use the reports as a basis for introducing legislation that 
targets certain aspects of the crime. Additionally, the information 
is invaluable to researchers exploring the crime and discussing 
potential prevention measures. 
 The annual statistics gleaned from Identity Theft Clearing-
house database are also used for developing consumer educa-
tional programs (FTC n.d.-c). To that end, the FTC launched a 
campaign, “AvoID Theft: Deter, Detect, Defend,” whose goal 
is to promote consumer knowledge by providing the materials 
needed to establish awareness programs. These materials range 
from pamphlets to short films and are available to any person or 
organization interested in informing others about the issues sur-
rounding identity theft. Individuals, law enforcement agencies, 
churches, clubs, professional groups, and businesses are encour-
aged to take part in the campaign. 
 In addition to consumer awareness programs, the FTC of-
fers detailed online victim assistance information (FTC n.d.-a). 
Step-by-step instructions, forms, and sample letters are provided 
to guide victims through the maze of re-claiming their identities. 
Briefly stated, all victims are advised to complete four basic steps 
as quickly as possible: (1) contact one of the three major credit bu-
reaus, TransUnion, Equifax, or Experian, and place fraud alerts on 
their credit reports; (2) close the accounts that have been compro-
mised or fraudulently opened in their names; (3) file a complaint 
with the FTC; and (4) file a complaint with a law enforcement 
agency. Then, instructions are given for victims of specific types of 
identity theft such as tax fraud, SSN fraud, driver’s license fraud, 
and so forth. 
 Since the Identity Theft Clearinghouse database was estab-
lished, the advantages associated with it have become obvious. 
The comprehensive annual reports, in conjunction with the online 

Solving the Identity Theft Problem 67
database access, consumer materials, and victim instructions, 
are helpful tools for determining the prevalence of the crime, 
 identifying current patterns in case investigations, predicting fu-
ture trends, and guiding awareness programs. Also, these are use-
ful tools for promoting a greater understanding of the nature of 
the crime, perpetrators, their methods, and victims. These argu-
ments demonstrate the need to continue the initiative and to fund 
periodic reevaluations and updates. There are, however, some 
limitations that warrant discussion. 
 The Consumer Sentinel Network is underutilized. Many eli-
gible agencies have not applied for access to the database (Con-
sumer Sentinel Network 2009). Some agencies have access but use 
it sparingly at best, and still others are unaware that the database 
exists. Therefore, ways to increase participation in the Consumer 
Sentinel Network need to be explored. 
 The Identity Theft Clearinghouse is also underutilized. One 
limitation is that all victims do not report the crime to the FTC; 
in fact, it is fairly common for crimes to go unreported. This phe-
nomenon, called “the dark figure of crime,” refers to the number 
of crimes that are committed that victims never report to police. If 
victims hesitate to notify police of crimes that occur, than it is logi-
cal to believe that in identity theft cases, victims may not notify 
the FTC. Victims may be unaware that they have the option of fil-
ing a complaint with the FTC. At this point, it is important to note 
that the FTC is not a law enforcement agency; they do not verify 
or investigate the complaints they receive, but some complaints 
may be referred to a law enforcement agency. 
 Victims elect not to file a complaint with the FTC for many 
reasons. Since the FTC does not investigate cases, some consider 
it a pointless endeavor. Many others do not consider themselves 
victims of a crime. For example, this attitude is common in cases 
of existing credit card account fraud. Research shows that the ear-
lier the fraudulent charges are detected, the easier it is to resolve 
the problems. Sometimes the issue is resolved with a telephone 
call. Cardholders, therefore, cannot justify filing a complaint with 
a law enforcement agency or the FTC. If the crime is not reported, 
victims may be less likely to use the instructions for clearing their 
names provided by the FTC. Given the importance of the Iden-
tity Theft Clearinghouse, consumer education programs ought to 
stress reporting the crime to the FTC. 
 Although the Identity Theft Clearinghouse and the Consumer 
Sentinel Network are both underutilized, their data is needed to 

68 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
provide better information to consumers, victims, businesses, 
legislators, and law enforcement agencies. More importantly, the 
data is useful developing and implementing effective preventa-
tive measures. 
 Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act 
 In 2004, the Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act amended 
18.U.S.C. § 1028 once again. The Act created the offense of “aggra-
vated identity theft” and introduced mandatory sentences for the 
crime. Aggravated identity theft is defined as the unlawful transfer, 
possession, or use of another person’s identifying information re-
lated to the commission of specific felonies. A conviction for wire, 
bank, or mail fraud, for example, involving stolen personal informa-
tion results in two sentences (i.e., one for the fraud conviction and 
an additional mandatory two-year sentence for aggravated identity 
theft). A terrorism conviction involving stolen personal informa-
tion or false identification documents also results in two sentences 
(i.e., one for the terrorism conviction and an additional five-year 
sentence for aggravated identity theft). The Act also mandates that 
those convicted of aggravated identity theft must serve out their 
sentences in custody, instead of being placed on probation. 
 The Identity Theft Enforcement and Restitution Act of 2008 
 The Identity Theft Enforcement and Restitution Act of 2008 was 
signed into law by President George W. Bush (Krebs 2008). The leg-
islation was designed to help in the investigation and prosecution 
of cybercrimes, including identity theft, and to provide financial 
recourse for victims. The new law broadens the federal courts’ ju-
risdiction over computer intrusion cases (Library of Congress n.d.). 
Prior to the bill’s enactment, federal courts only had jurisdiction 
if the perpetrator crossed state lines to access a victim’s personal 
computer. The new law eliminates the jurisdictional boundaries. 
Additionally, it removes the limits to monetary damages; it is no 
longer necessary to prove that a victim sustained at least $5,000 in 
damages as a result of computer hacking. It also became a felony to 
damage 10 or more computers associated with the federal govern-
ment or financial industry over a period of a year. In addition, the 
new law recommends increasing the penalties for identity theft, 
hacking, and computer-related fraud offenses. It instructs the U.S. 
Sentencing Commission to assess and update its guidelines. 
 Another aspect of the Act addresses the costs incurred by vic-
tims of identity theft (Library of Congress n.d.). When the thieves 

Solving the Identity Theft Problem 69
are convicted, victims may be entitled to restitution for the time 
they spend resolving problems. Although the legislation acknowl-
edges that victims sustain monetary losses, it does not address the 
entire financial impact of the crime. As discussed earlier in this 
chapter, victims are often victimized twice for the same crime, an 
event known as the second insult. The new law does not address 
these damages. For example, the credit scores of some victims are 
adversely affected due to fraudulent financial activities. Conse-
quently, victims are assessed higher interest rates on loans and 
credit cards. 
 State-level Legislative Responses 
 The majority of identity theft cases are not investigated and pros-
ecuted at the federal level. State Attorney Generals’ offices pursue 
many cases, but most are investigated by local law enforcement 
agencies and prosecuted in local courts. Laws that define identity 
theft and assign criminal penalties vary from state to state.  Arizona 
is credited with being the first state to pass a law criminalizing 
identity theft (U.S. Congress 2002). The statute was enacted in 1996. 
However, a Mississippi statute, enacted in 1993, could be considered 
the first identity theft legislation even though it referred to “false 
pretenses” instead of “identity theft” in its title. The statute, Mis-
sissippi Code Annotated § 97-19-85, was amended in 1998 to make 
identity theft a felony instead of a misdemeanor and expanded the 
types of personal identifying information covered under the law. 
California and Wisconsin passed identity theft laws in 1997. By 
2001, 44 states had enacted legislation under which identity theft 
became a criminal offense. Today, all states have passed new laws 
or enhanced their existing statutes pertaining to identity theft. 
 Some statutes define identity theft as the use of another per-
son’s identifying information to commit fraud. Conversely, the 
laws in some states do not require that the identities be used to 
commit crimes; under these laws, it is a criminal offense to pos-
sess, buy, sell, or give away the personal identifying informa-
tion of another person. Depending upon the state, identity theft 
is either a felony or misdemeanor. Classification is based upon 
the dollar amount of goods, services, and/or money obtained. 
Wyoming Statute Article 9, § 6-3-901 maintains that identity theft 
is a misdemeanor if the financial gain or attempted financial gain 
amounts to less than $1,000. In contrast, Arizona Revised Statute § 
13-2008 sets forth that identity theft is a felony even if no financial 
gain is realized. 

70 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 Legislators across the country are constantly amending cur-
rent laws and introducing new legislation to define identity theft 
more clearly, update current laws to reflect the evolution of tech-
nology and how it is used to commit crimes, increase the penalties 
associated with the crime under subscribed circumstances, offer 
consumers and victims more control over their personal informa-
tion, and provide the tools and resources needed for the inves-
tigation and prosecution of perpetrators responsible for identity 
theft. 
 Passport Programs 
 A few states help protect victims from having future prob  lems 
resulting from the theft of their identities. Approximately 10 states 
have instituted measures called “passport programs” (FTC n.d.-d). 
These programs aid victims in clearing their financial and criminal 
history records of fraudulent activities committed in their names 
and serve as proof of victimization, should problems occur in the 
future. Ohio’s Identity Theft Verification Passport Program is an 
example of this initiative. 
 A victim residing in Ohio must file a complaint with his or 
her local law enforcement agency in order to be eligible to par-
ticipate in the program (Ohio Attorney General n.d.). Once the 
agency confirms that the identity has been stolen, the victim is 
given a passport application to complete and return. Informa-
tion from the application, along with biometric data about the 
victim, is entered into a database by law enforcement personnel, 
and the passport application and police report are sent to the state 
 Attorney General’s office for verification. Once it is validated, the 
victim is issued a passport identification card. The purpose of the 
card is to help prevent future problems, as it can be presented to 
creditors as proof of victimization or presented to law enforce-
ment personnel should the victim be threatened with arrest for 
crimes committed in his or her name. Creditors and law enforce-
ment officials can verify the victim’s status by calling the toll-free 
numbers provided by the Attorney General’s office. 
 Identity Theft Task Forces 
 The purpose of a task force is to address a specific problem. It 
may be a collaborative endeavor between government agencies 
and private entities, or it may be made up of representatives from 
one or more government entities. Many states have established 
task forces to share information leading to the  investigation and 

Solving the Identity Theft Problem 71
 prosecution of identity theft cases. In June 2008 Georgia became 
one of the most recent states to pass a law mandating the for-
mation of a task force (State of Georgia 2008). Prior to the pas-
sage of Senate Bill 388, identity theft cases were investigated by 
the Governor’s Office of Consumer Affairs. The new bill pro-
vided funding to organize an identity theft task force within the 
Georgia Bureau of Investigation (GBI). In addition to conducting 
investigations, the GBI concentrates on raising public awareness, 
aiding victims, and training law enforcement personnel. The GBI 
also assists other law enforcement agencies with identity theft 
 investigations. 
 Data Privacy Day 
 Another response to the identity theft problem is the designation 
of January 28th as National Data Privacy Day in the United States. 
The program was founded in Europe in 2007, where it was known 
as Data Protection Day. In 2009, 27 European countries, Canada, 
and the United States took part in the international project (Intel 
Corporation n.d.). The states of Washington, California, Oregon, 
Massachusetts, Arizona, New York, and Wisconsin declared Janu-
ary 28, 2009 as Data Privacy Day, and North Carolina proclaimed 
January to be Data Privacy Month. Participants included univer-
sities, software vendors, government agencies, privacy advocates, 
financial institutions, data brokers, and several other types of 
businesses. 
 One goal of the program is to encourage a global dialogue re-
garding privacy issues (Intel Corporation n.d.). In addition, Data 
Privacy Day provides a forum for increasing awareness among 
businesses and consumers of the importance of securing sensitive 
information. To that end, the program also presents an opportu-
nity to educate youth about protecting their personal information 
online. 
 Identity Theft Prevention and Mitigation Program 
 Most states offer information to their residents about how to pre-
vent identity theft and what to do if they become victims of the 
crime. A recent initiative, an Identity Theft and Mitigation Pro-
gram, was established in the state of New York as part of the 
Consumer Protection Board (CPB) (New York State CPB 2009). A 
portion of the CPB Web site offers privacy protection information 
for use by businesses and consumers. For example, cell phone se-
curity is one of the issues addressed in the consumer section of 

72 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
the site (New York State CPB n.d.). The Web site also contains a 
section dedicated to assisting victims of identity theft. Under New 
York law, victims may be entitled to restitution if their imposter 
is convicted; therefore a worksheet is provided to help victims 
keep track of the costs they incur as a result of their victimization. 
They may request restitution for lost wages, time spent resolving 
problems, attorney’s fees, credit counseling, notary fees, financial 
account losses, and money spent on photocopies and mailings. 
Another worksheet is available for victims to record information 
about the contacts they make during the process of clearing their 
names, including interactions with the CPB. Victims may file a 
complaint with the CPB online or by calling a toll-free number. 
The unique aspect of the program, however, is that the CPB has 
a staff available to assist victims personally in resolving their 
problems with credit bureaus, businesses, banks, credit card com-
panies, and so forth. In some cases, staff members intercede on 
behalf of victims. 
 Criminal Justice System Response 
 The criminal justice system plays many roles in responding to 
identity theft victims. Law enforcement agencies, often the first 
to respond, take complaints and conduct investigations (Collins 
and Hoffman 2003). Then, offenders are prosecuted in courts of 
law. Most identity theft cases, however, are not investigated and 
prosecuted. Why? Law enforcement agencies, prosecutors, and 
judges across the nation are experiencing increased workloads. 
At the same time, budgets for personnel and training are shrink-
ing. Identity theft investigations are time-consuming; a single 
case may involve several perpetrators, victims, and jurisdictions. 
Likewise, a case may require the talents of several investigators. 
Simply stated, resources are lacking. Compounding the problem 
is the perception that identity theft is not a serious crime. 
 The President’s Identity Theft Task Force made recommenda-
tions to address these problems (President’s Identity Theft Task 
Force 2007). One suggestion was to develop a centralized data-
base to aid in investigations. This would allow law enforcement 
agencies to share case data and would be particularly valuable in 
addressing the jurisdictional issues that are inherent in identity 
theft cases. 
 The task force recommended that a universal complaint form 
be created to standardize the procedures for taking identity theft 
reports (President’s Identity Theft Task Force 2007). The  complaint 

Solving the Identity Theft Problem 73
form would be available on the FTC Web site for victims to print, 
complete, and take to a law enforcement agency for processing. 
Once the information is confirmed, law enforcement personnel 
would enter the complaint into the centralized database. This pro-
cess has several potential benefits for victims as well as law en-
forcement agencies. It would simplify the procedures for filing 
complaints. Further, a complaint form that collects specific infor-
mation about identity theft cases would aid in investigations by 
making it easier to recognize the connections between cases. 
 The task force also recommended coordinating and improv-
ing training for prosecutors and law enforcement personnel (Pres-
ident’s Identity Theft Task Force 2007). First, it was suggested that 
more training is needed in conducting investigations and assist-
ing victims and should be offered by the FTC. Second, training 
should be readily available to personnel on the federal, state and 
local levels. Furthermore, courses should provide up-to-date in-
formation. 
 Private and Public Partnerships 
 There are many private organizations that work together to pro-
vide victims’ services, promote public awareness, and offer iden-
tity theft insurance protection. Also, public and private entities 
form alliances in efforts to combat the crime. One such partner-
ship was formed between the International Association of Chiefs 
of Police (IACP) and the Bank of America (BAC) in 2006 (IACP 
2007). This was the first time that the financial industry and law 
enforcement had collaborated on a nationwide project designed 
to address prevention, victim assistance, and investigations (ID 
Safety n.d.). The first phase of the program was complete when a 
Web site called ID Safety was launched. The site contains preven-
tion suggestions for consumers, advice for victims of the crime 
and investigative training for law enforcement personnel. 
 The partnership identified several long-range objectives that 
must be accomplished (ID Safety n.d.). Its first objective is to pre-
vent identity theft from occurring by: increasing public awareness 
of the crime and how to prevent it, encouraging local law enforce-
ment agencies and financial organizations to form partnerships, 
and exploring vendor practices that may be a factor in facilitating 
the crime. The second objective is to improve methods for inves-
tigating identity theft cases by promoting insight into the global 
aspect of the crime and offering the opportunity for law enforce-
ment agencies nationwide to share investigative techniques and 

74 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
prevention strategies. The last objective is to facilitate a uniform 
response to the crime among law enforcement agencies and fi-
nancial institutions and to encourage them to combine their in-
vestigative efforts. The partnership, a three-year initiative, was 
established on solid goals and objectives. It will be reevaluated 
periodically to determine its effectiveness and future direction. 
 Protecting Personal Information 
 Identity theft cannot be prevented entirely. However, individu-
als can greatly reduce their risk of becoming victims of the crime. 
As stated in the first chapter, thieves use hundreds of methods 
to steal identities, and these methods are constantly evolving in 
response to several factors, such as technological advances and 
legislation. Preventative measures, therefore, must be continually 
reassessed. Regardless, individuals can take some basic steps to 
safeguard their personal identifying information. This section dis-
cusses protective measures that are inexpensive or cost nothing at 
all. In addition, the safeguards can be implemented immediately. 
 Awareness is the first step in reducing the risk of being vic-
timized. Before sharing personal information, ask several ques-
tions. Who is requesting it? Why is it necessary? How will it be 
used? Who will have access to it? Evaluate the situation and de-
termine if providing the information serves a beneficial purpose. 
For example, for individuals who are asked to provide their SSNs 
in order to obtain utility services, the benefits outweigh the risks. 
On the other hand, providing an SSN as identification for cashing 
a check puts individuals at great risk. Being aware of how identi-
ties are stolen and understanding basic preventative measures are 
effective tools for reducing the risk of victimization. 
 Phishing is a common method employed by thieves to steal 
identities. It is the act of sending deceptive e-mails for the purpose 
of tricking recipients into providing their personal information. 
Phishing e-mails usually have five elements in common: 
 
1. The e-mail appears to be from a legitimate source, such 
as a bank or credit union. The logo of the financial 
institution is embedded in the e-mail. 
 
2. The message conveys a sense of urgency. Recipients may 
be instructed to update their information within 48 hours 
or risk suspension of online account access. 
 
3. Many grammatical and spelling errors may be found in 
the e-mail. 

Solving the Identity Theft Problem 75
 
4. The e-mail might contain a link to a Web page. When 
recipients click on the link, a Web page appears that 
looks like it belongs to a legitimate business. However, 
it is a clone. 
 
5. A form for collecting personal information is provided 
on the bogus Web page. Once the form is completed 
and submitted, the information is used to perpetrate the 
identity theft. 
 All consumers should learn to recognize phishing attempts 
and be suspicious of unexpected or unsolicited e-mails. The best 
practice is to delete these messages, but if an e-mail does appear 
to be from a legitimate company, financial institution, or govern-
ment agency, recipients should contact the source by telephone 
to verify it. Further, consumers should look up the number in 
a telephone book or on a statement, and never call the number 
provided in an unsolicited e-mail. To avoid installing a computer 
virus, recipients should never click on a link provided in an un-
solicited e-mail. 
 There are also risks associated with responding to unsolicited 
telephone calls.  Vishing,  or voice phishing, is a common method 
used by identity thieves. It is the act of using a combination of 
pretexting, phishing, and/or advanced voice technology for the 
purpose of obtaining personal information under false pretences. 
There are many types of vishing schemes. One scheme involves 
telephone calls made over the Internet using Voice Over Internet 
Protocol (VoIP) technology. A thief can purchase temporary VoIP 
numbers and make calls to landline telephones. They often iden-
tify themselves as representatives of a credit card company or a 
financial institution. The caller may state that there has been suspi-
cious activity on the prospective victim’s account and may request 
personal information or provide a toll-free number for contacting 
the fraud department. Vishers are imitating the fraud notification 
process used by legitimate credit card companies and financial in-
stitutions. The best practice is to hang up the telephone without 
providing any information and not call the toll-free number the 
visher provides. Consumers should also ignore the number dis-
played on caller IDs, as these names and numbers can be forged. 
Instead, consumers should call the customer service number listed 
on the back of their credit card or on a billing statement. 
 Identity thieves can also obtain personal information through 
face-to-face interactions. Many legitimate businesses employ 

76 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
door-to-door solicitors to sell goods and services; however, no one 
should ever give personal information to a stranger who knocks 
at the door. Under no circumstances should a stranger be invited 
to step inside the residence. There have been many cases of iden-
tity theft in which victims allowed strangers into their homes. 
One thief will find a way to distract the potential customer while 
another looks for items to steal such as checkbooks, wallets, credit 
cards, bank statements, or credit card statements. If you are con-
sidering doing business with a stranger at the door, do not be 
pressured into making an immediate decision. Ask for identifica-
tion and information about the business (e.g., its name, address, 
and telephone number). End the conversation and take the time 
to thoroughly research the business. Call the local Better Business 
Bureau (BBB), or visit their Web site at http://www.bbb.org. If a 
professional license is required, confirm its status with the state 
licensing bureau. Consumers should also determine if there are 
any outstanding complaints or litigation involving the particular 
business. Finally, if satisfactory answers to these questions are re-
ceived, call the business to verify that the solicitor is actually their 
employee. 
 People must also be careful when purchasing medications 
over the Internet. As the cost of healthcare rises, the number of 
online pharmacies increases. It is a quick, convenient service for 
both customers and providers, however, hundreds of online phar-
macies are owned by criminals. In some cases, bogus Web sites 
are set up for the sole purpose of stealing customers’ personal in-
formation. In other cases, the pharmacies are not licensed or ac-
credited to sell medications to U.S.-based consumers. Some ship 
fake, substituted, or weakened medications, while others collect 
debit and credit card payments but fail to ship the orders. Before 
purchasing from an online pharmacy, check the National Asso-
ciation of Boards of Pharmacy (NAPB) Web site. There are also 
two searchable databases available for confirming a pharmacy’s 
validity. The Verified Internet Pharmacy Practice Sites (VIPPS) da-
tabase consists of pharmacies accredited by the NABP to sell med-
ications for human consumption. The Veterinary-Verified Internet 
Pharmacy Practice Sites (Vet-VIPPS) database contains pharma-
cies that are accredited to sell medications for animals. Both data-
bases are available at http://www.nabp.net/index.html?target=/
vipps/consumer/search.asp&. In addition, the NABP provides 
a list of names and URLs of online pharmacies that consumers 
should avoid. 

Solving the Identity Theft Problem 77
 There are risks associated with using debit and credit cards 
to conduct in-person and online transactions. When making pur-
chases in person, be aware of who has the card and make sure 
it is visible at all times.  Skimming  is a common method used to 
steal identities. Skimming devices are very small and can be easily 
hidden in a pocket, apron pouch, or under a counter. In a matter 
of seconds, a card can be swiped through a skimmer, and all of 
the information on the magnetic strip, including the card’s secu-
rity code, is recorded and stored. When making online purchases, 
check the BBB Web site before shopping on an unfamiliar mer-
chant’s Web site, and write down the merchant’s address and tele-
phone number for future reference. Be cautious if the only way to 
make contact is through a post office box or e-mail address. Look 
for the security icon, a closed padlock, before entering and sub-
mitting an order. Check the URL that appears in the browser bar 
at the top of the page. Make sure it begins with “https,” instead of 
“http.” The “s” indicates that information is encrypted before it is 
transmitted. Print and keep (or save in a file on your computer) 
copies of the purchase order, confirmation number, and all e-mail 
correspondence. In addition to these safeguards, consider having 
a separate low-limit credit card to use for online shopping, enter-
tainment, and travel. 
 Protecting incoming and outgoing mail is another way to re-
duce one’s risk of victimization. Identity thieves steal mail hop-
ing to find personal information. The most desirable documents 
include personal checks written to pay bills, boxes of blank checks 
being delivered from financial institutions, cell phone, telephone, 
and utility bills, credit card and bank statements, retirement and 
investment account statements, preapproved credit card applica-
tions, and income tax information such as W2 and 1099 forms. 
Remove incoming mail from the box immediately after it is deliv-
ered. If that is inconvenient, consider purchasing a locked mailbox 
or renting a post office box. Stop your mail delivery while on va-
cation. Never put up the red flag on a mailbox and leave it unat-
tended. The red flag tells the postal employee that there is outgoing 
mail, but it also signals to identity thieves that mail is waiting for 
them to pick up. The best practice is to take outgoing mail to the 
post office. Instead of dropping it in the blue curbside receptacle, 
take the mail inside and deposit it. The curbside mailboxes can fill 
up, thus making the mail near the top accessible to anyone. 
 Reducing one’s amount of incoming mail also helps pre-
vent identity theft. There are many ways to opt out of receiving 

78 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 unsolicited correspondence. By calling 1–888–5OPTOUT, individ-
uals can temporarily or permanently remove their names from 
the marketing lists that credit bureaus sell to businesses. Thus, 
businesses cannot send documents, such as preapproved credit 
card applications, to those who have chosen not to receive them. 
Another way to reduce unwanted mail is to complete and return 
opt-out notices. Financial institutions and other businesses share 
their customers’ information with affiliates, however they are 
mandated by law to give their customers the opportunity to opt 
out of having personal information shared with nonaffiliates. 
 The FTC provides another option to help individuals protect 
their privacy. Consumers may opt out of receiving telemarketing 
calls by registering their cell and telephone numbers with the Na-
tional Do Not Call Registry at http://www.ftc.gov/donotcall. It 
will not stop all unsolicited calls, but it will drastically reduce the 
number received. 
 Shredding obsolete or unwanted documents is another way 
to reduce the risk of becoming a victim of identity theft. A cross-
cut shredder is best because it chops paper into tiny bits that can-
not be pieced back together. Shredding prevents dumpster divers 
from retrieving personal information from recycling containers, 
dumpsters, trash cans, and landfills. However, some important 
documents must be retained such as tax returns, insurance poli-
cies, stock certificates, and blank checks. Store these in a locked 
drawer in your home or in a lock box (also called a safe deposit 
box) at a financial institution. 
 Passwords should be placed on all financial accounts to help 
reduce the risk of identity theft. Financial accounts include check-
ing, savings, investment, credit card, telephone, cell phone, and 
utilities. Passwords identify the account holder when conducting 
transactions online, in person, or over the telephone. Write these 
down and keep them with other important documents. To further 
secure accounts, change all passwords at least once a year. Choose 
strong passwords that are difficult for another person to figure out. 
Use a combination of random upper case letters, lower case let-
ters, numbers, and symbols. Avoid using soft passwords such as 
consecutive letters or numbers. Additionally, passwords should 
not contain personal information. It is easy to remember a date 
of birth, a family member’s name, full or partial SSN, telephone 
number, date of graduation, school affiliation, or mother’s maiden 
name; however, a thief may have enough information about an in-
dividual to guess his or her password using this very information. 

Solving the Identity Theft Problem 79
 Shoulder-surfing  is another method used by thieves to steal per-
sonal identifying information. Although it can happen anywhere, 
it is often associated with the use of an Automatic Teller Machine 
(ATM). A thief looks over the shoulder of the ATM user, records 
the numbers selected on the keypad, and uses that information to 
access the account illegally. When using an ATM, beware of your 
surroundings. If other people are in the area, shield the keypad 
and be sure to take your receipt. Another way criminals steal in-
formation is by installing skimmers or cameras in ATMs. Thus, 
it is best to use machines that are located at a financial institu-
tion. They are usually placed in high-traffic, well-lit areas, thereby 
greatly reducing the likelihood that a thief has tampered with the 
machine. Computer users are also targeted by shoulder-surfers. 
Take precautions when accessing accounts on public computers 
such as those located in libraries, coffee shops, airports, hotels, 
and hospitals. Make sure to shield the keyboard when entering 
personal information, and do not use a computer if the monitor is 
positioned where it can be read by others in the room. 
 Nonexistent, obsolete, or weak computer security increases 
the risks of identity theft, but though there are many ways to 
secure computers, some common security measures are often 
ignored. Keep all software programs, including the operating sys-
tem, up to date. Regularly check the vendor’s Web site for patches 
and updates. Install antivirus and spyware detection software. 
Since new viruses are discovered daily, download updates once a 
week and run a full scan of the hard drive. Make sure that firewall 
software is installed and turned on at all times; firewalls block 
intruders from illegally accessing computers. Be aware that the 
best firewalls are a combination of hardware and software. Read 
your computer’s owner’s manual and your Internet Service Pro-
vider’s (ISP) instructions for securing wireless networks. Crimi-
nals are adept at harvesting passwords and personal information 
by exploiting weaknesses in wireless devises. Consider using a 
commercial file and e-mail encryption program to further protect 
personal information. When sharing music and games, make sure 
that file-sharing software is configured to deny others access to 
important files on the hard drive, such as income tax returns. 
 Guard against identity theft when discarding, selling, or do-
nating a computer because data remains on the hard drive even 
after files, folders, and programs are deleted. Before disposing of 
an old computer, consider hiring a trusted professional to clean 
the hard drive or purchasing a  wipe  software program to remove 

80 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
all traces of data. The best option, however, is to remove and com-
pletely destroy the hard drive. To maximize protection before dis-
posing of any electronic devise, including cell phones, remove all 
traces of data. 
 The basic suggestions offered in this section are effective tools 
for lessening one’s risk of victimization, but if identity theft does 
occur, it is important to detect the crime as early as possible. To 
that end, individuals have many options. Scrutinize all bills and 
account statements as soon as they are received. If unauthorized 
activities are detected, report them immediately to the company 
or financial institution involved and close the compromised ac-
count. Also, report it if a bill or statement is not received on the 
date it is expected to arrive. 
 Another early detection tool is credit reports. Under the Fair 
Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), individuals are entitled to receive 
free credit reports every 12 months from the three major credit 
bureaus (i.e., TransUnion, Experian, and Equifax). Credit re -
ports may be ordered online through the AnnualCreditReport.
com Web site at http://www.annualcreditreport.com or they may 
be request  ed by calling 1-877-322-8228, a toll-free number. 
 The reports from all of the credit bureaus contain four basic 
types of information: personal identifying information, credit his-
tory, public records, and inquiries. Personal identifying informa-
tion includes current and previous addresses, date of birth, SSN, 
employer, and spouse’s name. The credit history section is a re-
cord of an individual’s debts and payment habits. Public records 
include bankruptcies, civil judgments, overdue child support, 
and state or federal tax liens. Lastly, the inquiries section lists all 
of the entities that accessed the full or partial credit report for a 
permissible purpose. There are two distinctive types of inquiries: 
 hard  inquiries are those initiated by the consumer, such as when 
applying for credit;  soft  inquiries are made by companies for pro-
motional purposes, such as mailing preapproved credit card of-
fers to a preselected group of consumers. 
 It is evident that credit reports are important because they 
are a reflection of an individual’s activities, ranging from where 
they live to where they have applied for credit. Equally impor-
tant, these reports can expose an identity thief’s illegal activities. 
If fraudulent or erroneous information is found on a credit report, 
consumers should follow the instructions provided by the credit 
bureau to rectify the situation. However, identity theft victims 
often need additional help resolving problems. The  “consumers” 

Solving the Identity Theft Problem 81
section of the FTC’s Web site, Fighting Back Against Identity 
Theft, offers information to aid victims in clearing their names. 
The site is located at http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/microsites/
idtheft/consumers/index.html. 
 The successful protection of personal information and early 
detection of identity theft begins with consumer awareness and 
knowledge of the crime. Well-informed individuals are more 
adept at identifying potential risks. Individuals can make better 
decisions in their personal lives, in the workplace, and in choos-
ing the companies with which they to do business. Ultimately, so-
ciety is the beneficiary of educated citizens. 
 Protecting Sensitive Information in the Workplace 
 Sensitive information is an integral part of doing business. It iden-
tifies the business, its customers, and employees. Many state and 
federal laws govern information security. The Health Information 
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) is an example 
of a federal law that sets standards for protecting patient infor-
mation within the healthcare industry (U.S. Department of HHS 
n.d.). Although laws vary from state to state, most states have 
enacted legislation that restricts the use of SSNs. In addition to 
complying with state and federal laws, much more can be done to 
protect sensitive information. Many of the suggestions in the pre-
vious section for protecting personal information can be adapted 
for the workplace environment, however some issues are unique 
and warrant discussion. The following section focuses on policies 
and procedures that can help ensure the security of proprietary 
information in the workplace. 
 Customers and employees expect that their sensitive infor-
mation will be protected once it is entrusted to a business. In ad-
dition to physically securing the premises, there are several steps 
that can be taken to safeguard the information that comes into, 
flows through, and goes out of a workplace. At this point, it is im-
portant to note that everyone in the workplace should be involved 
in assessing the security measures associated with their job tasks. 
Even though managers and employees rarely stay with one em-
ployer for their entire careers, their input is invaluable. Each posi-
tion has specific job tasks. Even though personnel changes, the job 
tasks remain fairly constant over time. 
 The first step is to be aware of the types of information that the 
business or organization collects and the purpose for gathering it. 
Determine if any sensitive information is collected  unnecessarily. 

82 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
For example, it is necessary to use SSNs as  identifiers for  processing 
in-house payroll. On the other hand, it is unnecessary to ask cus-
tomers to use their mothers’ maiden names as identifiers when 
other passwords can serve the same purpose. 
 The next step is to consider how proprietary information ar-
rives in the workplace, where it is stored, and who has access to 
it. Sensitive information comes into businesses in several ways, 
including via fax, telephone, e-mail, Web sites, and by in-person 
contact. Security measures for each process, therefore, should 
be taken into account. For example, many businesses take or-
ders for their products by fax. The orders may contain sensitive 
 information, such as debit or credit card numbers. To protect cus-
tomers’ privacy, fax machines should not be located in a public 
area of the workplace; instead, they should be strategically placed 
to coordinate with job tasks. Review the job tasks and determine 
who needs to have access to sensitive information in order to 
perform their duties. Using the fax machine scenario, follow 
the orders through the process (i.e., from the receipt of the faxes 
through shipment of the orders). Determine who must have ac-
cess to sensitive information as the orders progress through the 
system and eliminate any steps that expose it to those who do 
not need it in order to complete their job duties. Then, examine 
where and how proprietary information is stored. Personnel files, 
for example, should be kept in locked drawers, and computerized 
payroll software should be password-protected. Only authorized 
staff should be given access to sensitive files and computer pro-
grams, and their access should be based upon their job functions. 
 When proprietary information is no longer needed, it should 
be disposed of in a proper manner. There are several businesses 
that specialize in shredding or incinerating paper documents for 
other organizations. Some businesses prefer to shred their un-
needed documents in-house. This is a job task assigned to a posi-
tion within the workplace, therefore document disposal methods 
should be reviewed for security. 
 Once current practices have been evaluated and weaknesses 
in security identified, the next step is to address the findings. 
Develop company policies and job procedures for protecting 
sensitive information and include this information in personnel 
manuals. Provide in-house training programs for the current staff 
and all newly hired personnel. Insist on compliance. Should an 
individual violate the organization’s trust, have policies in place 
for dealing with the situation. In addition to training programs, 

References 83
consider offering an assistance program in case a staff member 
becomes a victim of personal identity theft. 
 Finally, hiring practices are important when considering 
ways to protect sensitive information in the workplace. Since 
some identity thieves seek out employment for the sole purpose 
of obtaining information, there are many approaches that can be 
used to screen potential employees for security risks. Examine 
prior work histories and contact previous employers. Conduct a 
thorough background check, including criminal records. Check 
social networking Web sites for information that individuals write 
about themselves. If hiring through an employment agency, make 
sure the agency adheres to rigorous screening processes. 
 Although general in nature, the proactive measures dis-
cussed in this section are relatively inexpensive to establish in any 
workplace. The alternative, such as a security breach of paper or 
electronic files, can result in a loss of business and can foster a 
sense of distrust within the workplace. Therefore, the time and 
money spent on protecting sensitive information can be recouped 
through customer and employee loyalty. 
 This chapter discussed numerous measures for prevent-
ing identity theft. If incidents of the crime are to be reduced, 
a concerted effort must be undertaken by the judicial system, 
individuals, private businesses, legislators, law enforcement 
agencies, and victims’ advocates. Identity theft is still a com-
mon occurrence even though progress has been made in some 
areas. More has to be done to protect sensitive information from 
being stolen and used by thieves. Perpetrators of identity theft 
must be held responsible for their crimes, and victims ought 
to have access to resolution and restoration services that meet 
their needs. 
 References 
 AARP. 2004. “One identity theft victim’s ‘living hell.’”  AARP Bulletin 
Today . http://bulletin.aarp.org/yourmoney/articles/livinghell.html. 
Accessed June 30, 2009. 
 Atkinson, Robert. 2004. Meeting the offshore challenge. http://www.
ppionline.org/ppi_ci.cfm?knlgAreaID=107&subsecID=123&contentID=
252767. Accessed January 15, 2009. 
 Attorney General of Florida, “Columbia county man pleads guilty 
to mortgage fraud scheme.” Press release, May 7, 2009. http://www.

84 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
myfloridalegal.com/newsrel.nsf/newsreleases/93B9C1234B2887B18525
75AF0050B79D. Accessed June 1, 2009. 
 Becker, Mark J. 2005. “Privacy: Outsourcing and the need for a vendor 
compliance strategy.” In  Expert Commentary, ed. G. E. Clayton. http://
www.irmi.com/Expert/Articles/2005/Clayton03.aspx. Accessed 
January 16, 2009. 
 Collins, Judith M. and Sandra K. Hoffman. 2003.  Identity Theft First 
Responder Manual for Criminal Justice Professionals: Police Officers, 
Attorneys, and Judges . Flushing, NY: Looseleaf Law Publications, Inc. 
 Collins, Judith M. and Sandra K. Hoffman. 2004. “Identity theft: 
Predator profiles.” Unpublished Paper, School of Criminal Justice, 
Michigan State University. 
 Consumer Sentinel Network. 2009. Consumer Sentinel Network 
Members. http://www.ftc.gov/sentinel/members.shtml. Accessed June 
20, 2009. 
 Deloitte Research. 2004. The titans take hold. How offshoring has 
changed the competitive dynamic for global financial services 
institutions. http://www.deloitte.com/dtt/cda/doc/content/
Offshoring%20Final%281%29.pdf. Accessed January 16, 2009. 
 Dixon, Pam. 2006. Medical identity theft: The information crime 
that can kill you. http://www.worldprivacyforum.org/pdf/wpf_
medicalidtheft2006.pdf. Accessed April 4, 2007. 
 Doerner, William G. and Steven P. Lab. 2005.  Victimology . 4th ed. 
Cincinnati, OH: Anderson Publishing Company. 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). 2008. 2007 mortgage fraud report. 
http://www.fbi.gov/. Accessed December 1, 2009. 
 Federal Trade Commission (FTC). n.d.-a. Defend: Recover from identity 
theft. http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/microsites/idtheft/consumers/
defend.html. Accessed September 7, 2009. 
 Federal Trade Commission (FTC). n.d.-b. Federal laws: Credit. http://
ftc.gov/bcp/edu/microsites/idtheft/reference-desk/federal-credit.
html. Accessed June 20, 2009. 
 Federal Trade Commission. n.d.-c. Fighting back against identity theft: 
Partnership. http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/microsites/idtheft/become-
a-partner.html. Accessed June 20, 2009. 
 Federal Trade Commission. n.d.-d. State laws: ID theft passport 
programs. http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/microsites/idtheft/reference-
desk/state-crim-passport.html. Accessed June 20, 2009. 
 Federal Trade Commission. 2008. About the Federal Trade Commission. 
http://ftc.gov/ftc/about.shtm. Accessed June 20, 2009. 

References 85
 Federal Trade Commission. 2009. Consumer sentinel network data book 
for January–December 2008. http://www.ftc.gov/sentinel/reports/
sentinel-annual-reports/sentinel-cy2008.pdf. Accessed June 20, 2009. 
 GalleryWatch. 2004. GalleryWatch federal analysis on outsourcing. 
http://www.gallerywatch.com/. Accessed March 3, 2006. 
 Gordon, Gary R., et al. 2007. Identity fraud trends and patters: Building 
a data-based foundation for proactive enforcement. (October): 1–74. 
Presented at a conference at the Economic Crime Institute, Utica 
College. http://www.utica.edu/academic/institutes/ecii/publications/
media/cimip_id_theft_study_oct_22_noon.pdf. Accessed February 27, 
2009. 
 Identity Theft Resource Center (ITRC). 2005. Identity theft: The 
aftermath 2004. http://www.idtheftcenter.org/artman2/uploads/1/
The_Aftermath_2004_1.pdf. Accessed April 29, 2009. 
 Identity Theft Resource Center. 2007. 2007 data breach stats. http://
www.idtheftcenter.org/artman2/uploads/1/ITRC_Breach_Stats_
Report_20071231_1.pdf. Accessed January 14, 2009. 
 Identity Theft Resource Center. 2008. Identity theft: The aftermath 
2007. http://www.idtheftcenter.org/artman2/uploads/1/
Aftermath_2007_20080529v2_1.pdf. Accessed April 29, 2009. 
 Identity Theft Resource Center. 2009a. 2005 data breach stats. http://
www.idtheftcenter.org/artman2/uploads/1/ITRC_Breach_Stats_
Report_20051231_2.pdf. Accessed June 3, 2009. 
 Identity Theft Resource Center. 2009b. 2006 data breach stats. http://
www.idtheftcenter.org/artman2/uploads/1/ITRC_Breach_Stats_
Report_20061231.pdf. Accessed June 3, 2009. 
 Identity Theft Resource Center. 2009c. 2008 data breach stats. http://
www.idtheftcenter.org/artman2/uploads/1/ITRC_Breach_Stats_
Report_2008_final_1.pdf. Accessed June 3, 2009. 
 Intel Corporation. n.d. Data privacy day 2009. http://www.intel.com/
policy/dataprivacy.htm. Accessed June 9, 2009. 
 ID Safety. n.d. About ID safety: A nationwide strategy to prevent 
and respond to identity crime. http://www.idsafety.org/?fa=about. 
Accessed June 9, 2009. 
 International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP), “International 
Association of Chiefs of Police and Bank of America offer tax time 
tips.” Press release, March 7, 2007. http://www.theiacp.org/About/
PressCenter/tabid/81/Default.aspx?id=820&v=1. Accessed June 9, 
2009. 
 Karmen, Andrew. 2003.  Crime Victims: An Introduction to Victimology. 5th 
ed. Belmont, CA: Thomson Publishing. 

86 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 Krebs, Brian. 2008. New federal law targets id theft, cybercrime. 
 Washington Post , October 1. http://voices.washingtonpost.com/
securityfix/2008/10/new_federal_law_targets_id_the.html. Accessed 
June 11, 2009. 
 Lazarus, David. 2004a. Extortion threat to patients’ records. Clients not 
informed of India staff’s breach.  San Francisco Chronicle, April 4. http://
sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?file=/c/a/2004/04/02/MNGI75VIEB1.
DTL. Accessed January 16, 2009. 
 Lazarus, David. 2004b. Special report: Looking offshore. Outsourced 
UCSF notes highlight privacy risk. How one offshore worker sent 
tremor through medical system.  San Francisco Chronicle, March 28. 
http://sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?file=/c/a/2004/03/28/
MNGFS3080R264.DTL. Accessed January 16, 2009. 
 Library of Congress. n.d. Thomas. http://thomas.loc.gov/ (object name 
S2168). Accessed June 10, 2009. 
 Markey, Edward J. 2004. Offshoring oversight letter—Homeland 
security. http://www.house.gov/markey. Accessed January 16, 2006. 
 New York State Consumer Protection Board (CPB). n.d. CPB, Identity 
Theft, Information Privacy and Internet Security. http://www.
nysconsumer.gov/internet_security.htm#Information%20Privacy%
20for%20Consumers. Accessed June 9, 2009. 
 New York State Consumer Protection Board. 2009. “Identity theft 
prevention and mitigation program to protect New Yorkers.” 
Press release, January 8, 2009. http://www.consumer.state.ny.us/
pressreleases/2009/jan82009.htm. Accessed June 9, 2009. 
 Ohio Attorney General. n.d. Identity theft verification passport. 
http://www.ag.state.oh.us/victim/idtheft/index.asp. Accessed June 9, 
2009. 
 President’s Identity Theft Task Force. 2007. Combating identity theft: 
A strategic plan. http://www.idtheft.gov/reports/StrategicPlan.pdf. 
Accessed May 3, 2007. 
 State of Georgia, Governor’s Office of Consumer Affairs. 2008. 
“Governor Perdue signs consumer protection legislation.” Press release, 
May 13, 2008. http://consumer.georgia.gov/00/press/detail/0,2668,542
6814_94800056_113479898,00.html. Accessed June 9, 2009. 
 Synovate. 2003. Federal Trade Commission-Identity Theft Survey 
Report. http://ftc.gov/bcp/edu/microsites/idtheft/downloads/
synovate_report.pdf. Accessed April 3, 2009. 
 Synovate. 2007. Federal Trade Commission-2006 Identity 
Theft Survey Report. http://www.ftc.gov/os/2007/11/
SynovateFinalReportIDTheft2006.pdf. Accessed April 3, 2009. 

References 87
 U.S. Congress. House. 2002.  Identity theft: Greater awareness and use of 
existing data are needed. June 2002. GAO-2-766. http://www.gao.gov/
new.items/d02766.pdf. Accessed June 27, 2007. 
 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). n.d. Health 
information privacy: understanding HIPAA privacy. http://www.hhs.
gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/index.html. Accessed June 9, 
2009. 
 United States of America v. ChoicePoint Inc. 2006a. U.S. District Court 
for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division. Case No. 1:06-
cv-00198-GET. Civil Complaint. http://www.ftc.gov/os/caselist/
choicepoint/0523069complaint.pdf. Accessed March 12, 2008. 
 United States of America v. ChoicePoint Inc. 2006b. U.S. District Court for 
the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division. Case No. 1:06-cv-
00198-GET. Stipulated Final Judgment and Order for Civil Penalties, 
Permanent Injunction, and Other Equitable Relief. http://www.ftc.gov/
os/caselist/choicepoint/0523069stip.pdf. Accessed March 12, 2008. 
 Walker, Samuel and Charles Katz. 2005.  The Police in America: An 
Introduction . New York: McGraw-Hill Publishers. 


89
 3 
 I
dentity theft poses a threat to both foreign and domestic security; 
therefore it is important to consider the crime when examining 
the challenges inherent to maintaining global security. Identity 
theft enables other crimes, including acts of terrorism. In addi-
tion, jurisdictional issues hamper investigations. If a victim lives 
in one county and the perpetrator in another, it compounds the 
problems associated with investigating and prosecuting identity 
theft cases. The preceding chapters explored the repercussions of 
the crime in the United States. This chapter discusses the problem 
of identity theft as it relates to other countries. In order to address 
global concerns and find potential solutions, it is paramount that 
the research, laws, and policies of other countries be examined. 
 Canada 
 In the early 1990s, Canada was viewed as a sanctuary for interna-
tional criminals who used identity fraud to facilitate transnational 
crimes such as drug trafficking, human trafficking, and terrorism 
(Ronderos 2000). This view stemmed from the fact that fraudulent 
or stolen Canadian passports were purported to be readily avail-
able and used regularly by transnational offenders. Canadian 
passports were said to be available to purchase for anywhere from 
US$500 to $25,000, or they could be rented for $5,000. 
 In addition, Canada’s refugee policies were extremely lib-
eral when compared to policies of many other countries (Ronde-
ros 2000). Compounding the problem is the fact that those who 
were refused asylum ignored deportation orders and simply 
 Worldwide Perspective 

90 Worldwide Perspective
disappeared. Between 1995 and early 2000, nearly 20,000 people 
were ordered to be deported from Canada. Instead of honoring 
deportation orders, they chose to go underground in Canada or 
cross the border into the United States. 
 As mentioned earlier, identity theft is often used as a 
method to facilitate other crimes, including terrorism, as, by 
its very definition, it enables criminals to travel from one coun-
try to another and serves as cover as they plan their criminal 
activities. The case of the Millennium Bomber illustrates how 
perpetrators move around and plan their crimes. The 1999 ar-
rest of Ahmed Ressam, known as the Millennium Bomber by 
U.S. authorities, brought many issues to the attention of coun-
tries around the world. One of these was the ease with which 
fraudulent or stolen identification documents could be obtained 
in most countries. Thus, terrorists could travel freely around the 
world, particularly between the United States and Canada, and 
they often financed their activities with credit card fraud and 
other financial crimes. 
 Ahmed Ressam left Algeria, his home country, in 1992 (Bern-
ton et al. 2002). At that time, Algeria was in a state of economic de-
pression and political unrest. Ressam went to France on a 30-day 
visa. When the visa expired, he fled to the island of Corsica. There, 
Ressam obtained a fraudulent French passport with his picture 
on it but in the name of Nasser Ressam. On November 8, 1993, he 
was arrested on immigration violations. A trial was set for March 
1994 and he was released from custody. 
 In February 1994, Ressam boarded a plane to Canada instead 
of risking deportation back to Algeria, and he traveled using a 
stolen and altered passport (Bernton et al. 2002). The owner’s pic-
ture had been removed and replaced with one of Ressam. When 
he deplaned in Montreal, Canadian authorities detected the fraud 
and arrested him. To avoid deportation, Ressam applied for po-
litical asylum. He was released and ordered to appear at a hear-
ing on March 28th. In the meantime, he began collecting welfare 
from the Canadian government in the amount of $550 per month. 
When Ressam failed to show up for the hearing, he was arrested 
again, but released after being photographed, fingerprinted, and 
advised of a new court date. 
 When his welfare payments ran out, Ressam resorted to steal-
ing (Bernton et al. 2002). He was arrested on January 30, 1995 for 
shoplifting a designer suit. After the court found him guilty, he 
was fined $100, sentenced to two years on probation, and ordered 

Canada 91
to leave Canada within six weeks—by July 23, 1995. In an effort 
to stall deportation, Ressam filed an appeal. As he waited for his 
court date, he continued stealing. He stole money by shoulder 
surfing at automatic teller machines. He also pilfered purses, wal-
lets, and luggage. Ressam used the stolen cash, credit cards, trav-
elers’ checks, and account information to sustain his lifestyle. 
 Once again, Ressam did not go to his hearing (Bernton et al. 
2002). By this time, he had a buyer for the identity documents 
he had stolen: Ressam sold them to Fateh Kamel, a naturalized 
citizen and fellow Algerian. He agreed to sell the documents for 
$60 to $200 each. In October 1996, he and a friend were arrested 
again for stealing. This time, they had stolen $300 from a guest at 
a Holiday Inn. Ressam was fined $500 and released. 
 Ressam had made many new friends in Canada (Bernton 
et al. 2002). Most of them were men from Algeria. One of his new 
friends, Abderraouf Hannachi, talked about training at Osama 
bin Laden’s camp in Afghanistan. He professed to be a recruiter 
with close ties with Abu Zubaydah, coordinator of the recruits 
entering the training camps, and Hannachi encouraged the young 
men to join the holy war, or jihad. Hannachi spoke of his hatred 
for the West, especially the United States. Ressam and his friends 
started attending services at a mosque Hannachi recommended. 
Soon, the young men were planning their own jihad activities.
However, the Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS) had 
the men under surveillance based on tips the CSIS had received 
from the French and Italian authorities. 
 In 1996, Hannachi made arrangements with Zubaydah in 
 Afghanistan to send Ahmed Ressam to a training camp (Bernton 
et al. 2002). To prepare for the trip, Ressam created a new identity 
for himself. This time, he chose to be a Canadian citizen in order 
to reduce the risk of being detected as he traveled to the camp. 
The process began with a stolen baptismal certificate, something 
referred to as a  breeder document . Ressam combed through local 
parish records until he found the name of a priest who was there 
in 1970, the year Ressam adopted as his new year of birth. He filed 
out the baptismal certificate with his new name, Benni Antoine 
Noris, and forged the priest’s signature. With the certificate, Res-
sam obtained a Canadian passport and purchased airline tickets. 
 Next, Ressam flew from Toronto to Frankfurt, Germany and 
then on to Pakistan (Bernton et al. 2002). From there, he was taken 
by automobile into the Khyber Pass of Afghanistan. The final por-
tion of the trip involved Ressam and several hundred other recruits 

92 Worldwide Perspective
walking over rugged terrain into the Kalden training camp. Res-
sam completed training in self-defense, guerilla warfare, weap-
ons, airport security, explosives, and many other subjects and was 
assigned an Al-Qaeda contact, a man named Abu Doha who was 
an Algerian residing in London. Ressam left the Kalden training 
camp and went to the Darunta camp for specialized training in 
making bombs. While at the Darunta camp, he and a group of 
fellow Algerians began planning an attack. Their target would be 
a U.S. airport, an embassy in Israel, or a military base. No matter 
the target, the bombing would correspond with the millennium. 
When Ressam left the camp, he took with him $12,000, a notebook 
containing instructions for building and detonating bombs, and 
an assignment. His assignment was to return to Canada and rent 
a safe house where he could stockpile passports and weapons. 
Ultimately, he was to build the bomb that would be detonated 
somewhere in the United States. 
 Ressam’s return trip was uneventful (Bernton et al. 2002). 
Security personnel at Los Angeles International Airport (LAX) 
stopped him, but after asking a few questions and checking Benni 
Noris’s passport against a watch list, they cleared him to board a 
plane bound for Canada. Security officials were unaware of the 
contents of Ressam’s luggage (e.g., bomb recipes and a couple of 
bomb-making ingredients hidden in shampoo and Tylenol bot-
tles). While waiting to board his flight, Ressam decided that LAX 
would be the target for the millennium bombing. 
 Ressam and other members of the training camp were sup-
posed to meet in Vancouver, British Columbia (Bernton et al. 
2002). When no one else arrived, Ressam went to Montreal and 
rented an apartment as instructed. There, he and some friends 
continued making plans for the bombing. They lived on stolen 
cash and credit cards, and when the group needed more money, 
Ressam applied for and received a Visa credit card under the 
name of Benni Noris. On August 31, 1999, he used the credit 
card to purchase bomb-making supplies at an electronics store. 
The next day, he used the Visa card to purchase alarm watches 
to be used as detonators. Ressam was undecided about whether 
to plant one or two bombs, so he asked Mourad Ikhlef, a former 
roommate, for advice. Ikhlef was experienced in these matters; 
he had fled Algeria in 1992 after being charged with detonating a 
bomb in the Algiers airport. Together, Ressam and Ikhlef decided 
that one bomb would be sufficient and that it should explode near 
a crowded checkpoint. 

Canada 93
 Although still living in Montreal, Ressam sometimes stayed 
overnight with friends who were renting his old apartment on 
Sherbrooke in Montreal (Bernton et al. 2002). He was at the Sher-
brooke apartment on October 4, 1999, when the Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police raided it. Ressam, however, was able to escape 
without being apprehended. Among the items confiscated by po-
lice were nine stolen passports and a backpack containing Res-
sam’s address book. The address for Evergro Products in British 
Columbia, an agricultural supply store, was on the first page of the 
book. Despite the raid, Ressam continued plotting the LAX bomb-
ing. He enlisted three fellow Algerians even though they had not 
trained in Afghanistan. One of the men was Ressam’s old friend 
in Montreal, Abdelmajid Dahoumane, who could help make the 
bomb. The second member was a credit card thief, Mokhtar Ha-
ouari, whose role was to provide the money the mission required. 
Abdelghani Meskini, a con man living in Brooklyn, was the third 
man recruited to help deliver the bomb to LAX. Although Ressam 
had never met Meskini, he arranged by telephone to meet him in 
Seattle, Washington in December. 
 In the meantime, Ressam contacted Abu Jaffar, an Al-Qaeda 
member who was close to Osama bin Laden (Bernton et al. 2002). 
He requested that Jaffar obtain bin Laden’s blessing for the LAX 
bombing and then Ressam called his designated contact, Abu 
Doha, in London and advised him to arrange for his return to Al-
geria after the bombing. Doha promised to provide Ressam with 
the money and identity documents he requested. 
 On November 17, 1999, Ressam and Dahoumane flew from 
Montreal to Vancouver, where they rented a car and a small cabin 
(Bernton et al. 2002). The two men built the bomb in the cabin 
and then Dahoumane returned to Montreal. On December 14, 
1999, Ressam drove to Victoria, British Columbia to board a ferry 
to Port Angeles, Washington. The immigration officer inspected 
Ressam’s passport, which had been issued in the name of Benni 
Noris. The officer checked his driver’s license against a computer 
database, and after inspecting a suitcase in the truck of the car, he 
allowed Ressam to drive the rental car onto the ferry. 
 The ferry arrived in Port Angeles, where a customs inspector 
checked each vehicle as it drove off the ferry and onto American 
soil (Bernton et al. 2002). However, the inspector became suspi-
cious of Ressam. He seemed nervous and was slow to comply 
with her requests. Soon, other inspectors joined in questioning 
him and examining his car. When an inspector removed the spare 

94 Worldwide Perspective
tire, he found bags of white powder and bottles of brown liquid 
hidden underneath it. Ressam took the first opportunity that 
came along to flee on foot. Eventually, he was apprehended and 
turned over to the Port Angeles police. After consulting with the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and customs officials, the 
police detained Ressam on suspicion of using false identification. 
Within a couple of days, it was determined that Benni Noris was 
really Ahmed Ressam, an Algerian with connections to suspected 
terrorists. The items found in the trunk of the rental car were the 
ingredients for a bomb. 
 While Ressam was in custody, one of his co-conspirators 
was waiting in Seattle (Bernton et al. 2002). The con man from 
Brooklyn, Abdelghani Meskini, thought he was meeting someone 
named Reda. He did not know Ressam’s true identity or what 
their mission entailed. All he knew was that, in exchange for par-
ticipating in the mission, he would receive a fraudulent visa so he 
could travel to an Al-Qaeda training camp in Afghanistan. Mes-
kini waited for a few days for Ressam to arrive and made several 
cash withdrawals using a stolen credit card. Finally, Meskini flew 
back to New York. On December 30, 1999, FBI agents arrested 
him. 
 Ressam was tried and convicted of several felonies, includ-
ing conspiring to commit an act of international terrorism (Bern-
ton et al. 2002). He faced a prison sentence of 57 to 130 years. In 
exchange for a 27-year prison sentence, Ressam agreed to testify 
against his co-conspirators and to reveal everything he knew 
about Al-Qaeda. 
 This case sparked debates between Canada and the United 
States concerning immigration policies and border security and it 
also brought attention to the issue of identity fraud. The fact that 
this is a worldwide problem and used by terrorists to facilitate 
their activities is not arguable, but in the midst of the debates, a 
Canadian-based study showed there is also a connection between 
identity fraud and international organized crime  (Ronderos 
2000). The study, “Identity Fraud and Transnational Crime,” was 
published in 2000 and indicates that identity fraud, the use of 
fraudulent identification documents, aids in organized criminal 
activities such human smuggling, drug trafficking, and weapons 
trafficking. As in the case of terrorism, fraudulent documents ob-
tained in one country can have negative consequences in another 
country. The study also found that there is a lack of statistical 
data documenting the extent to which identity theft is utilized by 

Canada 95
 organized crime. Thus, it is impossible to assess the problem accu-
rately. However, subsequent research, publicized cases, and data 
released by PhoneBusters have shed new light on the scope and 
nature of identity fraud in Canada. 
 PhoneBusters is the central repository for collecting iden-
tity theft complaints from victims residing in Canada (Phone-
busters n.d.). According to Canadian regulations, identity theft 
occurs when a person’s identifying information is obtained and 
used, without their permission, to commit criminal acts (OPC 
2008a). PhoneBusters is a collaboration between the Royal Cana-
dian Mounted Police and the Ontario Provincial Police and was 
founded in 1993 to address the problem of mass marketing fraud 
such as telemarketing schemes and advanced fee scams. However, 
victims did not have a central agency for reporting identity theft. 
Since PhoneBusters already dealt with other types of consumer 
fraud complaints, the government designated it to be the central 
repository for identity theft cases as well. 
 PhoneBusters aids in investigations by distributing case in-
formation to appropriate law enforcement agencies. The United 
States and Canada cooperate in cross-border investigations. 
PhoneBusters is also a member of the U.S. Federal Trade Com-
mission’s Consumer Sentinel and works in conjunction with the 
Competition Bureau of Canada. The Competition Bureau pro-
motes consumer awareness and a competitive marketplace for 
businesses. 
 Complaints received by PhoneBusters are analyzed and 
compiled into annual reports that help to identify fraud trends 
in Canada and offer solutions to the crime. The reports are also 
used for the development of public awareness programs. In 2006, 
PhoneBusters indicated that the number of victims reporting the 
theft of their identities had decreased from 8,204 in 2002 to 7,778. 
However, losses directly attributed to the crime increased from 
$11,832,166 in 2002 to $16,283,777 in 2006. PhoneBusters estimated 
that the figures represent only a fraction, perhaps five percent, 
of the actual losses (CBC News 2007). The Canadian Council of 
Better Business Bureaus agreed (Moore 2009). The organization 
estimated that identity theft costs consumers, retailers, financial 
institutions, and others over $2 billion annually. 
 The Strategic Council for the Competition Bureau of Canada 
has conducted three annual national surveys. The most recent 
study included 1,000 Canadians who took part in a telephone 
survey between April 5, 2007, and April 15, 2007 (The Strategic 

96 Worldwide Perspective
Counsel 2007). One of the objectives of the survey was to measure 
public awareness and response to marketing fraud and identity 
theft. The results indicate that, in 2007, 20 percent of respondents 
age 18 and older had been victims of identity theft or that some-
one in their household had been victimized, compared to 17 per-
cent in 2006 and 18 percent in 2005. College (26%) and university 
graduates (21%) most often reported being identity theft victims 
as compared to other education groups. 
 The 2007 survey asked the victims how they, or the victims 
residing in their household, reacted to the theft of their identities 
(The Strategic Counsel 2007). Most (23%) indicated they contacted 
the credit card companies, as compared to 33 percent in 2006. 
However, the percentage of respondents who notified their bank 
or credit union increased from 12 percent in 2006 to 20 percent in 
2007. Thirteen percent stated they reported the incident to their 
local police department. Sixteen percent reported that they did 
nothing at all about the theft. 
 The survey also gauged the effectiveness of the public aware-
ness program (The Strategic Counsel 2007). Over three quarters 
(80%) of the respondents stated that they remembered hearing, 
seeing, or reading messages regarding marketing fraud and iden-
tity theft. Of those, 63 percent acknowledged that awareness mes-
sages prompted them to alter their response, or that they would 
alter their response in the future, to an incident of marketing fraud 
or identity theft. However, only 22 percent of the respondents 
were aware of PhoneBusters. Once the surveyors provided infor-
mation about PhoneBusters, 83 percent stated they would prob-
ably contact the organization should they suspect or fall victim 
to marketing fraud or identity theft. The survey concluded that 
public awareness could greatly influence how Canadians respond 
to marketing fraud and identity theft. In addition, over half of 
the respondents (59%) indicated that public education is the best 
method for fighting the crimes. 
 Despite efforts to assess the extent and nature of identity 
theft in Canada, it remains unclear for several reasons (Tibbetts 
2007). First, PhoneBusters was originally founded to combat mass 
marketing fraud. When it became the national clearinghouse for 
identity theft complaints, the number of phone calls increased, 
which put a strain on their available resources. Reportedly, the 
center receives about 1,200 calls per day. Second, federal law ad-
dresses the offenses connected with the use of another person’s 
identifying information, however it excludes other issues, such as 

Canada 97
trafficking in identities. Third, law enforcement agencies expend 
their time and personnel on investigating violent crimes. Thus, 
identity theft complaints are typically not investigated due to the 
lack of resources. Compounding the problem is the fact that iden-
tity thieves are difficult to apprehend. Whether committed online 
or offline, the crimes often cross jurisdictional boundaries, and the 
perpetrators rarely act alone. In some cases, organized criminal 
syndicates victimize individuals and businesses to finance illicit 
activities. Finally, even if identity thieves are arrested and con-
victed, the penalties are minimal. The following case illustrates 
how one man traveled around the world committing fraud and 
identity theft for more than 10 years. Throughout his career, he 
was arrested and convicted several times. 
 Michael Reid, a British national, attempted to cross the bor-
der from Canada into the United States in October 1992 (Asian 
Pacific Post 2004). U.S. officials tried to confiscate his vehicle and 
detain him on an immigration infraction, but Reid fled the scene 
and almost ran over a customs officer. In 1993, he was arrested 
and convicted on an assault charge connected with the incident. 
He served six months in jail. 
 In 1995, Reid and two accomplices were arrested in Canada 
on fraud charges (Asian Pacific Post 2004). One co-conspirator 
was a young woman with a passport issued in Fiji. The other was 
a U.S. citizen wanted by federal authorities on fraud charges. The 
three fraudsters used stolen identities to procure funds from fi-
nancial institutions and credit card companies in Canada and the 
United States. Many of their victims were deceased. They found 
their victims by reading obituaries in newspapers published in 
both countries and in the Caribbean. 
 While searching Reid’s residence, police discovered blank 
driver’s licenses from countries around the world such as the 
United States and New Zealand (Asian Pacific Post 2004). They 
also found several fraudulent U.S. driver’s licenses. In addition, 
authorities confiscated equipment and supplies for manufactur-
ing fraudulent checks and driver’s licenses. Reid served a short 
jail term and was released. In 1998, Interpol arrested him in Co-
penhagen for having a number of fake identification documents 
on his person. 
 In April 2001, Reid was arrested once more by Canadian au-
thorities (Asian Pacific Post 2004). This time, authorities uncov-
ered 50 files in his automobile, each containing a separate identity 
dossier such as a birth certificate, driver’s license, and credit cards. 

98 Worldwide Perspective
From his residence, police confiscated a computer and equipment 
for manufacturing bogus checks and driver’s licenses. Reid ad-
mitted to police that he had not held a job in over a decade. In 
fact, he claimed that being a fraudster was his occupation. Dur-
ing court proceedings, it was revealed that he had stolen nearly 
$130,000 in credit card transactions and traveler’s checks from 
American Express. Discover lost $23,000 to credit card fraud. Reid 
was found guilty and received a sentence of two years in prison, 
but was released on parole a short time later. 
 Reid left Canada and relocated to Thailand in 2003 (Asian 
Pacific Post 2004). Shortly thereafter he was arrested for credit 
card fraud. After posting bond, Reid fled to the Philippines, 
where he and two accomplices from the United States engaged in 
credit card and other financial fraud schemes. Authorities began 
investigating the trio. Reid’s partners cooperated with police, so 
in retaliation Reid employed an assassin to kill the Americans. He 
did not know, however, that he had hired an undercover agent. 
Reid was arrested again in 2004. 
 This case clearly shows that identity theft enables criminals to 
travel the world committing crimes. Fraudulent passports, birth 
certificates, and driver’s licenses are some of the tools most often 
used by identity thieves, but criminals also target other types of 
personal identifying information. 
 The Canadian Social Insurance Number (SIN) is another area 
of concern (Ghoreishi 2007). SINs are comparable to the Social Se-
curity Numbers (SSNs) issued in the United States. In 1964, the 
Canadian government began issuing SINs as an account number 
for administering the Canada Pension Plan and other employment 
insurance programs (OPC 2008b), and three years later it was ad-
opted as a tax reporting number. Today, it is the most commonly 
used and accepted personal identifier in Canada, much like the 
SSN is in the United States. According to Auditor General Sheila 
Fraser, 2.4 million more SINs have been issued than there are citi-
zens in Canada (Ghoreishi 2007). Although it is unknown why 
this happened, one expert suggests several reasons for the dis-
crepancy: the SINs of the deceased may not have been withdrawn 
from the system, numbers belonging to those who have moved 
out of Canada may still be active in the system, or the problem 
may be attributed to organized crime rings who are known to 
commit SIN fraud. 
 Recent research published by The Office of Privacy Com-
missioner of Canada (OPC) indicates that SIN fraud is a major 

Canada 99
 concern for citizens along with credit card fraud and identity theft 
(OPC 2007). The OPC is a unit of government that serves as pri-
vacy advocates on behalf of Canada’s citizens. It has the authority 
to examine security concerns involving government and private 
entities entrusted with protecting personal information. As part 
of their ongoing research, OPC commissioned EKOS Research As-
sociates to conduct a survey in March 2007. The purpose of the 
study was to ascertain how Canadian citizens perceived privacy 
matters, how their concerns have evolved over time, and to iden-
tify emerging privacy concerns. 
 The study found that half of all Canadians thought the Pri-
vacy Act, which was enacted in 1983, should be updated to re-
flect the threat posed by widespread use of technology in daily 
life (OPC 2007). As stated previously, respondents indicated that 
credit card fraud, identity theft, and SIN fraud were among their 
major concerns. When technology is factored into the equation, 
citizens are increasingly worried about their privacy and the mea-
sures they should take to protect their personal information. The 
majority of respondents believed that their personal information 
was better protected 10 years ago than it was at the time of the 
survey. Over half of the respondents were unaware of the existing 
privacy protection laws which govern the collection and disclo-
sure of personal information (OPC 2007). They also had strong 
opinions about disclosure of security breaches. The majority of 
respondents indicated that, when an information breach occurs, 
individuals affected by it, along with the government, should be 
notified. If a government agency is responsible for a breach, nearly 
8 out of 10 respondents thought that the agency should be fined. 
In addition, most stated that victims of such a breach should and 
could sue the government agency in federal court. 
 Nearly three out of four respondents thought that one of the 
most important problems Canada will encounter in the future is 
protecting citizens from identity theft (OPC 2007). Despite these 
concerns, the study found that most of those surveyed carried 
their SIN card on their person, yet the study also found that the 
respondents were reluctant to provide their SIN when asked for it 
as a routine part of doing business. 
 The substantial research conducted over the years reflects 
the many issues that must be addressed in order to decrease the 
incidents of identity theft and the impact the crime has upon the 
Canadian economy (CBC News 2007). The Privacy Act needs to 
be amended to coincide with modern technological advances. 

100 Worldwide Perspective
Public and private entities should be placed under more stringent 
requirements for protecting the personal information they collect. 
Civil and criminal laws require revision to reflect harsher penal-
ties for identity theft. Finally, it is essential to continue efforts to 
raise public awareness. 
 United Kingdom 
 The nucleus of the United Kingdom’s government is the Cabinet 
Office and the Treasury (Cabinet Office 2008). The Cabinet Office 
makes sure that all governmental departments are aware of the 
Prime Minister’s objectives and oversees their implementation. In 
2002 it released a report, called “Identity Fraud: A Study” (Cabi-
net Office 2002). The purpose of the study was to assess the scope 
and nature of identity fraud in the United Kingdom. 
 The study found that incidents of identity fraud have steadily 
increased over the years and are expected to continue to rise in the 
future (Cabinet Office 2002). The crime cost the economy more 
than £1.3 billion   (approximately US$1.9 billion) from 2000 to 2001. 
Victims included government agencies, businesses, and individu-
als. In addition to financial crimes, the study indicated that iden-
tity fraud is used by organized crime to facilitate other crimes, 
such as unlawful immigration, human trafficking, drug traffick-
ing, and money laundering. 
 The study also identified many components that are believed 
to contribute to the increasing prevalence of identity theft (Cabi-
net Office 2002). To begin, the lack of standardized definitions of 
identity theft and identity fraud is a factor, as government defini-
tions are different from those used by public entities, and the defi-
nitions vary from one government agency to another. Thus, it is 
almost impossible to get a true picture of the nature and extent of 
the crime. Authors of the study recommended standardizing the 
definitions of identity theft and identity fraud. They also recom-
mended that the definitions be adopted as the criterion for report-
ing and measuring the effects of the crime. 
 The study suggested that identity fraud was defined as the 
use of a fictitious identity (also referred to as false identity) or 
the use of another person’s identity (also referred to as hijacked 
identity) to obtain goods and services (Cabinet Office 2002). It is 
perpetrated for three primary purposes. First, it is used to conceal 
one’s real identity. Undocumented immigrants use identity fraud 

United Kingdom 101
to conceal their illegal status and avoid deportation. It is used to 
launder illicit funds through the financial system. Identity fraud 
enables ineligible drivers to get a driver’s license and allows pe-
dophiles to obtain jobs where they will be in direct contact with 
children. Identity fraud also helps consumers to hide poor credit 
histories from potential creditors. Offenders use identity fraud 
to avoid detection while perpetrating crimes. It permits wanted 
criminals to evade law enforcement. Identity fraud can even en-
able individuals to be married to more than one spouse at a time. 
It also facilitates acts of terrorism. On the other hand, the study 
found that identity fraud can serve a good purpose when it is 
used by law enforcement to conceal their identities while work-
ing undercover operations. 
 Second, identity fraud is used to commit other frauds for fi-
nancial gain (Cabinet Office 2002). A person may commit iden-
tity fraud, for example, in order to defraud the welfare system. 
In other words, he may collect government benefits to which he 
is not entitled. Identity fraud is used to obtain all types of loans, 
including mortgages, and to procure employment. An applicant 
may claim another person’s educational background as his own, 
or may provide a completely fictitious identity and false qualifica-
tions. 
 Third, identity fraud is used to avoid financial obligations 
(Cabinet Office 2002). It makes it possible for individuals to avoid 
repaying their outstanding debts. Identity fraud allows parents 
to dodge familial responsibilities such as paying child support. 
It can be used as a means for citizens and businesses to evade tax 
obligations. 
 The study further established the three basic elements of an 
identity: the biometric identity, attributed identity, and biographi-
cal identity (Cabinet Office 2002). A  biometric identity  is made up of 
physical qualities that distinguish one person from another, such 
as fingerprints, facial form, DNA makeup, and retinal character-
istics. An  attributed identity  is comprised of official information 
associated with one’s birth, such as complete name, birth date, 
birthplace, and the names and addresses of both parents. A  bio-
graphical identity  accumulates over a person’s lifetime. It includes 
historical information regarding voting habits, employment, ed-
ucation, marriage, mortgages, insurance, and financial transac-
tions. 
 The authors of the study acknowledged that identity fraud 
cannot be completely eradicated however they also suggested 

102 Worldwide Perspective
that the crime could be made more difficult to commit (Cabinet 
Office 2002). To that end, the study indicates that identity fraud 
flourishes because of flaws inherent in the procedures used to 
issue and verify the authenticity of identity documents. Govern-
ment procedures were found to be less stringent than those of 
private entities. For example, the databases used by government 
agencies to verify identities often contain erroneous information. 
Furthermore, government agencies were less likely to verify iden-
tities than private entities. The study also noted that the private 
sector dedicates more resources to verification procedures than 
the government sector does. Private entities verify identities by 
checking government-issued identity documents and credit bu-
reau databases. They also utilize databases containing informa-
tion about known fraud schemes and offenders. 
 The British government’s procedures for issuing identity 
documents were also found to be less stringent than those of 
many other countries (Cabinet Office 2002). The government-
 issued identity cards in some countries are relatively effective in 
deterring identity fraud. For example, Belgium requires all citi-
zens to register their current address with the local police who 
physically go to the dwellings and confirm residency. Citizens 
must also carry their identity cards with them at all times, and 
the cards must be presented when authorities ask to see them. 
On the other hand, Spain requires all Spanish nationals to register 
with their local police when they reach the age of 14. Upon reg-
istration, they are issued identity cards containing a photograph, 
name, address, signature, birthplace, date of birth, nationality, 
and the cardholder’s parents’ names. Cardholders must renew 
their identification every 10 years. The cards can be scanned and 
read at computer terminals, and Spanish nationals are required to 
present their identity cards upon request by police, other govern-
ment agencies, and businesses. 
 The study warned that, in conjunction with issuing proce-
dures, identity cards are only as good as the security features 
built into them to guard against counterfeiting and to prevent 
the use of lost or stolen cards (Cabinet Office 2002). In addition, 
the study acknowledged that criminals find and exploit weak-
nesses inherent in the practices employed by both the public and 
private sector, yet these sectors do not work together in coun-
teracting identity fraud. Many separate government and public 
entities are responsible for detecting identity fraud and prosecut-
ing the offenders. Thus, most identity thieves are not likely to 

United Kingdom 103
be  prosecuted. In  addition, penalties are minimal or nonexistent 
if a criminal fabricates or uses the personal identifying informa-
tion of another person to commit crimes, particularly fraud such 
as applying for a passport, credit, government benefits, and so 
forth. 
 Based upon the findings of the study, many changes were 
instituted after it was published. One response to the study was 
the development of the Home Office Identity Fraud Steering 
Committee (IFSC)(Home Office 2009b). The Home Office is one 
of the largest branches of government in the United Kingdom. 
Its most important functions are to protect citizens from crime 
and terrorism, enforce immigration policies, secure the borders, 
ensure that the criminal justice system is fair, proficient, and pro-
fessional, and guard against identity fraud. Under the auspices of 
the Home Office, the IFSC was formed to bring existing resources 
together in one place and to introduce new programs aimed at 
reducing identity theft and identity fraud (Identity Theft.org.uk 
2009c). The IFSC is made up of representatives from the public 
and private sectors who are responsible for detecting, investigat-
ing, and prosecuting identity-related cases (Identity Theft.org.uk 
2009b). 
 The committee issued a standard set of definitions highlight-
ing the difference between identity theft and identity fraud (Iden-
tity Theft.org.uk 2009a).  Identity theft  comes about when enough 
of a victim’s personal information is obtained, whether they are 
deceased or alive, to aid in the commission of identity fraud.  Iden-
tity fraud  occurs when a fabricated identity or another person’s 
identifying information is used to commit a crime or is used to 
help someone avoid honoring obligations by pretending to be a 
victim of identity fraud. Identity theft, making up an identity, or 
committing identity fraud, are all defined as identity crimes. 
 Since businesses are also victims of identity crimes, the IFSC 
defined corporate identity theft and corporate identity fraud 
(Identity Theft.org.uk 2009a).  Corporate identity theft  occurs when 
enough of a corporation’s identifying information is obtained to 
aid in the commission of identity fraud.  Corporate identity fraud is 
when a fictitious or a real company’s information is used to aid in 
the commission of a crime.  Corporate identity crime  includes iden-
tity theft, fabricating a corporate identity, or committing corporate 
identity fraud. 
 Once the standardized definitions were in place, the  British 
Crime Survey was updated to gather more accurate statistics 

104 Worldwide Perspective
about personal and corporate identity-related crimes (Identity 
Theft.org.uk 2009a). In the future, the survey will provide data 
on the prevalence, nature, and impact of the crimes. The British 
Crime Survey is similar to the Uniform Crime Reporting system 
used in the United States; for example, local and county law en-
forcement agencies submit regional statistical reports to a state 
agency. The reports contain the number of incidents and types of 
crimes reported in their respective jurisdictions. At the state level, 
the reports are aggregated and submitted to a federal agency. Na-
tional statistical data that reflects all types of crimes in the United 
States is then compiled and published. 
 Two of the most common types of identity crimes in the 
United Kingdom involve driver’s licenses and passports (Identity 
Theft.org.uk 2009c). To address the problem, the Criminal Justice 
Act 2003 increased the penalties for driver’s license fraud to match 
the penalties for passport fraud. Both crimes became offenses for 
which offenders could be arrested and sentenced to a maximum 
of two years in prison. In addition, a database of lost and stolen 
passports was established by the Identity and Passport Service 
(IPS). The purpose of this database is to help detect and prevent 
identity fraud whenever a passport is used for identification or 
travel purposes, and public and private sector organizations were 
given access to the database. To strengthen passport security fur-
ther, individuals requesting a passport for the first time must ap-
pear in person. 
 In June 2003, the Home Office, UK Passport Service, Driver 
and Vehicle Licensing Agency, and private credit and financial 
groups introduced  Identity Fraud – The UK Manual  (Identity Theft.
org.uk 2009c). The purpose of the manual is to help organizations, 
and particularly financial institutions, detect fraudulent or forged 
driver’s licenses and passports. The manual contains pictorial 
illustrations of the security features incorporated into the docu-
ments and other pertinent information. This is similar to the  U.S. 
Identification Manual  used by law enforcement and other govern-
ment and financial agencies in the United States. 
 In 2004, the Identity Fraud Steering Committee (IFSC) 
launched a Web site to help raise public awareness of the risks of 
identity fraud, to provide information on avoiding identity theft 
and fraud, and detailing procedures to follow if victimized (Identi-
tyTheft.org.uk 2009c). The following year, the Single Points of Con-
tact (SPOC) network was formed (Identity Theft.org.uk 2009c). It 
is made up of representatives from police departments in England 

United Kingdom 105
and Wales and other government and intelligence agencies. The 
network was established to facilitate the successful prosecution of 
offenders through cooperation and information sharing. 
 Many more changes were implemented in 2006. The Police 
and Justice Act 2006 addressed the problem of impersonation of 
the deceased, thereby giving access to death records to agencies 
that are involved in investigating and prosecuting identity fraud 
cases (Identity Theft.org.uk 2009c). Also in 2006, the IFSC released 
a follow-up report, “Updated Estimate of the Cost of Identity 
Fraud,” that revised the data in the 2002 work, “Identity Fraud: A 
Study” (IFSC 2006). 
 The new 2006 report found that the cost to the economy 
due to identity fraud was £1.72 billion per year (approximately 
US$2.8 billion), a considerable increase from the statistics provided 
in 2002 of £1.3 billion (approximately US$1.9 billion) (IFSC 2006). 
The insurance industry accounted for annual losses estimated at 
£22 million (approximately US$38 million). Several factors motivate 
offenders to commit insurance fraud, facilitated by identity fraud 
(Cabinet Office 2002). It is a means for laundering proceeds from 
illegal  activities. Those who are uninsurable can purchase cover-
age. Insurance fraud allows for the procurement of cheaper rates or 
hides an unfavorable claims record. It is sometimes used to defraud 
insurers by filing several claims relating to a single incident. 
 In the 2006 report, the Association of Payment Clearing Ser-
vices (APACS) reported losses of approximately £504.8 million 
(approximately US$869 million) as a result of credit card fraud 
(IFSC 2006). Losses attributed to counterfeit cards amounted to 
£129.7 million (approximately US$223 million). Card not present 
transactions accounted for an additional £150.8 million (approxi-
mately US$259 million) in losses. The Building Societies’ Associa-
tion (BSA), made up of financial institutions similar to credit unions 
in the United States, reported losses during 2005 of £3.1 million 
(approximately US$5.3 million)   due to identity fraud. Government 
benefit fraud resulted in £20 million (approximately US$34 million) 
of losses to the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP). In other 
words, claimants used identity fraud as a means for collecting ben-
efits that they were not entitled to receive. The costs associated with 
implementing and maintaining detection and prevention programs 
were also included in the total expense of £1.72 billion (approxi-
mately US$2.96 billion) to the UK economy. For example, the Driver 
and Vehicle Licensing Agency spent £2.5 million   (approximately 
US$4.3 million) on measures aimed at keeping drivers’  licenses 

106 Worldwide Perspective
from being used in identity crimes. It cost the UK Passport Service 
(UKPS) £62.8 million (approximately US$108 million) to implement 
measures for screening passport applications for identity fraud. 
 Another change that took place in 2006 was the creation of 
the Identity and Passport Service, formerly the UKPS, under the 
auspices of the Home Office (Identity and Passport Service 2007a). 
In addition to issuing passports, the department is charged with 
developing and implementing the National Identity Scheme. This 
program is designed to protect citizens against identity theft and 
fraud, to ensure that public services are provided only to those who 
are eligible for benefits, to stop criminals and terrorists from using 
stolen identities to carry out criminal acts, to avoid issuing pass-
ports to ineligible applicants, and to prevent foreign nationals from 
abusing student and work visa privileges. As of April 1, 2008, the 
Identity and Passport Service assumed management of the General 
Register Office (GRO) (Identity and Passport Services 2007b). The 
GRO is responsible for keeping detailed vital records (such as those 
for births, deaths, and marriages) in England and Wales. The goal 
is to coordinate the agencies responsible for issuing passports, na-
tional identification cards, and maintaining vital records. In the end, 
the efforts are predicted to foster cooperation, information sharing, 
and efficiency among government agencies while also making 
them more cost-effective. One of the most important outcomes is 
the ability to generate more accurate identity records. 
 The National Identity Scheme is a compulsory national iden-
tification card system (Identity and Passport Services 2007a). Al-
though introduced in 2006, it is not scheduled to be implemented 
until late in 2009 (Identity and Passport Services 2009). The goal 
of the program is to streamline the identification process (Identity 
and Passport Services 2007a). Many different documents were ac-
cepted as proof of identity before the National Identity Scheme 
was implemented. These documents covered everything from a 
driver’s license to an electric bill. Thus, the new plan eliminates 
the reliance upon documents that can be stolen, faked, or forged. 
 When the system if fully implemented, British citizens that 
are over the age of 16 can apply for a National ID card (Identity 
and Passport Services 2007a). Biometric data, verified personal 
identifying information, and other characteristics unique to the 
cardholder will be recorded on a chip that is embedded in the 
card, and the information will be entered into the National Iden-
tity Register (NIR) database. When a person applies for a service, 
such government benefits, the National ID card must be presented 

Mexico 107
as proof of identity and the information from the chip on the card 
will be scanned and compared to the database contents. The card-
holder must be a physical match to the biometric data and able to 
recite the biographical data. In addition to government entities, 
the NIR will be available to other organizations, including finan-
cial institutions. 
 Mexico 
 Identity theft is rare in Mexico (Nevaer 2007). The vigorous pro-
cess implemented to stop election fraud in the country has also 
served as a deterrent for identity theft. The Federal Elections Insti-
tute, or Instituto Federal Electoral (IFE), is charged with verifying 
and registering voters. Every Mexican citizen over 18 years old 
must obtain a national identification card, and an applicant must 
present her original birth certificate and photo identification to a 
local IFE field office for examination. Once these documents have 
been presented, the applicant is fingerprinted and photographed 
and all of the information is transmitted electronically to Mexico 
City where it is stored in a database. A few weeks later, the appli-
cant must return to the IFE office to be fingerprinted again. An IFE 
card is issued if the applicant’s identity is confirmed. This process 
is so effective in stopping identity theft and voter fraud that the 
European Union is considering implementing a similar system. 
However, a ruling by Mexico’s Foreign Ministry may compromise 
the integrity of the IFE identification system. 
 Historically, Mexican consulates located in the United States 
have issued  matriculas consulares  to immigrants who do not have 
passports or visas (Nevaer 2007). According to an article written 
by Kevin O’Neil of the Migration Policy Institute, m atriculas con-
sulares  have been in existence for over 130 years, but the events 
of September 11, 2001 triggered concern among the millions of 
Mexicans living illegally in the United States (O’Neil 2003). Many 
U.S. public and private agencies changed their policies for secu-
rity reasons, and began to, for example, require that individuals 
have and show proper identification before entering buildings, 
gaining access to secure areas, or attending high-profile events. 
In addition, steps were taken to tighten the eligibility require-
ments for Social Security cards and driver’s licenses. All of these 
changes made it harder for those without documentation to live 
in the United States. 

108 Worldwide Perspective
 While in existence for over a hundred years, Mexico began 
recognizing  matriculas consulares  as a legitimate form of identifica-
tion in 2006 (Nevaer 2007). When an individual with a  matricula 
consular  moves back to Mexico from the United States, he can re-
tain his U.S. address as his home address, in essence, putting him 
in two places at one time. Critics believe that this practice may 
facilitate identity theft and other crimes. 
 Additional criticism comes from Marti Dinerstein of The 
Center for Immigration Studies (Dinerstein 2003a). Dinerstein 
published the first in-depth examination of the program and 
its role in Mexico’s attempt to shape U.S. immigration policy. 
She argues against the use of the  matricula consulares  for several 
reasons. The first is that the Mexican government does not au-
thenticate the breeder documents used to obtain these cards. 
An original or certified copy of a Mexican birth certificate is 
required, as is another piece of photo identification, preferably 
one issued in  Mexico. These documents include voter registra-
tion cards, military service cards, and passports. While the docu-
ments are required, Dinerstein’s criticism stems from the fact that 
the documents are rarely authenticated. The authentication pro-
cess is often simply a visual check. She argues that authentication 
needs to be more in-depth through the use of a computerized 
system. Furthermore, Dinerstein suggests that consular officials 
can use their discretion about the types of documents to accept 
if an individual does not have photo identification. In the past, 
employee ID cards, student ID cards, and department of motor 
vehicles cards have been accepted, but the inconsistent nature of 
the cards makes them difficult to authenticate. Dinerstein notes 
that  matricula consulares  are often issued on the same day as they 
are requested which allows for little time to authenticate the 
identity documents. This is especially true when large numbers 
of  matricula consulares  are issued over a short time period, as was 
the case in April 2003 when 1,500  matricula consulares  were issued 
in only two days at a Mexican consulate in Chicago (Dinerstein 
2003b). Another of Dinerstein’s concerns is that security features 
are lacking to prevent the issuance of multiple  matricula consul-
ares  to the same person. With no centralized computer database 
to compare information between consulates, a person could go 
from one consulate to another and obtain multiple cards that all 
possess the authentic security  features. 
 Dinerstein argues that the possession of  matricula consul-
ares  aids illegal immigrants in the commission of additional 

Russia 109
crimes (2003a). If an individual commits a misdemeanor or fel-
ony, he is required to show identification to law enforcement 
personnel. Without the  matricula consulare  as identification, the 
illegal immigrant is more likely to be arrested. As a result, that 
person would be fingerprinted and subject to a background 
check. However, many U.S. localities accept the  matricula con-
sulares  as legitimate proof of identification. Thus, law enforce-
ment personnel are simply issuing citations and releasing the 
perpetrators. 
 Dinerstein’s final concern is that there is the potential for il-
legal immigrants in the United States to obtain a driver’s license 
using their  matricula consulares  as proof of identity. Some states do 
not allow this practice, though others take the position that illegal 
immigrants are going to drive anyway, so they are required to 
pass a driver’s exam before being issued a license, thus making 
the roads safer for other drivers. 
 As previously stated, identity theft is less of a problem in 
Mexico than most countries due to the IFE card system (Nevaer 
2007). However, perpetrators have been known to come to the 
United States illegally and commit identity theft (Woo Yang 2006). 
The following case is an example of this phenomenon. 
 Fadi Kourani, of Lebanese origin, was a resident of Mexico 
(Woo Yang 2006). He came across the border into the United 
States without documentation. After arriving in California, 
Kourani became part of a fraud network acquiring the Social 
Security numbers of U.S. citizens. The stolen numbers were then 
used to commit over $1.7 million in credit card fraud. Kourani 
was arrested, and in June 2006 he pled guilty to conspiracy to 
commit credit card fraud and aggravated identity theft. He was 
sentenced to four years in prison. Upon his release, Kourani will 
be deported. 
 Russia 
 Identity theft in the form of bank and credit card fraud has been 
a problem in Russia for many years (Center for Strategic and In-
ternational Studies 1997). There is a direct connection between 
Russian Organized Crime, fraud, and the use of technology to 
facilitate crimes. Nearly $4.35 million was stolen electronically 
in Russia in 1995. In Moscow alone, credit card fraud increased 
150% between January and May 1995 and January and June 1996 

110 Worldwide Perspective
 (Center for Strategic and International Studies 1997). The follow-
ing case illustrates how one man used his knowledge of technol-
ogy to perpetrate credit card fraud. 
 Artur Lyakhov was well known in Russia as a government 
expert on reducing credit card fraud (Schreck 2005). At the same 
time that he was consulting with financial institutions, holding 
seminars, and granting media interviews, he was also the ring-
leader of a group of identity thieves. 
 In 2002, Lyakhov and his accomplices set up a credit and 
debit card fraud business (Schreck 2005). They obtained their vic-
tims’ information by hacking into legitimate Visa, MasterCard, 
and American Express accounts and manufacturing replicas of 
at least 5,000 cards. About 2,500 of these cards were sold on the 
Internet for $100 to $500 each. Lyakhov also gave his customers 
real-time, online access to the stolen accounts they purchased. 
This account monitoring reduced the chances that the debit card 
accounts would be overdrawn or the credit card limits surpassed. 
Thus, the chances of being caught were greatly diminished. To 
further reduce risk, the cards were used to shop at retail establish-
ments spread around the world. Eventually, Lyakhov and five of 
his accomplices were arrested. Authorities then discovered that 
Lyakhov was not a legitimate government employee, but rather 
that his career as an expert on reducing credit card fraud was built 
around fraudulent Interior Ministry identification documents. At 
least $1 million in losses has been attributed to Lyakhov and his 
associates. 
 A Russian government agency, the Ministry of Internal Af-
fairs (MVD), tracks organized crime and also helps to demon-
strate the impact that identity theft has on the Russian economy. 
In a report issued in 1997, the MVD found that the majority of 
the Russian economy was controlled by criminal organizations 
(Center for Strategic and International Studies 1997). Between 50 
and 85 percent of financial institutions were saturated with crime. 
The report further indicates that nearly 8,000 Russian organized 
crime syndicates had been identified. Some of them operate in-
ternationally, including in 17 major U.S. cities. Shortly after the 
Soviet Union was dissolved, many individual syndicate members 
came to the United States once they were released from prison 
and entered the country with fraudulent credentials such as visas, 
passports, and resumes. 
 Technology also makes it possible for identity thieves 
to collaborate on crimes when the offenders are thousands of 

Russia 111
miles apart. The following case illustrates how technology fa-
cilitated identity theft when the principals resided in different 
countries. 
 Roman Karelov was granted a temporary work and student 
visa in May 2006 (United States Department of Justice 2007). Be-
fore leaving Russia, he met with Aleksey Chugaev and agreed to 
participate in an identity theft scheme. Karelov arrived in Balti-
more, Maryland where he and a co-conspirator, Radik Nizamov, 
began defrauding U.S. businesses. Much of their criminal activity 
took place online. Chugaev had access to stolen identities, and, 
via the Internet, he used the information to purchase traveler’s 
checks, electronic equipment, jewelry, and gift cards. The items 
were shipped to Karelov’s and Nizamov’s residences. The men re-
packed the merchandise and forwarded the packages to Chugaev 
in Russia. To facilitate the electronic transfer of cash between the 
United States and Russia, Chugaev opened accounts using stolen 
debit cards. All the while, the men communicated by instant mes-
saging, e-mail, and cell phone. 
 Karelov and Nizamov were arrested, and Karelov admitted 
to stealing between $200,000 and $400,000. Both men received 
prison terms and face deportation after their release. Chugaev, on 
the other hand, was not apprehended. It is believed that he still 
lives in Russia (United States Department of Justice 2007). 
 Identity theft is sometimes committed for purposes other 
than immediate financial gain. It contributes to the trafficking 
of drugs, human beings, and weapons from Russia to countries 
around the globe and government corruption exacerbates the 
problems (Center for Strategic and International Studies 1997). 
Officials have been known to protect organized criminal syndi-
cates, and some have even provided the fraudulent documents 
that allowed the illicit activities to be carried out outside of 
Russia in destinations across the globe. For example, one syndi-
cate devised a scheme to launder money and export the funds 
out of Russia. They set up thousands of fake companies. Credit 
cards were issued to the companies, and the cards were used 
in Russia until the credit limits were reached. To get the money 
out of Russia, they recruited couriers by providing them with 
visas to the United States, Canada, and some Western European 
countries. 
 In summation, identity theft is rampant in Russia, and re-
search indicates that there is a direct correlation between orga-
nized criminal enterprises and identity theft. 

112 Worldwide Perspective
 South Africa 
 Identity theft is a major problem in South Africa. One estimate 
states that identity theft cost South African businesses approxi-
mately 276 million rand (approximately $29 million USD) in the 
first three months of 2008 alone (CHARGED! 2009). Another esti-
mate, made by a major credit bureau and a national insurance or-
ganization, found that identity theft costs South Africa more than 
1 billion rand per year (approximately $106 million USD) (Joseph 
2008). 
 The article, “Steep Rise in Identity Theft in South Africa,” offers 
insight into the identity theft problem in South Africa; the article 
is based on information provided by the Managing Director of the 
Consumer Profile Bureau, Fred Steffers (CHARGED! 2009). Es-
tablished in 1981, the Consumer Profile Bureau is considered the 
most comprehensive source of credit data in South Africa. Steffers 
believes that, since identity theft is so easy to commit, it is the 
crime of choice for many white collar criminals and he identifies 
several reasons for the increase in incidences of the crime. Corrup-
tion is one of the key reasons why identity theft is easy to commit. 
It is not difficult to obtain fraudulent identification. Furthermore, 
the Department of Home Affairs, the agency responsible for 
maintaining the ID book, is wrought with corruption. Steffers also 
points to increasingly sophisticated hackers who can access infor-
mation online and via cell phones and predicts that, as advances 
are made in technology, hackers will be able to steal more and 
more information. Steffers also indicates that South Africans, in 
general, have not taken enough measures to protect themselves. 
Many citizens do not realize that they should guard their identifi-
cation numbers. They are simply unaware of how to protect their 
personal information. 
 Mohamed Allie, a freelance journalist in Cape Town, has also 
commented on the need for South Africans to guard their identi-
fication numbers (Allie 2005). He states that many impoverished 
citizens are being enticed into marriages by people seeking resi-
dency in South Africa. While many enter into these unions fully 
aware of the marriage arrangements, others are  unaware that 
they are getting married. These people are victims of identity 
theft, and they often first learn that their identities have been 
stolen when they check with the Department of Home Affairs 
and discover that their marital status is listed as “ married.” 

Asia 113
 According to Leslie Mashokwe, a spokesperson for the Depart-
ment of Home Affairs, over 3,000 fraudulent marriages have 
been recorded. Some of these marriages have been expunged, 
but others remain on record. Women are usually victims of these 
 identity theft marriages . Other women suffer identity theft when 
they are mugged or robbed of documents containing their iden-
tification numbers. 
 As of 2005, it was relatively easy to assume the identity of 
another person in South Africa because the national identity 
cards lacked security features; for example, they can easily be 
altered by cutting out the original photo and replacing it with 
another (Allie 2005). In response to the identity theft problem, the 
government has begun to examine information and communica-
tion technologies (ICTs) for potential solutions. More specifically, 
knowing that there is government corruption that causes some of 
the identity theft, South African officials are looking for ways to 
make information more accessible to the public and make it more 
difficult for government employees to hide their misdeeds. The 
basic philosophy behind ICTs is that the more information made 
available to the citizenry, the less likely it becomes for authorities 
to alter identity documents without being noticed by others. One 
way in which the Department of Home Affairs in South Africa 
has utilized ICTs to help fight identity theft was to create a cam-
paign called “Know Your Status” to encourage women to use a 
government Web site to compare their identification number to 
their marital status. 
 Asia 
 Another region of the world where citizens are deeply concerned 
about identity theft is Asia. One study conducted in 2006, the “Uni-
sys Security Index,” assessed the degree of concern in Singapore 
related to national, financial, Internet, and personal security (Tan 
2006). The study found that Singaporeans are more concerned 
about identity theft than they are about issues such as terrorism. 
At least eighty percent of the respondents indicated that the abuse 
of their personal information was their main security concern. 
The serious health epidemics occurring in Singapore at the time 
of the survey and the risk of terrorist attacks were considered less 
of a threat than identity fraud and identity theft issues (Tan 2006). 
These findings were similar to those of a study conducted in 2007. 

114 Worldwide Perspective
Eighty-three percent of respondents then stated they were anx-
ious about identity theft (Ho 2007). 
 Research indicates that Asia is a hotbed of phishing activity. 
A 2007 report by the Anti-Phishing Working Group (APWG) 
found that 4 of the top 10 phishing Web sites in the world are 
hosted in Asian countries (ID Theft Protect 2008).  
 During a 2008 seminar, Cyber Security in East Asia, Dr. 
Nicholas Thomas from the University of Hong Kong discussed 
current cyber security concerns and their relationship to identity 
theft (Thomas 2008). According to Thomas, cybercrime is one of 
the most serious problems faced by any nation. He stated that re-
ports of cybercrime in Japan increased 52 percent between 2004 
and 2005. In South Korea, cybercrimes increased from 121 reports 
in 1997 to 60,000 in 2002. Thomas noted that part of the increase is 
most likely due to new legislative and enforcement efforts to curb 
the crimes. 
 Thomas argues that there is need for greater focus on cyber 
security policies (Thomas 2008). In part, his concerns stem from 
the fact that those working toward improved policies do not 
understand the environment they are examining, and bound-
aries in cyberspace are not limited to the physical boundaries 
present in other crimes. In addition, it is difficult to determine 
what types of policies are best for combating this sort of crime. 
Some focus on individual state or government policies, while 
others incorporate a regional or even an international stance for 
combating cybercrime. Given the limitless physical boundaries 
of cybercrime, policymakers need to address the issue by first 
generating a greater understanding of the ramifications of limit-
less boundaries and then developing policies that address cyber-
crime on a global level. 
 Thomas notes that differences within Asian countries influ-
ences the development of cybercrime and cyber security policies 
(Thomas 2008). First, economic and political divides may influ-
ence technology. Governments in poorer, more repressed states 
are less likely to address issues of cyber security than the gov-
ernments of more developed and politically open states. Further-
more, the ability for a state to develop its economy and become 
more modernized is influenced by its capacity to access, utilize, 
and integrate the global aspects of the Internet and computer 
technology into society. Second, there are cultural divides pres-
ent in many Asian states. Given that the norms and values may 
vary greatly, addressing cyber security on a regional level would 

The Threat to International and Homeland Security  115
require a greater understanding of these cultures and the con-
cerns associated with them. 
 Regional and international responses to security threats have 
been utilized in the past (Thomas 2008). For instance, the Associa-
tion of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum has 
worked to address regional insecurities since its inception in 1994. 
Other regional groups, such as Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation 
  (APEC), also addressed security issues from a regional perspec-
tive. The 2001 European Convention on Cybercrime approached 
security from an international stance. It addressed cyber security 
issues throughout the world. 
 The Threat to International and 
Homeland Security 
 As demonstrated through Dr. Thomas’s arguments, cybercrimes, 
including identity theft, pose a threat to countries’ domestic se-
curity as well as global security. Understanding the nature of the 
crimes and the environment in which they are committed is es-
sential for meeting the challenge of developing security measures. 
Once again, it is important to remember the attacks that took place 
on September 11, 2001 in the United States because some of the 
terrorists involved in this incident had also committed identity 
theft. One of them, for example, used the credit card of a deceased 
woman. 
 After September 11, the media, lawmakers, and research-
ers addressed the role of identity theft in the attacks. A report 
released in 2002 by the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) 
examined how identity theft aids in terrorism and other crimes 
(Stana 2002). In the study, identity fraud is distinguished from 
identity theft.  Identity fraud  is defined as the illegal use of another 
person’s identifying information or the illegal use of fabricated 
identifying information to commit a wide array of crimes.  Identity 
theft is a category of identity fraud involving stealing and using 
another person’s identifying information to commit some type of 
financial fraud. 
 Identity fraud and identity theft are implicated in most, 
if not all, terrorist plots against the United States (Stana 2002). 
In 2002, the U.S. Attorney General described identity theft as 
the main component of worldwide terrorist activities. Dennis 

116 Worldwide Perspective
Lormel of the FBI testified before Congress that terrorist groups 
finance their activities by all types of fraud, including identity 
theft. The report also addressed another category of identity 
fraud, called  identity document fraud  (Stana 2002). This is the use 
of fraudulent identity documents to illegally enter the United 
States. Examples of these documents include foreign and do-
mestic passports, student and work visas, foreign and domestic 
citizenship papers, border crossing cards, green cards, refugee 
travel papers, immigrant visas, and reentry papers. In 1998, the 
Immigration and Naturalization Service seized 99,171 fraudu-
lent identity documents. The number of seized documents rose 
to 114,023 in 2001. 
 Identity document fraud (e.g., passport fraud), allowed one 
of the planners of the 1993 World Trade Center bombing to enter 
the United States (Stana 2002). Six people were killed and another 
1,000 were injured in that explosion. Stolen identities were also 
used in the foiled millennium plot to bomb Los Angeles Inter-
national Airport. In addition, Rand Beers, Assistant Secretary of 
State for International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs, 
notes that terrorists often work with organized criminal groups to 
raise funds through activities such as drug trafficking and weap-
ons smuggling. These crimes are facilitated by fraudulent identity 
documents. 
 Once in the country, fraudulent or stolen U.S. identity docu-
ments can be purchased in the underground marketplace and 
used to avoid deportation. The most sought-after documents 
are driver’s licenses, birth certificates, and Social Security cards. 
By using one of these identification documents, it is possible to 
obtain the other two, but the most important piece of identify-
ing documentation in the United States is the SSN (Stana 2002). 
Patrick O’Carroll of the Social Security Administration (SSA) tes-
tified before the U.S. Senate Committee on Finance and stated 
that those wishing to do harm to the country often try to procure 
an SSN by stealing it from a living or deceased person, buying 
it through the online or offline black markets, fabricating it, or 
applying for it using fraudulent identity documents (O’Carroll 
2003). During 2000, the SSA issued nearly 63,000 numbers to 
noncitizens who applied for SSNs using fraudulent identity 
documents. For all intents and purposes, an SSN allows an in-
dividual to integrate into American society (Stana 2002). Thus, 
securing SSNs is a key component to securing the United States 
against terrorist threats. 

The Threat to International and Homeland Security  117
 Identity theft in the form of credit card fraud is another se-
curity threat. In Indonesia, police claim that credit card fraud is 
more prevalent than anywhere else in the world (Sipress 2004). 
There is evidence that the 2002 bombing of a Bali nightclub, 
which killed 202 people, was financed by credit card fraud. Iman 
Samudra, a member of an extremist Muslim group with ties to 
Al-Qaeda, was convicted of the crime and sentenced to execu-
tion. While on death row, he wrote a book that was published in 
2004. Most of the book is about his educational background as a 
computer programmer and the weapons training he received in 
Afghanistan; it also covers his views on U.S. foreign policy in the 
Middle East and rationalizes murdering Western civilians. How-
ever, one chapter in the book validated the concerns of Internet 
security professionals, security experts, and government officials 
(Sipress 2004). 
 The title of the chapter is “Hacking, Why Not?” It encourages 
extremists to wage an online holy war against the United States 
through computer hacking. Although it does not contain details, 
the chapter refers readers to sources on the Internet such as Web 
sites and chat rooms for tutorials on the subject. The chapter also 
stresses the importance of credit card fraud as a viable means for 
raising and laundering the funds that are needed to support a 
holy war. It even provides basic instructions for committing the 
crime. 
 The chapter was important for several reasons. First, it con-
firmed what experts had predicted: identity theft is a real and 
growing threat to national and international security (Sipress 
2004). The chapter also gave insight into how cybercrime is used 
to fund terrorist activities. It raised concerns that networks of ex-
tremist fraudsters could raise a lot of money online in a very short 
amount of time. Lastly, it confirmed that extremists may enlist the 
help of skilled hackers to attack computers belonging to their per-
ceived enemies. 
 It is evident that identity fraud poses a threat to both global 
security and countries’ national security (Gordon and Willox 
2003). The threat becomes more menacing when one considers the 
role of technology in the crime. It allows terrorists to remain anon-
ymous while they communicate with each other, recruit members 
from around the world, and raise funds. Therefore, a two-pronged 
solution is needed in order to address the problem effectively. 
Comprehensive national strategies, and a global  strategy, aimed 
at eradicating the crime should be implemented. For a plan to 

118 Worldwide Perspective
be effective, a global definition of identity theft must be adopted 
to aid in determining the scope and nature of the problem. The 
plan must include cooperation among law enforcement agencies 
across the nation and around the world, and successes and fail-
ures in policy making, both national and international, should be 
assessed regularly. Identity theft is a global problem for which 
global solutions are needed. 
 References 
 Allie, Mohamed. 2005. ICTs employed to fight identity theft.  Panos 
London, April 4. http://www.panos.org.uk/?lid = 19749. Accessed 
February 2, 2009. 
 Asian Pacific Post. 2004. Master forger wanted in Canada arrested 
in the Philippines,  The Asian Pacific Post , October 7. http://www.
asianpacificpost.com/portal2/402881910674ebab010674f4e8d11587.
do.html. Accessed February 4, 2009. 
 Bernton, Hal, et al. 2002. The Terrorist Within: The story behind one 
man’s holy war against America.  Seattle Times , June 23–July 7, Special 
Report. http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/news/nation-world/
terroristwithin/. Accessed February 1, 2009. 
 CBC News. 2007. Is that a SIN card in your pocket? Privacy 
Commissioner hopes not.  CBC News , October 18. http://www.cbc.ca/
consumer/story/2007/10/18/identity-theft.html. Accessed February 4, 
2009. 
 Cabinet Office. 2002. Identity fraud: A study. http://www.identitycards.
gov.uk/downloads/id_fraud-report.pdf. Accessed October 20, 2007. 
 Cabinet Office. 2008. About the Cabinet Office. http://www.cabinet
office.gov.uk/about_the_cabinet_office.aspx. Accessed February 4, 
2009. 
 Center for Strategic and International Studies. 1997. Russian Organized 
Crime: Global Organized Crime Project. CSIS Task Force Report. http://
www.russianlaw.org/roc_csis.pdf. Accessed May 31, 2009. 
 CHARGED! 2009. Steep rise in identity theft in South Africa. 
 CHARGED!, January 28. http://www.charged.co.za/frontpage/steep-
rise-in-identity-theft-in-south-africa. Accessed January 30, 2009. 
 Dinerstein, Marti. 2003a. IDs for Illegals: The ‘Matricula Consular’ 
Advances Mexico’s Immigration Agenda. http://www.cis.org/
articles/2003/back303.html. Accessed February 2, 2009. 
 Dinerstein, Marti. 2003b. The Issuance, Acceptance and Reliability of 
Consular Identification Cards. Statement prepared for the U.S. House 

References 119
of Representatives Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on 
Immigration, Border Security, and Claims. June 19. http://www.cis.org/
articles/2003/martitestimony61903.html. Accessed January 9, 2009. 
 Ghoreishi, Omid. 2007. Identity Fraud Widespread, Costing Millions: 
Over 2 million more SINs than there are people,  The Epoch Times , 
October 11. http://en.epochtimes.com/tools/printer.asp?id = 60641. 
Accessed February 4, 2009. 
 Gordon, Gary R. and Norman A. Willox, Jr. 2003. Identity Fraud: A 
Critical National and Global Threat. http://www.lexisnexis.com/
presscenter/hottopics/ ECIReportFINAL.pdf. Accessed February 10, 
2009. 
 Ho, Victoria. 2007. Identity Theft Still Asia’s Top Concern,  Business 
Week , December. http://www.businessweek.com/globalbiz/content/
dec2007/gb20071211 016169.htm?chan = top+news_top+news+index_
global+business. Accessed February 3, 2009. 
 Home Office. 2009a. About Us: Home Office Structure. http://
www.homeoffice.gov.uk/about-us/organisation/home-office-
structure/?version = 3. Accessed February 7, 2009. 
 Home Office. 2009b. About Us: Our Objectives and Values. http://www.
homeoffice.gov.uk/about-us/purpose-and-aims/. Accessed February 7, 
2009. 
 ID Theft Protect. 2008. “Global: BoxSentry and Internet Identity join 
forces to fight online fraud.”  ID Theft Protect, February 27. http://www.
id-theftprotect.com/news.php?news_id = 261&news_keyword = identity 
fraud. Accessed February 3, 2009. 
 Identity and Passport Services. 2007a. About Identity and Passport 
Services. http://www.ips.gov.uk/identity/about-us.asp. Accessed 
February 15, 2009. 
 Identity and Passport Services. 2007b. General Register Office to join 
Identity and Passport Service. http://www.ips.gov.uk/identity/press-
2007–10–9.asp. Accessed February 15, 2009. 
 Identity and Passport Services. 2009. Identity cards: The Identity and 
Passport Service (IPS) is responsible for issuing identity cards to UK 
citizens. http://www.ips.gov.uk/cps/rde/xchg/ips_live/hs.xsl/53.
htm. Accessed September 5, 2009. 
 Identity Fraud Steering Committee (IFSC). 2006. Updated Estimate of 
the Cost of Identity Fraud to the UK Economy. http://www.identity-
theft.org.uk/ID%20fraud%fraud%20table.pdf. Accessed December 3, 
2007. 
 Identity Theft.org.uk. 2006–2007. New Estimate of Cost of Identity 
Fraud to the UK Economy. http://www.identitytheft.org.uk/cms/

120 Worldwide Perspective
assets/cost_of_identity_fraud_to_ the_uk_economy_ 2006–07.pdf. 
Accessed February 15, 2009. 
 Identity Theft.org.uk. 2009a. Identity Crime Definitions. https://www.
identitytheft.org.uk/definition.asp. Accessed February 7, 2009. 
 Identity Theft.org.uk. 2009b. Home Office Identity Fraud Steering 
Committee. http://www.identity-theft.org.uk/committee.asp. Accessed 
February 7, 2009. 
 Identity Theft.org.uk. 2009c. What is being done. http://www.identity- 
theft.org.uk/what-is-being-done.htm. Accessed February 7, 2009. 
 Joseph, Natasha. 2008. “Identity Theft ‘costing SA millions.’”  The 
Mercury , June 4. http://www.iol.co.za/index.php?set_id = 1&click_id = 
13&art_id = vn20080604060110244C665305. Accessed January 30, 2009. 
 Moore, Rob. 2009. Government Re-Introduces Legislation Targeting 
Identify Theft. http://www.robmooremp.com/033109.htm. Accessed 
May 25, 2009. 
 Nevaer, Louis. 2007. “For Mexico, ‘Local Residence’ Now Includes 
New York and Los Angeles.”  New American Media , July 17, http://news.
newamericamedia.org/news/view_article.html?article_id = ddbb
298638ab34eeb371dbaa3e1f17ac. Accessed February 11, 2009. 
 O’Carroll, P. P. 2003. “The homeland security and terrorism threat from 
document fraud, identity theft and social security number misuse.” 
Statement for the record before the U.S. Senate Committee on Finance 
by the Office of the Inspector General, Social Security Administration. 
http://finance.senate.gov/hearings/testimony/2003test/091003pctest.
pdf. Accessed January 9, 2006. 
 O’Neil, Kevin. 2003. “Consular ID Cards: Mexico and Beyond.” 
 Migration Information Source , April, http://www.migrationinformation.
org/feature/display.cfm?ID = 115. Accessed January 28, 2009. 
 Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada. 2007. Canadians and the 
Privacy Landscape. http://www.priv.gc.ca/information/survey/2007/
ekos_2007_02_e.cfm. Accessed February 4, 2009. 
 Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada. 2008a. Identity theft: 
What is it and what you can do about it. http://www.privcom.gc.ca/fs-
fi/02_05_d_10_e.asp. Accessed February 4, 2009. 
 Office of the Privacy Commission of Canada. 2008b. Social Insurance 
Numbers. http://www.privcom.gc.ca/fs-fi/02_05_d_02_e.asp. Accessed 
February 4, 2009. 
 PhoneBusters. About Us. www.phonebusters.com/english/aboutus.
html. Accessed February 2, 2009. 
 Ronderos, Juan G. 2000. Identity Fraud and Transnational Crime. Paper 
presented at the Seventh Meeting of the CSCAP Working Group on 

References 121
Transnational Crime, May 31-June 1, Manila, Philippines. http://www.
ncjrs.gov/nathanson/id_fraud.html. Accessed February 10, 2009. 
 Schreck, Carl. 2005. “Credit Card Adviser Faces Trial for Fraud.” 
 The Moscow Times , October 19. http://www.moscowtimes.ru/
article/882/49/209146.htm. Accessed January 29, 2009. 
 Sipress, Alan. 2004. “An Indonesian’s Prison Memoir Takes Holy War 
Into Cyberspace.”  Washington Post Foreign Service , December 14. http://
www.washingtonpost.com/ac2/wp-dyn/A62095–2004Dec13?
language = printer. Accessed February 14, 2009. 
 Stana, Richard. 2002. “Identity Fraud Prevalence and Links to Alien 
Illegal Activities.” Statement for the record before the Subcommittee 
on Crime, Terrorism and Homeland Security and the Subcommittee on 
Immigration, Border Security, and Claims, Committee on the Judiciary, 
House of Representatives. http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02830t.
pdf. Accessed February 1, 2009. 
 The Strategic Counsel. 2007. Final Report to The Competition Bureau—
Findings from a Survey of Canadians: Post-Test of the Fraud Prevention 
Month Campaign—June 2007. http://www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/ic1.nsf/
eng/04321.html. Accessed February 5, 2009. 
 Tan, Aaron. 2006. “Identity theft bigger concern than terrorism.” 
 ZDNet Asia , October 6. http://www.zdnetasia.com/news/
security/0,39044215,61957688,00.htm. Accessed February 3, 2009. 
 Thomas, Nicholas. 2008. “Cyber Security In East Asia, Asia Governing 
Anarchy.” Paper presented at the Seminar for the Centre for Non-
Traditional Security Studies, S. Rajaratnam School of International 
Studies, Singapore, December 4. http://www.rsis.edu.sg/NTS/Events/
Nick%20Thomas.html. Accessed February 2, 2009. 
 Tibbetts, Janice. 2007. “Anti-fraud service swamped by victims of 
identity theft.”  Ottawa Citizen, July 5. http://www.canada.com/
victoriatimescolonist/news/story.html?id=55818fc0- 15a0–4e82–8ab9- 
d50db3fbf46f. Accessed February 14, 2009. 
 United States Department of Justice. 2007. “Russian Man Pleads Guilty 
to Participating in Identity Theft and Fraud Ring.” Press Release, 
September 24. http://www.usdoj.gov/usao/cae/press_releases/
docs/2007/09–24- 07KarelovPlea.pdf. Accessed May 31, 2009. 
 Woo Yang, Debra. 2006. Lebanese Credit Card Fraudster Sentenced to 
Four Years in Prison, United States Department of Justice, September 
26. Press release. http://www.usdoj.gov/usao/cac/pressroom/
pr2006/127.html. Accessed February 2, 2009. 


123
 4 
 1914 
 Federal Trade Commission Act 
 President Woodrow Wilson signed the Federal Trade 
Commission Act into law, which resulted in the creation 
of the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). The FTC is com-
promised of five commissioners. The President, with con-
sent from the Senate, appoints these commissioners. One 
of the duties of the FTC is to help protect consumers from 
unfair business practices. 
 1935 
 Social Security Act 
 President Franklin D. Roosevelt enacted the Social Secu-
rity Act to help restore economic security and ensure sta-
bility in the future. This Act led to the creation of the Social 
Security numbering system that is still in use today. 
 1968 
 Truth in Lending Act, Public Law 90–321 (Title I § 104), 82 
Stat. 147, May 29, 1968 
 This early attempt to protect consumers requires creditor-
grantors to disclose the terms of credit accounts. The Act 
requires the disclosure of information, such as annual 
percentage rate and maximum interest rate, to perspec-
tive account holders to allow consumers to compare the 
cost of credit  offered by various institutions and to protect 
current customers from billing problems. The disclosure 
requirements set forth in the Act also apply to leases of 
personal property such as automobile leases. 
 Chronology 

124 Chronology
 1971 
 Privacy Act of 1971, Public Law 93–579, 88 Stat. 1896, 
 December 31, 1974 
 The Privacy Act of 1971 limits access to the personal iden-
tifying information gathered by government agencies and 
restricts the agencies’ ability to disclose that information 
to others. The Act requires federal government agencies 
to establish measures to inform individuals of why they 
are collecting personal information, give individuals ac-
cess to their own information, and allow them to dispute 
any erroneous, incomplete, outdated, and irrelevant in-
formation. In addition, the disclosure of personal infor-
mation is prohibited except for reasons specified in the 
Act. Agencies must notify individuals in writing of the 
intent to disclose and receive written permission to do so. 
Furthermore, the Act establishes the Privacy Protection 
Agency, to make sure that agencies comply with all the 
requirements. 
 1974 
 Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 
 This law protects individuals’ educational records that 
are maintained by any school receiving federal funding. 
It limits the disclosure of information, requires the cor-
rection of inaccurate information, and permits parents, 
guardians, or the adult student to review all information 
that is in the educational record. The Act grants this pro-
tection to a student’s parents or legal guardians until he 
or she turns 18, at which time it transfers to the student. 
 1978 
 Electronic Funds Transfer Act 
 The Electronic Funds Transfer Act is a 1978 federal law 
that provides specific protections for electronic fund 
transfers into and from a consumer’s bank account. The 
financial  institution must inform customers of the fees for 
making transfers, the procedures for disputing unauthor-
ized transactions or errors, and the situations that war-
rant disclosing account information to third parties. 
 1982 
 False Identification Crime Control Act of 1982 
 The False Identification Crime Control Act of 1982 
amended federal level criminal code and established 

Chronology 125
penalties for a variety of false identification scenarios. 
The Act allows for penalties to be imposed upon anyone 
who knowingly creates or transfers identification docu-
ments. Furthermore, the Act allows for imposing penal-
ties on those who are found to have in their possession 
five or more false identification documents. Penalties 
may also be assessed for the possession of false identifi-
cation documents with the intent to defraud the country 
or for possession of stolen U.S. documents. Under this 
Act, the definition of identification document includes all 
documents issued by any level of government. 
 1986 
 Fair Credit Billing Act 
 The Fair Credit Billing Act amends the Truth in Lend-
ing Act. The Fair Credit Billing Act assists consumers by 
creating procedures to resolve billing errors on open-end 
credit accounts (i.e., credit cards). This Act protects con-
sumers from fraudulent charges by limiting their liability 
to $50. It also protects consumers from charges for services 
or products not received or received in a manner that was 
not agreed upon. The Act defines what is considered a 
billing error and establishes procedures for consumers to 
follow for disputing billing errors or fraudulent charges. 
 1990 
 Federal Elections Institute—Mexico (Instituto Federal Elec-
toral [IFE]) 
 In response to the Constitution changes of 1989, the Mex-
ican government created the Instituto Federal Electoral 
(IFE), the Federal Elections Institute, in October 1990. The 
purpose of this agency is to register and verify voters. It 
contributes to removing a political culture shrouded with 
suspicion, distrust, and illegalities. The IFE is considered 
one of the most reliable institutions in Mexico. 
 1992 
 Privacy Rights Clearinghouse (PRC) 
 The Privacy Rights Clearinghouse was founded in 1992.
Some of the goals of the organization are to increase 
awareness of issues surrounding technology and its im-
pact on privacy, educate consumers on how to take charge 
of the flow of their own personal information, respond to 

126 Chronology
 1992 
consumer complaints, keep records of complaints and 
(cont.)  provide them to interested parties, and serve as con-
sumer advocates at all levels of government. 
 1993 
 Phone Busters 
 In January 1993 the Canadian government established a 
national antifraud call center. Operated by the Ontario 
Provincial Police and the Royal Canadian Mounted Po-
lice, this call center initially assisted in the prosecution of 
telemarketing cases under the Criminal Code of Canada 
in Ontario and Quebec, but has been expanded to include 
assisting U.S.- and UK-based agencies through extradi-
tion. Phone Busters makes statistical information and 
case evidence available to law enforcement agencies to 
aid in prosecuting fraudsters. To help prevent telemarket-
ing crimes, Phone Busters also provides up-to-date public 
awareness programs. 
 1994 
 Driver’s Privacy Protection Act of 1994 
 Congress passed the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act as an 
amendment to the Omnibus Crime Act of 1994. The Driv-
er’s Privacy Protection Act is a response to the unnecessary 
disclosure of personal information by various states’ De-
partments of Motor Vehicles (DMV). The concern stemmed 
from cases in which stalkers bought information about their 
victims through DMV offices. One of the most publicized 
cases was that of actress Rebecca Schaeffer, who was mur-
dered in 1989 after a private investigator obtained informa-
tion about her for an obsessed fan. Based on information 
from the California motor vehicle records, the stalker lo-
cated Ms. Schaeffer’s place of residence and killed her. The 
Driver’s Privacy Protection Act restricts the disclosure of 
personal information contained in DMV records. Govern-
ment employees working within the scope of their jobs may 
have access to the records. The records may be disclosed to 
conduct a motor vehicle recall in order to protect the driv-
ers’ safety. DMV records can be released to government 
officials to assist in proceedings involving a certain motor 
vehicle. Individuals may have access to their own records. 
Lastly, private investigators have access to DMV records. 
The Act provides for criminal fines should a DMV fail to 

Chronology 127
comply with the law and it also gives victims the right to 
sue the DMV for punitive damages and attorneys fees. 
 1996 
 The Health Information Portability and Accountability Act of 
1996 (HIPAA) 
 The purpose of this Act is to improve the efficiency of the 
healthcare system. Among other benefits, the Act sets na-
tional standards for the security, protection, and confiden-
tiality of individuals’ health-related information, known 
as the Privacy Rule. While HIPPA became effective on 
April 14, 2001, health insurers, healthcare providers, and 
clearinghouses were given until April 2003 to meet the 
terms of the Privacy Rule. 
 
 Fair Debt Collection Practices Act 
 Congressional findings of abuse, deception, and unfair 
debt collection practices led to the creation of the Fair Debt 
Collection Practices Act. The goal of this Act is to protect 
consumers from the unscrupulous methods used by some 
debt collectors. The Act also encourages States to take ac-
tions to protect consumers. In addition, the Act protects 
agencies who abide by the regulations from being placed 
at a competitive disadvantage within the industry. 
 1997 
 Identification Act, No. 68 of 1997—South Africa 
 The government of the Republic of South Africa enacted 
the Identification Act of 1997 to describe the policies and 
procedures regarding who must obtain a national iden-
tification card and what must be done in order to obtain 
one. This Act also allows for the creation and maintenance 
of a national population registry. 
 1998 
 The Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act 
 Congress passed the Identity Theft and Assumption Deter-
rence Act in October 1998. The Act is an amendment to 18 
U.S.C. §1028, and defines identity theft as a federal crime. 
 1999 
 Identity Theft Data Clearinghouse 
The Federal Trade Commission, as a result of a mandate 
by the Identity Theft and Assumption and Deterrence

128 Chronology
 1999 
 Act, launched the Identity Theft Data Clearinghouse in 
(cont.)  November 1999 to collect identity theft complaints di-
rectly from victims.
 
 Gramm-Leach Bliley Act 
 The Gramm-Leach Bliley Act (GLB Act) requires financial 
institutions to provide their customers with annual privacy 
notices. The notice explains the circumstances under which 
account holders’ personal information will be shared with 
or sold to nonaffiliated third parties. Before the informa-
tion can be disclosed, customers are given the opportunity 
to opt out or limit the disclosure to affiliates. The GLB Act 
requires financial institutions to establish and enforce cus-
tomer information security policies; it also prohibits pre-
texting. The GLB Act of 1999 is also known as the Financial 
Services Modernization Act of 1999. 
 
 Victims of Crimes Extended Services (VOICES)/Identity Theft 
Resource Center (ITRC) 
 Linda and Jay Foley established the Victims of Crimes 
Extended Services (VOICES) under the auspices of the 
Privacy Rights Clearinghouse in 1999. It later became the 
Identity Theft Resource Center (ITRC), a stand-alone non-
profit organization. The ITRC is dedicated to victim ad-
vocacy and providing educational services for consumers 
as well as public and private entities. 
 
 Identity Theft Program 
 Dr. Judith Collins established the Identity Theft Program, 
formerly called the Identity Theft Partnerships in Preven-
tion, at the School of Criminal Justice, Michigan State Uni-
versity, East Lansing, Michigan. An outreach initiative, 
the main focus of the program is to conduct research, pro-
vide victim advocacy, and assist in identity theft investi-
gations. Training is also available in many areas such as 
public and workplace awareness program development. 
 2000 
 California Identity Theft Registry 
 The Identity Theft Data Base was established by Califor-
nia Penal Code Section 530.7 (Assembly Bill 1862-Torlak-
son; Chapter 631, Stats. of 2000). The purpose of the bill 

Chronology 129
is to assist victims of criminal identity theft. This type of 
identity theft occurs when an individual’s personal iden-
tifying information is used by another person, without 
permission, to aid or abet in the commission of a felony 
or misdemeanor. The bill allows victims, whose identi-
ties have been connected with criminal records, to reg-
ister for inclusion into the Identity Theft Data Base that 
is maintained by the California Department of Justice. 
First, victims must submit a registration application and 
provide all required documentation. The information is 
verified and entered into the database. Then, a personal 
identification number (PIN) is issued to the victim. In-
formation in the database is available 365 days a year by 
calling a toll-free number. The database is accessible to 
law enforcement officials, victims, and others who have 
obtained permission from the victims. 
 
 Social Security Number Confidentiality Act of 2000 
 The Social Security Number Confidentiality Act was 
signed into law by President Bill Clinton on November 6, 
2000. The purpose of the bill is to protect Social Security 
numbers (SSNs) from theft due to unopened government 
mailings,  including checks. It prohibits full or partial 
SSNs from being printed on the outside of all government 
mailings. The Act also prohibits mailings that allow SSNs 
to be visible through the envelopes of sealed mail. 
 
 Internet False Identification Act of 2000 
 The Internet False Identification Act of 2000 is an amend-
ment to the Crime Control Act of 1982. The Internet False 
Identification Act makes it illegal for false identity docu-
ments to be transferred electronically. It was passed to 
address the abundance of counterfeit identification docu-
ments, templates, and files being distributed over the 
Internet or downloaded and distributed from storage de-
vises. The Act mandated that a committee be formed to 
make sure that existing resources, such as task forces, are 
used to aggressively investigate and prosecute violators. 
 
Internet Crime Complaint Center 
 The Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3), formerly 
known as the Internet Fraud Complaint Center (IFCC), 

130 Chronology
 2000 
was founded. The IC3 is a joint venture between the Fed 
(cont.)  eral Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the National White 
Collar Crime Center (NW3C). It collects complaints from 
victims of online fraud or the parties that were defrauded 
and refers them to federal, state, or local law enforcement 
agencies for investigation. The complaints are included in 
the Federal Trade Commission’s database and reflected in 
their annual statistical reports. The IC3 complaint form is 
available on their Web site at http://www.ic3.gov/com 
plaint. 
 2001 
 FTC’s Annual Reports 
 The Federal Trade Commission released its first annual 
statistical report based on the complaints filed by victims 
of identity theft from January to December 2000. The re-
port consisted of 12 pages of charts and graphs. 
 2002 
 Military Sentinel 
 The Federal Trade Commission established the Military 
Sentinel database to collect identity theft and fraud-
related  complaints directly from members of the armed 
forces, military civilian employees, and their families. 
 2003 
 Fair and Accurate Credit Transaction Act (FACTA) 
 This Act added new provisions to the Fair Credit Report-
ing Act (FCRA).   The purpose of the legislation is help 
consumers detect and prevent identity theft. The major 
provision of the Act requires the three major credit bu-
reaus (TransUnion, Equifax, and Experian) to provide 
consumers with one free credit report every 12 months 
upon the consumer’s request. It resulted in the formation 
of a centralized source for requesting credit reports. The 
Act also created procedures whereby consumers can cor-
rect inaccurate, erroneous, or fraudulent information con-
tained in their credit bureau reports. 
  
 Identity Theft Consumer Notification Act, 108th Congress, 
H.R. 818, Pending 
 Congress introduced the Identity Theft Consumer Noti-
fication Act on February 13, 2003. It was referred to the 

Chronology 131
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer 
Credit and has yet to be signed into law. The Act is an 
attempt to require financial institutions to notify custom-
ers immediately upon discovering that their records have 
succumbed to a security breach. The Act contains one 
exception to the disclosure requirement, that is, financial 
institutions may delay notifying customers if requested 
by the law enforcement agencies that are conducting an 
investigation into the incident. 
 2004 
 Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act 
 President George W. Bush signed the Identity Theft 
Penalty Enhancement Act into law. The Act created the 
offense of “aggravated identity theft” and set forth man-
datory sentences for the crime. In addition, the Act directs 
the U.S. Sentencing Commission to increase the penalties 
when a person uses their position, such as an employee or 
officer of a company, as a means to steal personal identi-
fying information or to launder stolen identities. 
 
Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act (Check 21) 
 Although the Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act, also 
known as the Check 21 Act, was enacted in 2003, it went 
into effect on October 28, 2004. It allows banks to process 
checks electronically, which is more cost-efficient and less 
time-consuming than the traditional method of moving 
the original paper checks from one bank to another. 
 
 Shadowcrew Web Site Taken Down 
 In October 2004, the United States Secret Service (USSS) 
busted one of the largest international crime rings, 
known as Shadowcrew. The worldwide organization 
consisted of more than 4,000 participants and operated 
entirely online for two years. Members, owners, opera-
tors, and moderators participated in buying and selling 
personal information, identity documents, Social Secu-
rity numbers, credit card numbers, and debit card num-
bers. At the time the Shadowcrew Web site was taken 
down by the USSS, group members had compromised 
approximately 1.7 million credit card numbers, leading 
to more than $4 million in losses to financial institutions. 

132 Chronology
 2004 
 Ohio’s Identity Theft Verification Passport Program 
 (cont.)  Ohio Attorney General Jim Petro received funding from 
the U.S. Department of Justice to establish the Identity 
Theft Verification Passport Program. In 2004 law enforce-
ment officials began learning to use the program. Its pur-
pose is to help protect victims of identity theft against 
future problems. Current victims, or those who became 
victims within a retroactive seven-year time period be-
ginning December 14, 2004, may be eligible to participate 
in the program. Consumers may call 1-888-MY-ID-4ME 
(1-888-694-3463) for information. 
 2005 
 ChoicePoint Data Breach 
 ChoicePoint, a company that collects, stores, compiles, 
and resells consumer information, announced a large 
data security breach. The dossiers of over 160,000 indi-
viduals had been inadvertently sold to a group of identity 
thieves. Each file, compiled from a variety of pubic and 
private sources,  contained personal identifying informa-
tion such as Social Security number and date of birth. The 
thieves set up at least 50 fake business accounts in order 
to gain access to the ChoicePoint files. 
 2006 
 Identity Cards Act 2006 
 The Identity Cards Act 2006 was signed into law in 
March. The Act set forth the legal structure required to 
establish a national, personal identification card program 
in the United Kingdom. The purpose of the program is to 
address the problems created by identity theft, immigra-
tion fraud, and government benefit abuse. The Act also 
makes it a crime for a person to have an identity docu-
ment in his or her possession that belongs to someone 
else or equipment and/or supplies needed to make fake 
identity documents. 
 
  United States of America (for the Federal Trade Commission) v. 
ChoicePoint Inc. 
 On January 26, 2006, the Federal Trade Commission 
(FTC) announced that a settlement had been reached 
with ChoicePoint on charges stemming from a 2005 data 

Chronology 133
breach. The company, which collects and sells personal 
information to subscribers, sold personal information to 
a ring of identity thieves. ChoicePoint agreed to pay $10 
million in civil fines and $5 million in consumer repara-
tions. This was the highest civil penalty ever assessed by 
the FTC. ChoicePoint was charged with several violations 
of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) and the FTC Act, 
including failure to properly screen subscribers. In addi-
tion to the monetary settlement, the company agreed to 
an independent audit of their security measures every 
two years for the next 20 years. 
 
 Estep v. Blackwell 
 In March 2006, Darrell Estep prompted the filing of a 
class- action lawsuit in the U.S. District Court in Cincin-
nati. The complaint alleged that Ohio Secretary of State, 
Kenneth Blackwell, posted documents containing So-
cial Security numbers (SSNs) on the office’s Web site, 
which exposed thousands of Ohioans to identity theft. 
The Ohio attorney general issued an opinion stating that 
SSNs must not appear on documents  accessible to the 
public because it violates an individual’s right to privacy. 
According to the complaint, Blackwell did not stop the 
practice despite the attorney general’s opinion. The case 
was settled when Blackwell agreed to remove the SSNs 
from any financial documents posted on the secretary of 
state’s Web site and agreed to take steps to prevent it in 
the future. 
 
 Ohio Secretary of State’s Office Data Breach 
 In April 2006 the Ohio secretary of state’s office acknowl-
edged a data security breach that put registered voters 
at risk of identity theft. In accordance with the Freedom 
of Information Act, political groups may request and be 
granted access to voter registration lists for use in their 
campaign projects. In this case, the secretary of state’s 
office mailed CDs containing voter information, such as 
names, addresses, and past voting histories, to 20 political 
groups. It was discovered, however, that the Social Secu-
rity numbers (SSNs) belonging to some Ohio voters were 
accidently included on the CDs. The CDs were recalled 
and replaced with new ones that lacked that information. 

134 Chronology
 2006 
ID Safety (www.IDSafety.org) 
(cont.)   In 2006 a partnership between the International Associa-
tion of Chiefs of Police and Bank of America was formed 
to address identity theft prevention, investigations, and 
victim assistance. This is the first time that law enforce-
ment and the banking industry made a large-scale coop-
erative effort to combat the crime of identity theft. 
 2007 
 The President’s Identity Theft Task Force 
 On May 10, 2006, President George W. Bush signed Ex-
ecutive Order 13402, which established The President’s 
Identity Theft Task Force. The task force, made up of rep-
resentatives from several federal agencies, was chaired by 
the attorney general of the United States and co-chaired 
by the chairman of the Federal Trade Commission. As set 
forth by the Order, the purpose of the task force was to 
address identity theft from many perspectives and pre-
pare a comprehensive plan for fighting the crime. The re-
sulting report,  Combating Identity Theft: A Strategic Plan , 
was introduced on April 23, 2007. 
 
  United States Department of Veterans Affairs, VA Medical 
Center Data Breach 
 The U.S. Department of Veteran’s Affairs reported that a 
portable hard drive was discovered missing in January 
from a VA hospital in Alabama. The hard drive contained 
the patients’ personal information and the doctors’ billing 
information. 
 
Fidelity National Information Services Data Breach 
 Fidelity National Information Services announced the 
theft of customer records in July 2007. The firm stated that 
an employee of a subsidiary company, Certegy Check Ser-
vices, was responsible for accessing and selling at least 2.3 
million records containing personal identity information. 
Certegy later revised the number of records breached to 
8.5 million. 
 
Luciano Pisciotti and Daniel Mills v. Old National Bancorp 
 On August 23, 2007, the U.S. Court of Appeals, Seventh 
Circuit, upheld the decision of the U.S. District Court, 

Chronology 135
Southern District of Indiana, to dismiss a class action 
lawsuit filed on the behalf of Old National Bancorp cus-
tomers. In 2005 the bank’s Web site was hacked and the 
lawsuit sought damages for emotional distress and re-
imbursement for the cost of credit monitoring services. 
The Court of Appeals ruled that the costs incurred by the 
bank’s customers for credit monitoring services are not 
considered compensable damages under Indiana’s secu-
rity breach notification law. Additionally, the Court stated 
that none of the plaintiffs claimed to have become victims 
of identity theft due to the breach, thus, they did not suf-
fer any actual damages. 
  
 The Clean Credit and Identity Theft Protection Act: Model 
State Laws 
 The Consumers Union and the U.S. Public Interest Re-
search Groups (U.S. PIRG) introduced the Model in 2004 
and updated it in 2007. The purpose of the Model is to aid 
those states seeking to enact tougher consumer-protec-
tion laws as provided under the Fair and Accurate Credit 
Transactions Act (FACTA). The Model addresses six key 
issues: Social Security number protection, security freeze, 
the prevention of and protection from security breaches, 
right to file a police report regarding identity theft, ad-
equate destruction of personal records, and a severability 
clause. 
 2008 
 Data Protection Day/Data Privacy Day 
 January 28, 2008 was designated Data Privacy Day in the 
United States and Canada. The international initiative 
began in 2007 when the day was declared Data Protection 
Day in Europe. The goals of the program are to encourage 
a global dialogue regarding privacy issues and increase 
awareness among businesses and consumers of the im-
portance of security-sensitive information. 
 
 Texas Attorney General Reaches Settlement with Radio Shack 
 In July 2008 Attorney General Abbott announced that an 
agreement had been reached with Radio Shack. The re-
tailer was charged with violating Texas law governing the 
disposal of documents containing personal  identifying

136 Chronology
 2008 
 information. Charges were filed by the attorney general 
(cont.)  after customer records containing Social Security num-
bers, credit card information, debit card information, 
names, addresses, and telephone numbers were discov-
ered in a dumpster at a store located in Portland, Texas. 
Radio Shack agreed to pay $630,000 to the state as well as 
implement security procedures to protect their customers’ 
sensitive information. 
 
 The Identity Theft Enforcement and Restitution Act of 2008 
 In September 2008 President George W. Bush signed the 
Identity Theft Enforcement and Restitution Act into law. 
The bill was designed to provide financial recourse for 
victims of cybercrimes, including identity theft, and to 
help in the investigation and prosecution of the crimes. 
The Act also calls for the U.S. Sentencing Commission to 
consider harsher penalties for identity theft, hacking, and 
computer-related fraud offenses. 
 2009 
 United States Department of Veterans Affairs Data Breach 
Settlement 
 In January 2009 the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs 
(VA) agreed to settle the class action suits brought by vet-
erans groups as a result of a data breach that occurred 
in 2006. A laptop computer and external hard drive con-
taining the  personal information of nearly 26.5 million 
veterans and active military personnel were stolen from 
the home of a VA employee. According to the settlement, 
a $20 million fund was set up to reimburse the veterans 
who could prove that they incurred damages. Claims 
were limited to a maximum of $1,500 per person. 
 
 Flores-Figueroa v. United States 
 On May 4, 2009, the U.S. Supreme Court of Appeals, 
Eighth Circuit, ruled that prosecutors must show that a 
person knowingly used someone else’s identifying in-
formation in order to be charged and convicted of ag-
gravated identity theft. Ignacio Flores Figueroa, a citizen 
of Mexico, gave documents to his Illinois employer that 
contained counterfeit identification numbers. Figueroa 
was arrested and charged with immigration offenses and 

Chronology 137
aggravated identity theft. During proceedings in District 
Court, Figueroa asked for dismissal of the aggravated 
identity theft charge because the government could not 
prove that he knew that the identification numbers were 
assigned to other people. Figueroa was originally found 
guilty but appealed the case and won. 
 
   United States of America v. Albert Gonzalez, a/k/a cumbajohny, 
a/k/a cj, a/k/a UIN 201679996, a/k/a UIN 476747, a/k/a 
soupnazi, a/k/a segvec, a/k/a kingchilli, a/k/a stanozololz 
 In September 2009 the leader of a credit and debit card 
fraud ring, Albert Gonzalez, was sentenced to 25 years 
in prison in a case that was dubbed “the largest known 
case of identity theft in history.” Gonzalez, who had 10 
accomplices, is responsible for stealing the information 
from millions of credit and debit cards by hacking into 
the computer networks belonging to BJ’s Wholesale Club, 
OfficeMax, TJX Companies, Boston Market, Barnes & 
Noble, and Sports Authority between 2003 and 2006. Sev-
eral other defendants are scheduled to appear in federal 
court in late 2009 and during 2010. 


139
 5 
 W
hile identity theft in some form may have been around 
since the earliest of civilizations, it is clear that it has taken 
a more prominent role in today’s society. As the crime has 
become more prevalent and technology has spawned new ways 
for it to be committed, it is evident that there is a need for re-
form in how this crime is addressed. This chapter focuses on 
some of the key persons who have helped to teach society about 
what identity theft is and how to prevent it. Many of those pro-
filed in this chapter are politicians who introduced new ideas 
and concepts about the crime through legislation. These indi-
viduals fought for tougher penalties, more inclusive laws, and a 
greater level of accountability by government and other private 
entities who commonly handle consumers’ personal informa-
tion. In addition to those who hold political office, many other 
people have worked to gain a greater understanding of identity 
theft in order to provide information that helped to direct and 
reform policies. Some of these individuals were victims them-
selves who took their own experiences and offered insight to 
others about ways to address the issue. While reading through 
the list of people involved in combating identity theft, it is im-
portant to note that some of the legislation discussed herein did 
not become law in its original format; however, the introduction 
of that legislation led to other pieces of legislation being intro-
duced and passed into law. The ideas that were generated by 
the list of people below have helped to shape the way in which 
the United States handles identity theft cases today. 
 Biographical Sketches 

140 Biographical Sketches
 Abagnale, Frank, Jr. (1948–) 
 Frank Abagnale was born in New York in 1948. His childhood 
has been described as normal and uneventful. However, when 
he was 13, his mother and father separated and this seems 
to have paved the way for the future life he would live. In re-
cent years, his name has become well known as a result of the 
movie  Catch Me If You Can,  in which Leonardo DiCaprio por-
trayed him. The movie is based on Abagnale’s book by the same 
title and depicts his life as a confidence man. Throughout his 
life,  Abagnale has taken on many roles. He was an airline pilot, 
a doctor, a  lawyer, a college professor, and a businessman, at 
least on paper. He never had any formal education or training 
for most of the positions he held, but instead read about the 
positions and observed people working in those positions so 
that he might pass himself off as one of them. In order to do 
this, Abagnale had to learn how to create documents that could 
pass for being authentic. He was able to fabricate fraudulent 
transcripts, name badges, checks, a Federal Aviation Adminis-
tration license, and other documents that helped to hide his true 
identity. He lived his life as a man for approximately five years. 
At 21 years of age, Abagnale was apprehended in France, and 
he served time in France, Sweden, and the United States for his 
crimes. Upon his release, U.S. officials realized what a wealth of 
knowledge Abagnale had and, under the terms of his release, he 
was required to teach federal law enforcement agencies about 
security and fraud schemes. He is now recognized as one of 
the leading authorities on fraud, document security, and em-
bezzlement. He runs his own security business, and continues 
to work with law enforcement. Today, he also works with cor-
porations and financial institutions to help them develop poli-
cies and procedures to address and prevent fraud. Abagnale is 
the author of  Stealing Your Life ,  The Art of the Steal , and the  Real 
U Guide to Identity Theft . 
 Ashcroft, John (1942–) 
U.S. Attorney General 
 John Ashcroft was born in Chicago, Illinois. He graduated from 
Yale University in 1964, and in 1967 he was awarded a Juris 

Biographical Sketches 141
 Doctorate degree from the University of Chicago. That same year, 
he married his wife, Janet, who now teaches at Howard Univer-
sity. They have three children. 
 Ashcroft began his political career shortly after graduat-
ing from the University of Chicago. In 1972, he ran for office in 
Missouri, but he lost in the primary. In 1973, the Missouri gover-
nor appointed him as state auditor. He remained the state audi-
tor until 1975. At that time, he was hired by Missouri Attorney 
General Jack Danforth to serve as an Assistant Attorney General. 
In 1976, when Danforth was elected to the U.S. Senate, Ashcroft 
was elected to replace him. Ashcroft was re-elected as  Attorney 
General in 1980. He went on from the Attorney General’s office to 
serve two consecutive terms as Missouri governor, and in 1994, he 
moved into the federal arena and was elected to the U.S. Senate. 
In 2000, President George W. Bush appointed Ashcroft to the posi-
tion of United States Attorney General. 
 Though Ashcroft is a Republican, he crossed party lines 
when it came to working on the problem of identity theft. 
In 2005 he worked with California’s senior Senator Dianne 
Feinstein and held press conferences to encourage the pas-
sage of stiffer penalties for identity thieves. The significance of 
these press conferences was that they demonstrated the federal 
government’s interest in fighting identity theft and enacting 
harsher punishments for those who commit the crime. In ad-
dition,  Ashcroft and Feinstein focused on making it easier for 
prosecutors to obtain convictions for identity theft cases and 
sought to expand the definition of identity theft to include the 
possession of false identity documents, in addition to the use of 
those documents. 
 Bliley, Thomas Jerome, Jr. (1932–) 
U.S. Representative (R-Va.) 
 Thomas “Tom” Bliley was born in 1932 in Chesterfield County, 
Virginia. At the age of, 16 he graduated from Benedictine High 
School in Richmond, Virginia. He earned his undergraduate de-
gree from Georgetown University in 1952 and then served in 
the U.S. Navy from 1952 to 1955. Bliley’s political career began 
when he was elected vice-mayor of Richmond in 1968. He was 
elected mayor of Richmond in 1970, and held that position until 

142 Biographical Sketches
1977. In 1980, Bliley was elected to the U.S. House of Represen-
tatives, and he served as a representative from January 1981 
until January 2001. 
 Bliley co-sponsored the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999. The 
Act gives eight federal agencies the authority to enforce the Fi-
nancial Privacy Rule and the Safeguards Rule and protects con-
sumers from individuals and companies who might try to obtain 
personal financial information under false pretenses. This tech-
nique, known as pretexting, allowed criminals to obtain informa-
tion for the purpose of identity theft. The Act also required that 
financial institutions create policies and safeguards to protect 
their customers’ personal information. 
 Bowen, Debra (1955–) 
California Secretary of State 
 Debra Bowen was born in 1955 in Illinois. She attended  Michigan 
State University and received her Bachelor’s degree in 1976. 
Bowen then earned a Juris Doctorate degree from the University 
of Virginia School of Law in 1979. She moved to  California and 
started her own law firm in 1984. Bowen served on the California 
State Assembly from 1992–1998 and then in the California State 
Senate from 1998–2007. She is currently the  California Secretary 
of State. 
 Bowen’s record shows that she is concerned about iden-
tity theft and privacy protection. She is the author of California 
Senate Bill 168 (SB 168) which was passed and became law. In 
authoring this bill, Bowen helped to create a law that protects 
Social Security numbers, allows consumers to place a credit 
freeze on their credit reports, and also clarifies how fraud alerts 
should work. In general, this bill allows for greater security for 
California citizens’ credit records. She also authored California 
Senate Bill 1279 in hopes of trying to encompass all types of 
personal data in the requirements for disclosure to consumers 
in the event of security breaches. The California Senate passed 
the bill, but the California State Assembly did not; hence the 
bill did not become law. Although this piece of legislation did 
not pass, it demonstrates Bowen’s comittment to protecting per-
sonal  information. 

Biographical Sketches 143
 Calderon, Charles (1950–) 
State Senator (D-Calif.) 
 Charles Calderon was born in 1950 in Montebello, Califor-
nia. He holds a degree in Political Science from California State 
 University–Los Angeles and a Juris Doctorate degree from the 
University of California at Davis. He began his political career 
by winning a seat on the Montebello School Board. Calderon was 
first elected to the California State Assembly in 1982; he was the 
first Latino lawyer to win a seat in the Assembly. In 1990, he ran 
for the California State Senate and won. 
 During his time in office, Calderon introduced Assembly 
Bill 424 (AB 424) in 2005. The purpose of the bill was to revise 
the definition of the word “person” in the current law. Under-
standing that identity theft happens not only to people but also 
to companies, organizations, and the like, and that there are 
many pieces of information that can be considered personally 
identifying, Calderon proposed that the definition be broad-
ened to include a wider range of entities, including but not 
limited to firms, associations, organizations, and partnerships. 
The bill also stated that, just as the definition of identity theft 
needed to be broadened to incorporate these other entities, the 
list of what constitutes a piece of identifying information also 
needed to be expanded to include identifiers that are specific to 
these entities. 
 Also in 2005, Calderon sponsored Assembly Bill 1566, which 
was created to help protect members of the armed forces who are 
deployed to a location outside of the state of California. This Bill 
was specifically designed emphasize the importance of protecting 
those who are serving in the armed forces. 
 Cantwell, Maria (1958–) 
U.S. Senator (D-Wash.) 
 Maria Cantwell was born in 1958 in Indianapolis, Indiana. She 
earned her Bachelor of Arts degree in Public Administration 
from Miami University (Ohio) in 1981, and later moved to Se-
attle,  Washington, in 1983. In 1986, Cantwell was elected to the 

144 Biographical Sketches
 Washington State House of Representatives. In 1992, she was 
elected to the U.S. House of Representatives, where she served one 
term. After she was defeated in the House race in 1994, Cantwell 
returned to work in the private sector and became the vice presi-
dent of marketing for RealNetworks. 
 During her time with RealNetworks, there were questions 
pertaining to the privacy policy of the company. Cantwell’s ex-
perience in the computer software industry helped to shape her 
views on privacy issues and demonstrated her concern for pro-
tecting the privacy of Internet users. This further aided her when 
she ran for a seat on the U.S. Senate in 2000, as privacy was an 
early issue in that campaign. 
 Since becoming a U.S. Senator in 2001, Cantwell has dem-
onstrated her concern about identity theft and the victims of 
this crime. She has proposed several bills, including the Reclaim 
Your Identity Act of 2001 and the Identity Theft Victims Assis-
tance Act of 2002. These acts were designed to help victims face 
the challenges that accompany having their identities compro-
mised. Knowing that identity theft is often not discovered for 
some time and that victims often struggle to obtain information 
pertaining to their case, the bills offered victims more control 
over their situation. Although the bills did not pass, they have 
helped to make legislators and others more aware of the impact 
of identity theft and have helped to shape future legislation. In 
2007, Cantwell continued to demonstrate her desire to better 
understand the identity theft problem and how it correlates to 
other crimes and problems within society when she proposed 
a national study to determine the relationship between iden-
tity theft and methamphetamine labs. As the number of meth-
amphetamine labs continues to grow within the United States, 
signs were beginning to emerge that many of the lab operators 
are using stolen identities to obtain the products needed to man-
ufacture the drug. 
 Carter, Steve (1954–) 
Indiana Attorney General 
 Steve Carter received his Juris Doctorate degree from the Indiana 
University School of Law, and served as the Chief of Staff to In-
diana Lieutenant Governor John M. Mutz. He was the  Attorney 

Biographical Sketches 145
General for Indiana from 2000–2008. During his time as Attorney 
General, he gained a strong reputation for working to protect the 
state’s citizens. He enforced one of the nation’s strongest Do Not 
Call Laws to help protect constituents from unwanted telemarket-
ing calls. In 2008, he launched an Identity Theft Unit for the state 
of Indiana to help residents who have been victims of identity 
theft and to educate the public on ways to protect their personal 
identifying information. The Identity Theft Unit is part of the 
Consumer Protection Division, which is a division of the Attorney 
General’s Office. The Identity Theft Unit is also responsible for 
investigating alleged fraud and serves as a resource for local law 
enforcement and prosecutors. During his time as Attorney Gen-
eral, Carter’s office worked to pass the Security Breach Disclosure 
Law, which requires businesses in the state to notify customers of 
security breaches that may have made their personal information 
vulnerable to theft. Furthermore, companies that do not properly 
disclose security breaches to their customers risk fines of up to 
$150,000. 
 Cogdill, David (1950–) 
State Assembly (R-Calif.) 
 Dave Cogdill was born in 1950 in Long Beach, California. He 
moved to Modesto in 1979 and built a real estate appraisal 
business. He began his career in politics in 1975 when he was 
elected to the Board of Directors of the Bridgeport Fire Pro-
tection District in Mono County. He also served two terms on 
the Modesto City Council. In 2006, Cogdill was elected to his 
current position as a California State Senator. From April 2008 
until February 2009, he also served as the Senate Republican 
Leader. Prior to working for the California State Senate, Cogdill 
served on the California State Assembly. During his years as a 
public servant, Cogdill has received numerous awards, includ-
ing Legislator of the Year by Crime Victims United of California 
in 2007, the Mickey Conroy Legislator of the Year by the Cali-
fornia State Commanders Veterans Council in 2007, Outstand-
ing Legislator by the Chief Probation Officers of California in 
2008, and  Special Recognition as an Outstanding Legislator by 
the California  Sheriffs’ Association also in 2008. Cogdill also 
sponsored  Assembly Bill 618 (AB 618), which was designed to 

146 Biographical Sketches
assist law enforcement and prosecutors’ offices in investigat-
ing and prosecuting cases of identity theft and other fraud of-
fences. The bill allows law enforcement to request, in addition 
to account statements and a copy of the signature, surveillance 
photos or video recordings of persons accessing the victim’s 
financial account at a financial institution or at an automated 
teller machine. 
 Cuccinelli, Ken (1968–)
State Senator (R-Va.) 
 Ken Cuccinelli was born in 1968 in Edison, New Jersey. He re-
ceived his Bachelor of Science degree in Mechanical Engineering 
from the University of Virginia, a Juris Doctorate from George 
Mason University School of Law, and a Master of Arts degree 
in International Commerce and Policy from George Mason Uni-
versity. His career in politics began in 2002 when he was elected 
to his current position in the Virginia State Senate. In 2006, Cuc-
cinelli proposed legislation that would give consumers greater 
control over their personal information by permitting them to 
put a credit freeze on their credit reports. While a credit report 
freeze in the state of Virginia was not put into place until 2008, 
Cuccinelli demonstrated progressive thinking in the fight against 
identity theft. 
 Feinstein, Dianne (1933–) 
U.S. Senator (D-Calif.) 
 Born Dianne Emiel Goldman in San Francisco, California, Di-
anne Feinstein is a name commonly recognized in politics. She 
is currently the senior U.S. Senator from California. In 1991, Pete 
 Wilson’s Senate seat became vacant when he resigned to become 
Governor of California, and Feinstein won a special election in 
November 1992 that allowed her to fill the vacant seat. Feinstein 
became the first woman from California to serve in the U.S. Sen-
ate. She has been re-elected three times since her initial election 
in 1992. 

Biographical Sketches 147
 Feinstein’s political career covers a 40-year span. Prior to 
joining the U.S. Senate, she held numerous other political offices. 
She was elected to the San Francisco County Board of Supervi-
sors in 1969, and went on to become the first female mayor of San 
Francisco, where she served from 1978 to 1988. During her tenure 
as mayor, she was named the nation’s “Most Effective Mayor” 
by  City and State  magazine. Throughout her political career she 
has received numerous awards and honors for her hard work and 
dedication to her constituents. 
 Feinstein’s political career can be described as one that has 
been filled with bi-partisan cooperation to help protect the na-
tion and its citizens. She has focused her attention on matters 
of national security and on fighting crime and violence. She has 
worked border security and visa entry reforms that resulted in 
laws making it a crime to tunnel beneath a U.S. border. Further-
more, she has focused her attention on the rights of crime victims, 
helped to protect children through the support of the AMBER 
Alert Network, and worked to combat the nation’s methamphet-
amine problem. 
 As times have changed, so has Feinstein. She has looked at 
the problems of society and offered insight into how to address 
them, including identity theft. In line with her focus on protecting 
U.S. citizens and helping crime victims, she has sponsored leg-
islation pertaining to identity theft, including the Identity Theft 
Prevention Act of 2001.  The Act gave prosecutors more tools for 
combating the crime by mandating that criminal intent is suffi-
cient proof for conviction. She also cosponsored the Identity Theft 
Penalty Enhancement Act, which focused on determining penal-
ties for aggravated identity theft charges. 
 Foley, Linda 
 Linda Foley’s work on identity theft issues came about as a result 
of her own identity being stolen by her employer. Foley had been 
hired as an independent contractor (as a writer/advertiser) for the 
San  Diego-based magazine  Essentially You . Within months of fill-
ing out her employment paperwork, Citibank notified Foley that 
they had a new mailing address on file for her. Foley contacted 
law  enforcement and immediately began the process of trying to 
correct her credit reports. After being a victim of identity theft, 
Foley became a volunteer for the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, 

148 Biographical Sketches
and then she and her husband, Jay Foley, founded the Identity 
Theft Resource Center in 1999. 
 Foley conducts seminars for a variety of audiences. She 
has testified at state and federal legislative hearings on the is-
sues surrounding identity theft, and offers assistance to victims 
of the crime. She also works to educate the public about ways 
to protect themselves from identity theft. Foley has received 
numerous awards and has been featured on television in pro-
grams such as  The  Montel  Williams Show , as well as in print, 
including in  Reader’s Digest  and  Time . Today, Foley is consid-
ered one of the leading experts on identity theft. Her passion 
for assisting victims has led her to make fighting identity theft 
her life’s work. 
 Frank, Mari 
 Like many who become passionate about the fight against iden-
tity theft, Mari Frank was also a victim of the crime. In 1996, Frank 
learned that her identity had been stolen when she received a 
phone call from a bank requesting payment on an $11,000 debt 
she purportedly owed them. 
 Based on her experience as a victim, Frank used her legal 
expertise to create the Identity Theft Survival Kit. The kit is an 
all-encompassing tool for victims of the crime. She compiled ex-
pert information, a step-by-step manual on what to do if you 
are a victim, and how to stop being a victim. In addition, the 
kit includes samples of the legal documents and paperwork that 
victims may need. Frank is an attorney and a private consultant, 
and has also coauthored and authored books such as  Privacy Pi-
racy  and  From Victim to Victor: A Step by Step Guide for Ending the 
Nightmare of Identity Theft . She hosts a weekly radio show based 
at the University of California that addresses issues pertaining to 
privacy in today’s society. Frank’s desire to see changes in iden-
tity theft laws is evident in her testimonies before both the Cali-
fornia legislature and the U.S. Congress. She has also appeared 
on television shows such as “Dateline” and “48 Hours”. CNN and 
PBS Television have aired a 90-minute special on identity theft 
featuring Frank. She serves on numerous  advisory boards and is 
also the leader of a task force on identity theft in Los Angeles and 
Orange Counties, California. 

Biographical Sketches 149
 Givens, Beth 
 Consumer advocate Beth Givens is a former librarian who spe-
cialized in resource sharing and library network development. 
In 1992, Givens established the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, 
of which she is currently the director. The Clearinghouse’s pur-
pose is to help protect consumers’ privacy and to educate the 
public about potential attacks against their privacy. In addi-
tion to being the director of the Clearinghouse, Givens is the 
author of encyclopedia entries on identity theft in the  Encyclope-
dia of Privacy, the World Book Encyclopedia,  and the  Encyclopedia 
of Crime and Punishment . She is also the author of  The Privacy 
Rights Handbook :  How to Take Control of Your Personal Information 
and the coauthor of  Privacy Piracy: A Guide to Protecting Yourself 
from Identity Theft . Not only is Givens an established author, but 
she speaks on behalf of consumers’ interests at state and federal 
legislative hearings and participates in task forces and commis-
sions aimed at identifying threats to personal information and 
developing methods to protect it. Given her expertise, she is 
often interviewed by the media. 
 Gramm, William Philip (1942–)
U.S. Senator (R-Tex.) 
 William Philip Gramm was born in 1942 in Fort Benning,  Georgia. 
He graduated from the University of Georgia in 1964 with his 
undergraduate degree in business administration, and continued 
his education there, receiving a doctorate degree in economics in 
1967. He taught economics at Texas A&M University from 1967 
to 1978, and in 1978 launched his political career when he was 
elected to the U.S. House of Representatives as a representative 
from Texas. He served in the House as a Democrat from 1978 until 
he resigned in January 1983. Next, he ran in the special election 
that was required to fill his now-vacant seat, this time as a Repub-
lican. He won the election and continued to serve in the House 
from 1983–1985. At that time, he decided to run for the U.S. Sen-
ate, continuing on as a Republican. Gramm was elected to the 
Senate and served there from 1985–2002. 

150 Biographical Sketches
 Gramm was one of the authors of the Financial Modern-
ization Act of 1999, more commonly referred to as the Gramm-
Leach-Bliley Act. While some claim that the Act does not do 
enough to protect consumers, others argue about whether or not 
it is a state or the federal government’s responsibility to handle 
issues of privacy. Regardless of these concerns, the Act has sig-
nificant features that protect the personal financial information 
of consumers. The main components of the Act that relate to pri-
vacy include the financial privacy rule, the safeguards rule, and 
the pretexting provision. 
 Kaine, Timothy M. (1958–) 
Governor (D-Va.) 
 Timothy Kaine was born in 1958 in St. Paul, Minnesota. In 1979, 
he graduated from the University of Missouri. He then attended 
Harvard Law School, from which he graduated in 1983. Kaine 
has also served as a missionary in Honduras. In his professional 
career as an attorney, he gained recognition for his fair housing 
advocacy, as he often represented people who were discrimi-
nated against in the housing market. Kaine began his political ca-
reer as a city council member for Richmond in 1994, where he was 
elected to four terms, and he also served two terms as the mayor 
of Richmond. While mayor, he had a tough on crime approach 
and received national accolades for his reduction in the city’s vio-
lent crime rate. In 2001, Kaine was elected lieutenant governor of 
Virginia, and was elected governor of Virginia in 2005. 
 While governor of Virginia, Kaine worked to protect the pri-
vate information of the citizens of his state. In January 2007, he 
signed Executive Order 43 assigning responsibility for protect-
ing the private information of citizens to the secretary of technol-
ogy, a position charged with ensuring that the privacy protection 
policies and procedures pertaining to and created by the state of 
Virginia are followed accordingly. Kaine also recommended that 
the state initiate credit report freezes for consumers who are inter-
ested. The credit report freeze for Virginia went into effect in July 
2008 and is currently free to victims of identity theft and offered 
for $10.00 to all others. Kaine has also demonstrated his  dedication 
to fighting identity theft by pushing for the disclosure of security 
breaches when they occur. 

Biographical Sketches 151
 Kyl, Jon (1942–) 
U.S. Senator (R-Ariz.) 
 Jon Kyl was born in Nebraska and currently resides in Arizona. 
He holds a Bachelor’s degree and a law degree from the Univer-
sity of Arizona. His legislative career has included serving in both 
the U.S. House of Representatives and in the U.S. Senate, where 
he currently serves as the Republican Whip. This position gives 
him the opportunity to build support on key issues that face the 
country. Senator Kyl also serves on several committees, including 
the Senate Finance and the Judiciary Committees, and the Sub-
committee on Terrorism, Technology, and Homeland Security. 
 Kyl’s legislative career has allowed him the opportunity to 
address many key issues, such as concerns about the rights of vic-
tims, stronger border security, immigration enforcement, imple-
menting antiterrorism tools, and focusing on the country’s safety 
and security. With the increasing concerns about identity theft in 
the United States, Kyl has also focused his efforts on developing 
and supporting new ways to protect personal identifying infor-
mation. He supported the passage of the 2003 Fair and Accurate 
Credit Transactions Act. In addition, he co-sponsored the Iden-
tity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act. In 2007, Kyl co-sponsored 
the Personal Data Protection Act, which, in part, set standards for 
notifying consumers when data breaches occur. 
 Leach, James Albert Smith (1942–) 
U.S. Representative (R-Iowa) 
 James Albert Smith Leach was born in Davenport, Iowa in 1942. 
He earned an undergraduate degree from Princeton University 
in 1964, and a Master of Arts degree from John Hopkins Univer-
sity in 1966. From 1965–1970 Leach worked for Donald Rumsfeld. 
First, he worked on the staff of then U.S. Representative Donald 
 Rumsfeld, and from 1969 to 1970 he served as the special assistant 
to  Rumsfeld, who was then Director of the Office of Economic 
Opportunity. In 1976, Leach decided to run for office himself. He 
ran for and was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives as a 
representative from Iowa. Leach served in the House from 1977 
to 2007. 

152 Biographical Sketches
 During Leach’s time in office he worked on many commit-
tees and also helped to write the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act with 
William Gramm and Thomas Bliley. There were three main com-
ponents related to information privacy included in the Act: the 
financial privacy rule, the safeguards rule, and the pretexting 
provision. The Financial privacy rule established the require-
ment that financial institutions must provide customers with a 
copy of the institution’s privacy notice explaining the methods 
employed for collecting information and sharing it with oth-
ers. Furthermore, the rule allows customers to limit some of the 
sharing of their information. The safeguards rule requires that 
financial institutions, including credit reporting agencies, create 
and maintain procedures for protecting customer information. 
The pretexting provision was designed to prevent organizations 
from trying to obtain consumers’ personal information under 
false pretenses. The combination of these rules helps to protect 
the personal financial information of consumers. 
 Leahy, Patrick (1940–) 
U.S. Senator (D-Vt.) 
 Patrick Leahy was born in Montpelier, Vermont in 1940. He grad-
uated from Saint Michael’s College in 1961, and received his Juris 
Doctorate degree from Georgetown University Law School in 
1964. His career in politics began in 1966 when he was elected as 
the State’s Attorney for Chittenden County. He remained in the 
position until 1974, when he was elected to the U.S. Senate. Leahy 
took his seat in the Senate in January 1975 and remains an active 
Senator today. Throughout his career in the Senate, he has been 
concerned with the issue of privacy and is considered one of the 
leading advocates for privacy policy. 
 In October 2007, Leahy introduced a bill that focused on 
increasing the ability for prosecutors to fight identity theft and 
other cyber crimes that are becoming increasingly common. Fur-
thermore, the legislation was designed to allow victims greater 
access to restitution from the perpetrator. This piece of legisla-
tion, known as the Identity Theft Enforcement and Restitution 
Act, passed in both the U.S. House of Representatives and the 
U.S. Senate, was sent to the President, and signed into law in 
September 2008. 

Biographical Sketches 153
 Madigan, Lisa (1966–) 
Illinois Attorney General 
 Lisa Madigan was born in 1966 in Chicago, Illinois. Her back-
ground demonstrates her concern for people. She worked as a 
teacher and in developing after-school programs aimed at keep-
ing students in school and out of trouble. She served as  Illinois 
State Senator from 1998 until 2002, and in 2002 was elected At-
torney General of the State of Illinois. She won re-election in 2006 
and currently holds that position. Madigan is the first woman 
elected to serve as Illinois’ Attorney General. 
 During her tenure as Attorney General, one item on her 
agenda has been to protect residents from scams and other fraud-
ulent practices. She works hard to stop fraud, recover losses, and 
educate the community about common fraud schemes. In order 
to help victims of identity theft, Madigan also initiated the  Illinois 
Identity Theft Hotline in 2005, the nation’s first hotline of this 
type. The purpose of the hotline is to assist residents who are 
victims of identity theft. Hotline counselors lead victims through 
the process of filing a police report, dealing with credit reporting 
agencies, repairing their credit, and preventing further problems 
from occurring. 
 May, Johnny 
 Johnny May attended the University of Detroit-Mercy and holds 
two degrees, a Bachelor of Science degree in Criminal Justice and 
a Master of Science degree in Security Administration. He is a Cer-
tified Protection Professional (CPP) by the American Society for 
Industrial Security (ASIS). ASIS requirements for a CPP  include 
 either nine years work experience, or a Bachelor’s degree and 
seven years work experience, plus the applicant must pass an 
 examination. In 2007, May also became a Certified Identity Theft 
Risk Management Specialist with the Institute of Consumer Fi-
nance Education. He works as a security consultant and trainer 
whose focus is on protecting not only individuals, but also busi-
nesses and organizations from identity theft. He is well known 
for his work in the security profession and is the author of  Johnny 
May’s Guide to Preventing Identity Theft  and is the expert featured in 

154 Biographical Sketches
the video  Identity Theft: How to Protect Your Credit, Your Money and 
Your Good Name . His expertise has led to numerous appearances on 
both television and radio programs, including  NBC Nightly News 
with Tom Brokaw, and he has been featured in many national pub-
lications, such as  Entrepreneur magazine and  Consumers Digest . 
 May serves as an adjunct professor at the University of 
 Detroit-Mercy, Madonna University, and Henry Ford Commu -
nity College. In conjunction with his teaching endeavors, May 
created the first college-level identity theft prevention course in 
the nation, which is offered at Madonna University and Henry 
Ford Community College. 
 Oller, Thomas (1958–) 
State Assemblyman (R-Calif.) 
 Thomas Oller was born in 1958 in Fresno, California. He gradu-
ated from California State University, Stanislaus in 1980. Oller was 
a member of the California State Assembly from 1996–2000, and 
held a seat in the California State Senate from 2000–2004. In 2004, 
he was defeated in his bid for Congress, and in 2008 he dropped 
out of the Congressional race when California State  Senator Tom 
McClintock announced that he would also be running for the 
vacant seat. Oller currently works in the private sector. But as a 
member of the California State Assembly, Oller sponsored As-
sembly Bill 2232 (AB 2232) in 2000, which was designed to cre-
ate tougher penalties for computer hackers. The bill is aimed at 
those who hack into computer networks to intentionally spread 
computer viruses. Under this new law, the fines for first offenses 
were increased to $5,000 from $250. In addition, if the virus causes 
more than $10,000 in damages, then the perpetrator may face up 
to three years in a state facility. The bill also expands the definition 
of injury or damages to make it a crime to deny access to a sys-
tem’s legitimate users (as in denial of service attacks). California 
Governor Gray Davis signed the bill into law in 2000. 
 Ostergren, Betty “B. J.” 
 Virginia-based identity theft activist Betty Ostergren received a 
Bachelor of Science degree in 1972 and worked as an  insurance 

Biographical Sketches 155
claims supervisor for many years. Today, however, she is known 
because of her work in reducing the incidents of identity theft. 
Ostergren is the founder, editor, and publisher of  The Virginia 
Watchdog  (www.thevirginiawatchdog.com). She is outspoken 
about the ways in which the government releases citizens’ per-
sonal information on the Internet. Ostergren began her battle 
against the government publication of personal information in 
2002 after finding out that the Circuit Court Clerk for the county 
in which she lived was going to put records online that contained 
her signature. Ostergren fought against this because she believes 
that there are certain types of information that should never be 
posted, such as a person’s Social Security number, mother’s 
maiden name, signature, account numbers, date of birth, and the 
names of minors. While able to stop her own county’s Circuit 
Court Clerk, she has not been successful in stopping all other 
counties and local governments from posting personal infor-
mation. Ostergren developed  The Virginia Watchdog,  in part, as 
a way to form a collective group of people who are willing to 
fight to keep records containing sensitive information off the In-
ternet. The  Watchdog  was also developed as a means to educate 
the public about the types of information being placed online. 
Ostergren’s work has brought her much attention and she has 
been featured on national television programs including the CBS 
Evening News, CNN’s Daybreak, and Fox News Channel’s Weekend 
Live. 
 Paterson, David A. (1954–) 
Governor (D-N.Y.) 
 David A. Paterson was born in Brooklyn, New York in 1954. In 
1977, he earned a Bachelor’s degree in History from Columbia 
University and in 1982 he earned his Juris Doctorate degree from 
Hofstra Law School. Paterson has served the state of New York for 
over 20 years, as a New York State Senator, Lieutenant Governor, 
and Governor. He is also known for being the first African Ameri-
can to serve as Lieutenant Governor and Governor. 
 Throughout his political career, Paterson has taken the ini-
tiative to combat crime, including identity theft. As Governor of 
New York, he signed into law legislation that made it easier for 
consumers to freeze their credit reports. In addition, he has taken 

156 Biographical Sketches
measures to further reduce the use of Social Security numbers as 
identifiers, in order to protect residents from identity theft. 
 In 2008 Paterson proposed a comprehensive bill that would 
allow for the creation of the New York State Consumer Protec-
tion Board’s Identity Theft Prevention and Mitigation Program, 
which went into effect in early 2009. He also has taken an inter-
est in making the citizens of New York aware of other common 
areas of fraud. Most recently, he promoted the use of public ser-
vice announcements to raise awareness of lottery scams. Paterson 
promotes educating the public in order for them to better pro-
tect themselves from becoming victims of identity theft and other 
fraud-related crimes. 
 Petro, James (1948–) 
Ohio Attorney General 
 James M. Petro was born in 1948 in Brooklyn, Ohio. He received 
a Bachelor of Arts degree from Denison University in Ohio and 
his Juris Doctorate degree from Case Western Reserve University 
School of Law in Ohio. He began his political career as a city coun-
cil member in Rocky River, Ohio in 1977, and also served four 
years as a member of the Ohio House of Representatives. In 1991, 
Petro began a four-year term as Cuyahoga County Commissioner. 
Three years later, he was elected as the Ohio Auditor. From 2003–
2007, Petro served as the state’s Attorney General. During his ten-
ure as Attorney General, Petro implemented a pilot program, the 
Identity Theft Verification Passport program, with funding from 
the U.S. Department of Justice and support from the Buckeye 
State Sheriffs’ Association, Ohio Association of Chiefs of Police, 
Ohio Department of Public Safety, the Federal Trade Commission, 
and the National Notary Association. This program was designed 
to help protect victims of identity theft by giving them a means to 
demonstrate that they have been victims of the crime. The Pass-
port program offers a centralized database that is maintained 
by the Attorney General’s office and allows law enforcement to 
enter information into it about identity theft cases. The program 
also offers an identification card to victims that they can show, as 
needed, to prove that they are victims. This program serves as a 
model for other states, demonstrating what can be done to help 
protect victims of identity theft from the continued victimization. 

Biographical Sketches 157
 Poochigian, Charles (1949–) 
State Senator (R-Calif.) 
 Charles S. Poochigian was born in 1949 in Fresno, California. He 
graduated from California State University, Fresno in 1972 and 
received a Juris Doctorate degree from Santa Clara University in 
1975. Since then, he has served as a California State Assembly-
man, from 1994–1998, and as a Senator from 1998–2006. While 
in the Senate, Poochigian realized the importance of gaining a 
greater understanding about identity theft and being tougher 
on the criminals who commit the crime. As a result, in 2006 he 
sponsored Senate Bill 1390, which requires the collection of ar-
rest data pertaining to identity thieves. By collecting this data, 
law enforcement can detect potential trends in the cases of iden-
tity theft being reported. By using this data to detect trends, law 
enforcement can focus their attention, time, and resources more 
effectively on  apprehending perpetrators and, potentially, pre-
venting additional crimes. Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger 
signed the bill into effect in 2006. 
 Simitian, Joe (1953–) 
State Senator (D-Calif.) 
 Joe Simitian was born in 1953 in Palo Alto, California. He holds 
two Masters degrees, a Master of Arts in International Policy 
Studies from Stanford University and a Master of City Planning 
from the University of California, Berkeley. He also obtained his 
Juris Doctorate degree from the University of California, Berke-
ley. He served in many political positions prior to being elected 
to the state senate, including mayor of Palo Alto, a Supervisor 
for Santa Clara County, and as a member of the California State 
Assembly. In 2004, Simitian was elected to the California State 
Senate. 
 Throughout his time in politics, Joe Simitian has worked 
to help protect victims of identity theft and to prevent people 
from becoming victims of the crime. He has sponsored various 
pieces of legislation to address issues associated with identity 
theft, and in 2009, the California State Senate approved Senate 
Bill 20 (SB 20), which he proposed. The bill addresses some of 

158 Biographical Sketches
the concerns  associated with security breach notification laws in 
California. It calls for standardizing the breach notification pro-
cess. Furthermore, SB 20 attempts to make the notifications easier 
for consumers to understand by requiring that details about the 
breach, as well as what needs to be done as a result, be written 
in easy to understand terminology. SB 20 also requires that any 
individual security breach that impacts 500 or more California 
residents must be reported to the state’s Attorney General, thus 
allowing him or her to examine larger security breaches, investi-
gate them, and also try to understand how to prevent them from 
occurring in the future. 
 In 2008, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger signed into law 
another piece of legislation sponsored by Simitian. California 
State Senate Bill 31 (SB 31) was written to outlaw skimming, help 
protect personal information, and make it a criminal offense to 
remotely read, or attempt to read, personal identifying informa-
tion by using radio frequency identification (RFID), also known 
as a skimmer. This legislation allows for punishment that may 
consist of jail time, a fine, or both. Simitian also sponsored Cali-
fornia State Senate Bill 612 (SB 612), which was signed into law 
by Governor Schwarzenegger in 2008. This law is an attempt to 
assist in the prosecution of the crime of identity theft. Knowing 
that identity theft can take place anywhere and that the crime is 
often not committed in the same county where the victim resides, 
SB 612 was designed to make it easier for the victim to seek justice 
by allowing for the prosecution of an identity theft case to take 
place in the county where the victim resides, regardless of where 
the crime actually took place. 
 Simitian also received the 2007 Award for Excellence in Public 
Policy for his legislation on privacy protection and its role in pre-
venting identity theft. This award came in response to Assembly 
Bill 700 (AB 700)/Senate Bill 1386 (SB 1386), which requires busi-
nesses to notify consumers of security breaches in which personal 
identifying information may have been compromised. 
 Specter, Arlen (1930–) 
U.S. Senator (R-Pa.) 
 Arlen Specter was born in Wichita, Kansas in 1930. At age 
four, Arlen Specter was named Deputy Sheriff of Sedgwick 

Biographical Sketches 159
County, Kansas, giving him the distinction as being the young-
est Deputy Sheriff in history according to  Ripley’s Believe It or 
Not . He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania in 1951 
and then from Yale Law School in 1956. Specter also served in 
the U.S. Air Force from 1951–1953. Upon graduating from law 
school, Specter worked as an attorney and began his political 
career. From 1963–1964, he served on the Warren Commission 
investigating the assassination of John F. Kennedy. Specter won 
the 1965 race for District Attorney in Philadelphia, and served 
in that position until 1974. After a couple of unsuccessful cam-
paigns for U.S. Senate and Governor of Pennsylvania, Specter 
was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1980 and took office in Janu-
ary 1981. He is now the senior Senator from Pennsylvania and 
holds the distinction of being Pennsylvania’s longest serving 
senator. Partially in response to an identity theft case in which 
an employee of a car dealership used customer information 
to take out $4 million in loans, Specter proposed the PITFALL 
(Prevent Identity Theft from Affecting Lives and Livelihoods) 
legislation in 2003. Though the bill did not become law, Spec-
ter was not dissuaded. Specter continued to fight for consumer 
rights and the protection of personal identifying information. 
In 2007, Specter coauthored the Identity Theft Enforcement and 
Restitution Act, which was signed into law by President George 
W. Bush in 2008. Specter and Leahy also coauthored The Leahy-
Specter Personal Data Privacy and Security Act of 2007, which 
did not pass. 
 Torlakson, Tom (1949–) 
State Assemblyman (D-Calif.) 
 Tom Torlakson was born in San Francisco, California in 1949. 
He worked as a Merchant Marine during the Vietnam War. He 
earned his Bachelor and Master of Arts degrees in 1971 and 1977, 
respectively, from the University of California, Berkeley. Before 
entering politics, he was a science teacher in the San Francisco 
area. He was elected to the city council in Antioch in 1978, and 
since then has held seats in both the California State Assembly, 
from 1996 through 2000, and the California State Senate, from 
2000–2008. At that time, he was not able to run for State Senate 
again because of term limit rules. In 2008, he once more ran for 

160 Biographical Sketches
State Assembly and regained his old seat. He will be able to 
serve one final term in the Assembly, but cannot run for reelec-
tion, as he will have reached the maximum Assembly term limit 
as well. 
 During his time in office, Torlakson has focused on many is-
sues. From fitness, to education, to consumer protection,  Torlakson 
has made an impact on the people of California. He was respon-
sible for proposed Assembly Bill 1862 in 2000 that called for the 
creation of a statewide database of identity theft victims. The bill 
was signed by Governor Gray Davis in 2000. It required the De-
partment of Justice to establish and maintain the database of iden-
tity theft victims. The database is designed to help victims clear 
their names and, due to its centralized nature, allows for easier 
access to records of identity theft victims, thus allowing for easier 
verification that a person has, indeed, been a victim of identity 
theft. 
 Wyland, Mark (1946–) 
State Senator (R-Calif.) 
 Mark Wyland was born in Escondido, California in 1946. He 
earned a Bachelor of Arts degree from Pomona College and a 
Master of Arts degree from Columbia University. He began his 
government career as a member of the Escondido Union School 
District Board, where he served from 1997 until 2000. He then ran 
for the California State Assembly and was elected in 2000. He re-
mained a member of the State Assembly until 2006, when he was 
elected to the California State Senate. 
 As a member of the California state legislature, Wyland 
has sought to protect the rights of consumers and to protect 
them from identity theft. Wyland introduced Assembly Bill 245 
(AB 245) in 2001. The Act, approved by the governor in Octo-
ber 2001, was created to give law enforcement and prosecu-
tors more leeway regarding the arrest and prosecution of those 
suspected of identity theft. Wyland realized that identity theft 
may not be committed by a stranger to the victim. The previous 
wording of the penal code required that, in order to be charged 
with  identity theft, the perpetrator must have used the personal 
information of the victim for unlawful purposes and must have 
received the information without the victim’s consent. The new 

Biographical Sketches 161
law allows for prosecution to take place even when the infor-
mation was obtained with the victim’s consent. Thus, the act 
of using that information for unlawful purposes is enough to 
constitute the crime of identity theft. Wyland also proposed As-
sembly Bill 946 (AB 946), which called for tougher penalties and 
fines for those convicted of identity theft. Although this bill did 
not pass, it demonstrates Wyland’s continued commitment to 
the fight against identity theft. 


163
 6 
 T
his chapter was designed to allow readers to access some of 
the key documents pertaining to identity theft; it presents 
pertinent information regarding the Federal Trade Commis-
sion and legislation that has been passed relating to identity 
theft. 
 Executive Summary Consumer Fraud 
and Identity Theft Complaint Data 
January–December 2008  
 The Federal Trade Commission collects identity theft complaints from 
victims and compiles annual statistical reports of that data. Following 
is an executive summary of the data collected by the Federal Trade Com-
mission during 2008. 
 • The Consumer Sentinel Network (CSN) now contains over 
7.2 million complaints, and over 5.8 million do-not-call 
complaints. 
 • The CSN received over 1.2 million complaints during calendar 
year 2008: 52% fraud complaints; 26% identity theft complaints; 
and 22% other types of complaints. This year’s report is the first 
to include the other types of complaints. 
 • Identity theft was the number one complaint category in the 
CSN for calendar year 2008 with 26% of the overall complaints, 
followed by Third Party and Creditor Debt Collection (9%); 
Shop-at-Home and Catalog Sales (4%); Internet Services (4%); 
 Data and Documents 

164 Data and Documents
Foreign Money Offers and Counterfeit Check Scams (3%); 
Credit Bureaus, Information Furnishers and Report Users 
(3%); Prizes, Sweepstakes and Lotteries (3%); Television and 
Electronic Media (2%); Banks and Lenders (2%); and Telecom 
Equipment and Mobile Services (2%). The complete ranking 
of all thirty complaint categories is listed on page six of this 
report. 
 Fraud 
 • A total of 643,195 CSN 2008 complaints are fraud-related. 
Consumers reported paying over $1.8 billion in those fraud 
complaints; the median amount paid was $440. Eighty-four 
percent of the consumers reporting fraud also reported an 
amount paid. 
 • Fifty-eight percent of all fraud complaints reported the method 
of initial contact. Of those complaints, 52% said email, while 
another 11% said an Internet website. Only 7% of those 
consumers reported the phone as the initial point of contact. 
 • Colorado is the state with the highest per capita rate of reported 
fraud and other types of complaints, followed by Maryland and 
Nevada. 
 Identity Theft 
 • Credit card fraud (20%) was the most common form of 
reported identity theft followed by government documents/
benefits fraud (15%), employment fraud (15%), and phone or 
utilities fraud (13%).Other significant categories of identity 
theft reported by victims were bank fraud (11%) and loan 
fraud (4%). 
 • Government documents/benefits fraud is now the second 
most common reported type of identity theft after credit card 
fraud. Fraudulent tax return-related identity theft, a subtype of 
government documents/benefits fraud, has increased nearly six 
percentage points since calendar year 2006. 
 • Electronic fund transfer-related identity theft continues to be 
the most frequently reported type of identity theft bank fraud 
during calendar year 2008, despite declining since calendar year 
2006. 
 • Arizona is the state with the highest per capita rate of reported 
identity theft complaints, followed by California and Florida. 
 Federal Trade Commission. 2009.  Consumer sentinel network data book for 
January–December 2008. http://www.ftc.gov/sentinel/reports/sentinel-
annual-reports/sentinel-cy2008.pdf. Accessed April 3, 2009. 

President’s Identity Theft Task Force 165
 President’s Identity Theft Task Force  
 The following are the recommendations made by the President’s Identity 
Theft Task Force in April 2007. Based on the recommendations listed 
below, many changes have taken place within the government concern-
ing how personal information is handled, the assistance and protection 
victims receive, and the investigation of incidents of identity theft. 
 President’s Identity Theft Task Force Summary of Interim 
Recommendations Prevention 
 Improving Government Handling of Sensitive Personal Data 
 Recommendation 1: The Task Force recommends that the Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB) issue to all federal agencies the at-
tached Task Force guidance that covers (a) the factors that should gov-
ern whether and how to give notice to affected individuals in the event 
of a government agency data breach that poses a risk of identity theft, 
and (b) the factors that should be considered in deciding whether to 
offer services such as free credit monitoring. 
 Recommendation 2: To ensure that government agencies improve 
their data security programs, the Task Force recommends that OMB and 
the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), through the interagency 
effort already underway to identify ways to strengthen the ability of all 
agencies to identify and defend against threats, correct vulnerabilities, and 
manage risks: (a) outline best practices in the areas of automated tools, 
training, processes, and standards that would enable agencies to improve 
their security and privacy programs, and (b) develop a list of the top 10 or 
20 “mistakes” to avoid in order to protect government information. 
 Recommendation 3: To limit the unnecessary use in the public sec-
tor of Social Security numbers (SSNs), the most valuable consumer infor-
mation for identity thieves, the Task Force recommends the following: 
 • The Office of Personnel Management (OPM), in conjunction 
with other agencies, should accelerate its review of the use of 
SSNs in its collection of human resource data from agencies and 
on OPM-issued papers and electronic forms, and take steps to 
eliminate, restrict, or conceal their use (including the assignment 
of employee identification numbers, where practicable). 
 • OPM should develop and issue policy guidance to the federal 
human capital management community on the appropriate and 
inappropriate use of an employee’s SSN in employee records, 
including the proper way to restrict, conceal, or mask SSNs in 
employee records and human resource management information 
systems. 

166 Data and Documents
 • OMB should require all federal agencies to review their use of 
SSNs to determine where such use can be eliminated, restricted, 
or concealed in agency business processes, systems, and paper 
and electronic forms. 
 Recommendation 4: To allow agencies to respond quickly to data 
breaches, including by sharing information about potentially affected 
individuals with other agencies and entities that can assist in the re-
sponse, the Task Force recommends that all federal agencies, to the 
extent consistent with applicable law, publish a new “routine use” for 
their systems of records under the Privacy Act, modeled after the at-
tached “routine use” recently drafted by the Department of Justice, that 
would facilitate the disclosure of information in the course of respond-
ing to a breach of federal data. 
 Improved Authentication Methods 
 Recommendation 5: Because developing reliable methods of authen-
ticating the identities of individuals would make it harder for identity 
thieves to access existing accounts and open new accounts using other 
individuals’ information, the Task Force should hold a workshop or 
series of workshops, involving academics, industry, and entrepreneurs, 
focused on developing and promoting improved means of authenticat-
ing the identities of individuals. 
 Victim Assistance 
 Recommendation 6: To allow identity theft victims to recover for the 
value of time they spend in attempting to remediate the harms suffered, 
the Task Force recommends that Congress amend the criminal restitu-
tion statutes to allow for restitution from a criminal defendant to an 
identity theft victim, in an amount equal to the value of time reasonably 
spent by the victim attempting to remediate the intended or actual harm 
incurred from the identity theft offense. 
 Law Enforcement 
 Recommendation 7: To ensure that victims can readily obtain the police 
reports that they need to take steps to prevent the misuse of their per-
sonal information by identity thieves, and to ensure that their complaint 
data is entered in a standardized format that will allow complaints to 
flow into a central complaint database and that thereby would assist 
law enforcement officers in responding to such complaints, the FTC, 
with support from the Task Force, will develop a universal police report, 
which an identity theft victim can complete, print, and take to any local 
law enforcement agency for verification and incorporation into the 
police department’s report system. 

President’s Identity Theft Task Force 167
 Improving Government Handling of Sensitive Personal Data 
 1. Establishing a Data Breach Policy for the Public Sector 
 Identity theft and related harms are a consequence of sensitive in-
formation about consumers that criminals obtain through theft or other 
improper means. In many cases, providing notice to the affected indi-
viduals can help prevent or mitigate the harms to consumers. Notice 
permits consumers to take protective actions, while also allowing rel-
evant private sector entities to assist the consumers. Appropriate notice 
can also enable law enforcement to investigate, punish, and deter crime. 
At the same time, however, unnecessary or excessive breach notification 
can overwhelm the public and impose undue burdens and costs on con-
sumers, as well as on government agencies. Several federal government 
agencies have suffered high-profile security breaches involving sensitive 
consumer data over the past several months. These and other agencies 
have faced difficult decisions about when and how to notify the public 
of such incidents, and whether the agencies should offer free credit 
monitoring or other services to those who may be affected. Federal 
agencies need guidance in how to make these important decisions. 
 Recommendation 1: The Task Force recommends that the Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB) issue the attached guidance memoran-
dum, advising federal agencies on steps to take in the event of a com-
promise of data. The Task Force has developed and formally approved 
a set of guidelines, produced in Attachment A, that provides the factors 
that should be considered in deciding whether, how, and when to in-
form affected individuals of the loss of personal data that can contribute 
to identity theft, and whether to offer services such as free credit moni-
toring to the persons affected. 
 2. Improving Data Security in the Public Sector 
 The high-profile data breaches suffered by several federal agencies 
have focused attention on whether the government is doing enough to 
secure the massive amounts of data held by federal agencies as part of 
their core missions. The President’s Management Agenda (PMA) Score-
card, OMB reports to Congress, Congress’ annual security report card, 
Government  Accountability Office reports, and many agency Inspector 
General (IG) reports show that agency performance in both informa-
tion privacy and security is uneven. Common findings are that agencies 
would benefit from increased sharing of best practices, group purchases 
of automated tools and training courses, and development of a more 
effective common curriculum for training. OMB and the Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) are already leading an interagency Informa-
tion Systems Security Line of Business (ISS LOB) effort to explore ways 
to address these issues, including to identify and defend against threats, 
correct vulnerabilities, and manage risks. The ISS LOB can be a useful 
forum for developing best practices and a list of practices that should be 
avoided in order to protect government information. 

168 Data and Documents
 Recommendation 2: To ensure that government agencies improve 
their data security programs, the Task Force recommends that OMB and 
DHS enhance the activities of the ISS LOB. Specifically, the Task Force 
recommends that the ISS LOB should (a) outline best practices in the 
area of automated tools, training, processes, and standards that would 
enable agencies to improve their security and privacy programs, and 
(b) develop a list of the top 10 or 20 “mistakes” to avoid in order to 
 protect information held by the government. 
 3.  Decreasing the Use of Social Security Numbers 
by the Public Sector 
 One way to reduce the incidence of identity theft is to make it more 
difficult for criminals to obtain consumer information. Currently, the 
most valuable consumer information identity thieves can find is the 
Social Security Number (SSN). SSNs are key to assuming another’s 
identity because they are used to match consumers with their credit 
histories and many government benefits. 
 Consequently, if federal agencies were to eliminate unnecessary 
uses of SSNs, they could reduce the opportunities for unauthorized use 
by identity thieves. The Office of Personnel Management (OPM), which 
issues or approves many of the federal forms and procedures using the 
SSN, and OMB, which oversees the management and administrative 
practices of federal agencies, can play pivotal roles in restricting the un-
necessary use of SSNs, offering guidance on potential substitutes that 
would be of equal use to the agencies but of no use to identity thieves, 
and establishing greater consistency when the use of SSNs is unavoid-
able. 
 Recommendation 3: To limit the unnecessary use in the public 
sector of SSNs, the most valuable consumer information for identity 
thieves, the Task Force recommends the following: 
 Recommendation 3a: OPM should accelerate its review of the use 
of SSNs in its collection of human resource data from agencies and on 
OPM-based papers and electronic forms, and take steps to eliminate, 
restrict, or conceal their use (including the assignment of employee 
identification numbers, where practicable). If necessary to implement 
this recommendation, Executive Order 9397, effective 11/23/1943, 
which requires federal agencies to use SSNs in “any system of perma-
nent account numbers pertaining to individuals,” should be partially 
rescinded. It should also be noted that steps are already being taken to 
facilitate implementation of this recommendation. This month, each 
OPM program office designated staff to review the use of SSNs in that 
office, and OPM is prepared to complete its inventory of forms, pro-
cedures, and systems that currently display SSNs by October 13, 2006. 
This new inventory will be the basis for OPM’s actions to change, 
eliminate, or mask the use of SSNs on OPM approved/authorized 
forms. 

President’s Identity Theft Task Force 169
 Recommendation 3b: OPM should develop and issue policy guid-
ance to the federal human capital management community on the 
appropriate and inappropriate use of an employee’s SSN in employee 
records, including the appropriate way to restrict, conceal, or mask SSNs 
in employee records and human resource management information sys-
tems. OPM already has begun work to implement this recommendation, 
such as by working to establish a unique employee identifier that can be 
used in human resource and payroll systems rather than SSNs. Pursuant 
to the Task Force’s recommendation, OPM is also prepared in September 
2006 to begin consulting with a working group of agencies to develop 
a new OPM policy regarding the use of a unique employee identifier 
and limitations on the use of SSNs. The policy would include instruc-
tions on when SSNs can be displayed, when SSNs must be masked in 
employee records, and when SSNs must be masked on human resource 
and payroll system computer screens. The policy could be drafted by 
November 1, 2006 and would be issued by May 2007, following internal 
coordination and comment by agencies. OPM would then be prepared 
to work with the various human resource and payroll systems to imple-
ment the changes required by any new policy, with a phased-in imple-
mentation expected to take up to 18 months to complete. 
 Recommendation 3c: OMB should require all federal agencies to 
review their use of SSNs to determine the circumstances under which 
such use can be eliminated, restricted, or concealed in agency business 
processes, systems, and paper and electronic forms, other than those 
authorized or approved by OPM. Already, OMB has developed a sur-
vey instrument to be in a position to implement this recommendation, 
which OMB could issue to all agencies this year. To add to this effort, 
and to ensure consistency, the Task Force will identify factors that agen-
cies should take into consideration in determining whether the use of 
the SSN is essential to the agency’s mission and necessary to ensure pro-
gram integrity or to maintain national security. The Task Force will also 
evaluate the availability of practical alternatives to use of the SSN. 
 4.  Publication of a “Routine Use” for Disclosure 
of Information Following a Breach 
 A federal agency’s ability to respond quickly and effectively in the 
event of a breach of sensitive personal data is critical to its efforts to 
prevent or minimize any consequent harms. An effective response may 
include disclosure of information regarding the breach to those indi-
viduals affected by it. Similarly, expeditiously notifying persons and en-
tities in a position to cooperate (either by assisting in informing affected 
individuals or by actively preventing or minimizing harms from the 
breach) will help mitigate consequences of a breach. However, the very 
information that may be most necessary to disclose to such persons and 
entities will often be information maintained by federal agencies that is 
subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. § 552a. Critically, the Privacy 

170 Data and Documents
Act prohibits the disclosure of any record in a system of records, by any 
means of communication to any person or agency, unless the subject in-
dividual has given written consent or unless the disclosure falls within 
one of twelve statutory exceptions. See 5 U.S.C. §§ 552a(b)(1)-(12). 
 To address this issue, federal agencies could, in accordance with 
the Privacy Act exception set forth in subsection § 552a(b)(3), publish 
a “routine use” that specifically permits the disclosure of information 
in connection with response and remedial efforts in the event of a data 
breach. Such a “routine use” would serve to protect the interests of 
the people whole information is at risk by allowing agencies to take 
appropriate steps to facilitate a timely and effective response, thereby 
improving their ability to prevent, minimize, or remedy any harms that 
may result from a compromise of data maintained in their systems of 
records. For example, such a routine use would permit an agency that 
has lost data such as bank account numbers to quickly share that infor-
mation with the appropriate financial institutions, which could assist 
in monitoring for bank fraud and in identifying the account holders, 
thereby facilitating the agency’s ability promptly to notify the affected 
individuals. The Department of Justice recently drafted such a “routine 
use,” which is reproduced in Attachment B, and which the Task Force 
offers as a model for other federal agencies to use in developing and 
publishing their own “routine uses” as soon as practicable. 
 Recommendation 4: To allow agencies to respond quickly to data 
breaches, including by sharing information about potentially affected 
individuals with other agencies and entities that can assist in the re-
sponse, the Task Force recommends that all federal agencies, to the 
extent consistent with applicable law, publish a new “routine use” for 
their systems of records under the Privacy Act, modeled after the at-
tached “routine use” recently drafted by the Department of Justice, that 
would facilitate the disclosure of information to other agencies, entities, 
and persons in the course of responding to a breach of federal data. 
 Improved Authentication Methods 
 5. Developing Alternate Means of Authenticating Identities 
 In addition to its widespread use by government, the SSN is used 
throughout the private sector. In particular, the SSN often is used for the 
dual purposes of identification (to match individuals to records of their 
information) and authentication (to prove that individuals are who they 
say they are). Two factors combine to heighten the risk of identity theft: 
the ready availability of SSNs to identity thieves as a result of their ubiq-
uitous use, and the SSN’s use as a sole or primary means of authenticat-
ing individuals to open new accounts or obtain other benefits. 
 Both the private and public sectors have made strides in develop-
ing improved means of verification and authentication. For example, the 
Customer Identification Program already requires financial institutions 
regulated by the federal banking agencies and the SEC to develop and 

President’s Identity Theft Task Force 171
implement procedures for verifying customers’ identities when opening 
new accounts. Technology also can substantially improve the authenti-
cation process by, for example, the use of biometrics to authenticate the 
consumer’s identity, making it less likely that a criminal can gain access 
to another’s account. However, many questions remain about emerging 
technologies, consumer acceptance, and system implementation. 
 One way to sharpen the focus on improving the means for authen-
ticating the identities of individuals would be to hold public workshops 
that bring together academics, industry, and entrepreneurs who are 
developing better authentication systems. These experts can discuss the 
existing problem, examine the limitations of current processes of au-
thentication, and probe viable solutions that will reduce identity fraud. 
As an initial step, the FTC and other Task Force member agencies are 
prepared to announce in the fall of 2006 that they will host such a work-
shop in the early part of 2007. 
 Recommendation 5: Because developing reliable methods of au-
thenticating the identities of individuals would make it harder for iden-
tity thieves to open new accounts or access existing accounts using other 
individuals’ information, the Task Force should hold a workshop or 
series of workshops, involving academics, industry, and entrepreneurs, 
focused on developing and promoting improved means of authenticat-
ing the identities of individuals. 
 Victim Assistance 
 6. Restitution for Identity Theft Victims 
 One reason that identity theft can be so destructive to its victims 
is the sheer amount of time and energy often required to remediate 
the consequences of the offense. This may be time spent clearing credit 
reports with credit-reporting agencies, disputing charges with indi-
vidual creditors, or monitoring credit reports for additional impacts of 
the theft. The FTC estimated in 2003, based on the results of its Identity 
Theft Survey Report, that the average identity theft victim spends 30 
hours resolving the problems created by identity theft. Those individu-
als who were victimized most seriously (from both the false opening of 
new accounts in their names  and the unauthorized use of their validly-
issued credit cards) spent an average of 60 hours resolving the prob-
lems. Overall, according to the survey, approximately 297 million hours 
were expended in one year by consumers attempting to resolve identity 
theft-related problems. 
 While restitution is available for direct pecuniary costs of identity 
theft offenses, the federal restitution statutes, 18 U.S.C. § § 3663(b) and 
3663A(b), do not provide for compensation for this time spent by con-
sumers rectifying accounts and avoiding more harm. Moreover, courts 
have interpreted the restitution statutes in such a way that would likely 
preclude the recovery of such amounts from criminal defendants, absent 
explicit statutory authorization. 

172 Data and Documents
 In order to better remediate the harm caused by identity theft, the 
Department of Justice has drafted amendments to the restitution stat-
utes, reproduced in Attachment C, that would allow a victim to obtain 
restitution from a criminal defendant for the time reasonably spent 
trying to rectify the consequences of the offense. Under these proposed 
amendments, the district court judge would determine the amount of 
time reasonably spent and the value of the victim’s time. The Depart-
ment of Justice can propose that Congress adopt these amendments 
 immediately. 
 Recommendation 6: The Task Force recommends that Congress 
amend the criminal restitution statutes, 18 U.S.C. §§ 3663(b) and 
3663A(b), based on the attached proposal developed by the Depart-
ment of Justice, to allow for restitution from a criminal defendant to an 
identity theft victim, in an amount equal to the value of time reasonably 
spent by the victim attempting to remediate the intended or actual harm 
incurred from the identity theft offense. 
 Law Enforcement 
 7. Development of a Universal Police Report 
 Victims of identity theft often need police reports documenting the 
misuse of their information in order to recover fully from the effects of 
the crime. For example, identity theft victims can use a detailed police 
report as an “identity theft report” under the Fair and Accurate Credit 
Transactions Act to request that fraudulent information on their credit 
report be blocked, or to obtain a seven-year fraud alert on their credit 
file. Further, identity theft victims also must have a police report to ob-
tain documents relating to fraudulent applications and transactions, and 
creditors may require a police report before establishing the victim’s 
 bona fides in challenging a fraudulent account or purchase. Filing a 
police report also makes it more likely that law enforcement will pursue 
an investigation of the identity theft. 
 Some victims report, however, that they are unable to get a police 
report. FTC complaint data show that during the last three years, about 
25% of victims of new-account fraud who sought police reports were 
not able to obtain them, in part because of overtaxed local police depart-
ments and the time involved in preparing what often can be a highly 
detailed document. Simplifying the process of writing and receiving a 
police report would both relieve the burden on local law enforcement 
and allow victims to more easily repair the damage to their credit from 
the crime. A universal law enforcement report that the victim could 
complete online and take to the local police department would help 
achieve this goal. Additionally, the data from such standardized reports 
would be in a format that is used by the FTC’s Identity Theft Data 
Clearinghouse, increasing the ability of law enforcement to effectively 
spot significant patterns of criminal activity. 

Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act  173
 At present, the FTC has an online complaint form that is used to 
enter data into its Identity Theft Data Clearinghouse, which is in turn 
made available to law enforcement nationwide through Consumer Sen-
tinel. The FTC is also prepared to develop a revised online complaint 
form at www.ftc.gov/idtheft that victims can complete, print, and take 
to a local law enforcement agency for verification and incorporation into 
the police department’s report system. The victim will then have a valid, 
detailed police report; the police department will have a record of the 
crime; and the victim’s complaint information will have been entered 
into the FTC’s Identity Theft Data Clearinghouse. The Public Sector 
Liaison Committee of the International Association of Chiefs of Police 
supports and has been involved in this effort. 
 Recommendation 7: To ensure that victims can readily file the 
 police reports necessary to allow them to prevent the continued 
misuse of their personal information, and to assist law enforcement 
in analyzing significant patterns of criminal activity in investigat-
ing identity theft complaints, the FTC, with support from Task Force 
members, should develop a universal police report, which an identity 
theft victim can complete, print, and take to any local law enforcement 
agency for verification and incorporation into the police department’s 
report system. 
 President’s Identity Theft Task Force. 2007.  Summary of interim 
recommendations: Prevention. www.ftc.gov/os/2006/09/060916interimre
commend.pdf. Accessed May 3, 2007. 
 Identity Theft and 
Assumption Deterrence Act  
 This legislation established identity theft as a felony and set forth pen-
alties associated with it. Additionally, the Identity Theft and Assump-
tion Deterrence Act required the Federal Trade Commission to collect 
complaints directly from victims and share that information with law 
enforcement agencies and other specified organizations. 
 Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act As 
amended by Public Law 105–318, 112 Stat. 3007 
(Oct. 30, 1998) An Act 
 To amend chapter 47 of title 18, United States Code, relating to identity 
fraud, and for other purposes. [NOTE: Oct. 30, 1998—[H.R. 4151] 

174 Data and Documents
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United 
States of America in Congress assembled , [NOTE: Identity Theft and As-
sumption Deterrence Act of 1998.] 
 Sec. 
 001. Short Title 
 002. Constitutional Authority to Enact this Legislation. 
 003. Identity Theft 
 004.  Amendment of Federal Sentencing Guidelines for Offenses 
Under Section 1028 
 005.  Centralized Complaint and Consumer Education Service for 
Victims of Identity Theft 
 006.  Technical Amendments to Title 18, United States Code 
 007.  Redaction of Ethics Reports Filed by Judicial Officers and 
Employees 
 § 001. Short Title. [NOTE: 18 USC 1001 note.] 
 This Act may be cited as the “Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence 
Act of 1998”. 
 § 002. Constitutional Authority to Enact this Legislation. 
[NOTE: 18 USC 1028 note.] 
 The constitutional authority upon which this Act rests is the power of 
Congress to regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the sev-
eral States, and the authority to make all laws which shall be necessary 
and proper for carrying into execution the powers vested by the Con-
stitution in the Government of the United States or in any department 
or officer thereof, as set forth in article I, section 8 of the United States 
Constitution. 
 § 003. Identity Theft. 
 (a)  Establishment of Offense.—Section 1028(a) of title 18, United 
States Code, is amended— 
 (b)  in paragraph (5), by striking “or” at the end;
(2) in paragraph (6), by adding “or” at the end;
(3)  in the flush matter following paragraph (6), by striking “or 
attempts to do so,”; and
(4)  by inserting after paragraph (6) the following: 
 “(7)  knowingly transfers or uses, without lawful authority, a 
means of identification of another person with the intent 
to commit, or to aid or abet, any unlawful activity that 
constitutes a violation of Federal law, or that constitutes a 
felony under any applicable State or local law;”. 

Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act  175
 (b)  Penalties.—Section 1028(b) of title 18, United States Code, is 
amended— 
 (b) in paragraph (1)— 
 (A) in subparagraph (B), by striking “or” at the end; 
 (B) in subparagraph (C), by adding “or” at the end; and 
 (C) by adding at the end the following: 
 “(D)  an offense under paragraph (7) of such subsection 
that involves the transfer or use of 1 or more means 
of identification if, as a result of the offense, any 
individual committing the offense obtains anything of 
value aggregating $1,000 or more during any 1-year 
period;”; 
 (2) in paragraph (2)— 
 (A)  in subparagraph (A), by striking “or transfer of an 
identification document or” and inserting “, transfer, 
or use of a means of identification, an identification 
document, or a”; and 
 (B)  in subparagraph (B), by inserting “or (7)” after “(3)”; 
 (3) by amending paragraph (3) to read as follows: 
 “(3)  a f2ine under this title or imprisonment for not more than 20 
years, or both, if the offense is committed— 
 “(A)  to facilitate a drug trafficking crime (as defined in 
section 929(a)(2)); 
 “(B)  in connection with a crime of violence (as defined in 
section 924(c)(3)); or 
 “(C)  after a prior conviction under this section becomes 
final;”; 
 (4) in paragraph (4), by striking “and” at the end; 
 (5) by redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (6); and 
 (6) by inserting after paragraph (4) the following: 
 “(5)  in the case of any offense under subsection (a), 
forfeiture to the United States of any personal property 
used or intended to be used to commit the offense; 
and”. 
 I Circumstances.—Section 1028I of title 18, United States 
Code, is amended by striking paragraph (3) and inserting 
the following: 
 “(3) either— 
 “(A)  the production, transfer, possession, or use prohibited 
by this section is in or affects interstate or foreign 
commerce; or 
 “(B)  the means of identification, identification document, 
false identification document, or document- making 
implement is transported in the mail in the course of 
the production, transfer, possession, or use prohibited 
by this section.”. 

176 Data and Documents
 (d)  Definitions.—Subsection (d) of section 1028 of title 18, 
United States Code, is amended to read as follows: 
 “(d) In this section— 
 “(1)  the term ‘document-making implement’ means 
any implement, impression, electronic device, or 
computer hardware or software, that is specifically 
configured or primarily used for making an 
identification document, a false identification 
document, or another document-making implement; 
 “(2)  the term ‘identification document’ means a 
document made or issued by or under the authority 
of the United States Government, a State, political 
subdivision of a State, a foreign government, 
political subdivision of a foreign government, an 
international governmental or an international quasi-
governmental organization which, when completed 
with information concerning a particular individual, 
is of a type intended or commonly accepted for the 
purpose of identification of individuals; 
 “(3)  the term ‘means of identification’ means any name 
or number that may be used, alone or in conjunction 
with any other information, to identify a specific 
individual, including any— 
 “(A)  name, social security number, date of birth, official 
State or government issued driver’s license or 
identification number, alien registration number, 
government passport number, employer or 
taxpayer identification number; 
 “(B)  unique biometric data, such as fingerprint, voice 
print, retina or iris image, or other unique physical 
representation; 
 “(C)  unique electronic identification number, address, or 
routing code; or 
 “(D)  telecommunication identifying information or 
access device (as defined in section 1029(e)); 
 “(4)  the term ‘personal identification card’ means an 
identification document issued by a State or local 
government solely for the purpose of identification; 
 “(5)  the term ‘produce’ includes alter, authenticate, or 
assemble; and 
 “(6)  the term ‘State’ includes any State of the United 
States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth 
of Puerto Rico, and any other commonwealth, 
possession, or territory of the United States.”. 
 (e)  Attempt and Conspiracy.—Section 1028 of title 18, United States 
Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: 

Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act  177
 “(f )  Attempt and Conspiracy.—Any person who attempts or 
conspires to commit any offense under this section shall 
be subject to the same penalties as those prescribed for 
the offense, the commission of which was the object of the 
attempt or conspiracy.”. 
 (f )  Forfeiture Procedures.—Section 1028 of title 18, United States 
Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: 
 “(g)  Forfeiture Procedures.—The forfeiture of property under 
this section, including any seizure and disposition of 
the property and any related judicial or administrative 
proceeding, shall be governed by the provisions of section 
413 (other than subsection (d) of that section) of the 
Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 
1970 (21 U.S.C. 853).” 
 (g)  Rule of Construction.—Section 1028 of title 18, United States 
Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: 
 “(h)  Rule of Construction.—For purpose of subsection (a)(7), 
a single identification document or false identification 
document that contains 1 or more means of identification 
shall be construed to be 1 means of identification.” 
 (h)  Conforming Amendments.—Chapter 47 of title 18, United 
States Code, is amended— 
 (1)  in the heading for section 1028, by adding “ and 
information “ at the end; and 
 (2)  in the table of sections at the beginning of the chapter, in the 
item relating to section 1028, by adding “and information” 
at the end. 
 § 004. Amendment of Federal Sentencing Guidelines for Offenses Under 
Section 1028. [NOTE: 28 USC 994 note.] 
 (a)  In General.—Pursuant to its authority under section 994(p) 
of title 28, United States Code, the United States Sentencing 
Commission shall review and amend the Federal sentencing 
guidelines and the policy statements of the Commission, as 
appropriate, to provide an appropriate penalty for each offense 
under section 1028 of title 18, United States Code, as amended 
by this Act. 
 (b)  Factors for Consideration.—In carrying out subsection (a), 
the United States Sentencing Commission shall consider, with 
respect to each offense described in subsection (a)— 
 (1)  the extent to which the number of victims (as defined in 
section 3663A(a) of title 18, United States Code) involved in 
the offense, including harm to reputation, inconvenience, 

178 Data and Documents
and other difficulties resulting from the offense, is an 
adequate measure for establishing penalties under the 
Federal sentencing guidelines; 
 (2)  the number of means of identification, identification 
documents, or false identification documents (as those 
terms are defined in section 1028(d) of title 18, United States 
Code, as amended by this Act) involved in the offense, is 
an adequate measure for establishing penalties under the 
Federal sentencing guidelines; 
 (3)  the extent to which the value of the loss to any individual 
caused by the offense is an adequate measure for 
establishing penalties under the Federal sentencing 
guidelines; 
 (4)  the range of conduct covered by the offense; 
 (5)  the extent to which sentencing enhancements within the 
Federal sentencing guidelines and the court’s authority to 
sentence above the applicable guideline range are adequate 
to ensure punishment at or near the maximum penalty for 
the most egregious conduct covered by the offense; 
 (6)  the extent to which Federal sentencing guidelines sentences 
for the offense have been constrained by statutory 
maximum penalties; 
 (7)  the extent to which Federal sentencing guidelines for the 
offense adequately achieve the purposes of sentencing set 
forth in section 3553(a)(2) of title 18, United States Code; 
and 
 (8)  any other factor that the United States Sentencing 
Commission considers to be appropriate. 
 § 005. Centralized Complaint and Consumer Education Service 
for Victims of Identity Theft. [NOTE: 18 USC 1028 note.] 
 (a)  In <<NOTE: Deadline.>> General.—Not later than 1 year after 
the date of enactment of this Act, the Federal Trade Commission 
shall establish procedures to— 
 (1)  log and acknowledge the receipt of complaints by 
individuals who certify that they have a reasonable belief 
that 1 or more of their means of identification (as defined in 
section 1028 of title 18, United States Code, as amended by 
this Act) have been assumed, stolen, or otherwise unlawfully 
acquired in violation of section 1028 of title 18, United States 
Code, as amended by this Act; 
 (2)  provide informational materials to individuals described in 
paragraph (1); and 
 (3)  refer complaints described in paragraph (1) to appropriate 
entities, which may include referral to— 

Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act  179
 (A) the 3 major national consumer reporting agencies; and 
 (B) appropriate law enforcement agencies for potential law 
enforcement action. 
 (b)  Authorization of Appropriations.—There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this 
section. 
 § 006. Technical Amendments to Title 18, United States Code. 
 (a)  Technical Correction Relating to Criminal Forfeiture 
Procedures.—Section 982(b)(1) of title 18, United States Code, 
is amended to read as follows: “(1) The forfeiture of property 
under this section, including any seizure and disposition 
of the property and any related judicial or administrative 
proceeding, shall be governed by the provisions of section 
413 (other than subsection (d) of that section) of the 
Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 
1970 (21 U.S.C. 853).” 
 (b)  Economic Espionage and Theft of Trade Secrets as Predicate 
Offenses for Wire Interception.—Section 2516(1)(a) of title 
18, United States Code, is amended by inserting “chapter 90 
(relating to protection of trade secrets),” after “to espionage.” 
 § 007. Redaction of Ethics Reports Filed by 
Judicial Officers and Employees. 
 Section 105(b) of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: 
 ”(3)  (A) This section does not require the immediate and uncondi-
tional availability of reports filed by an individual described in 
section 109(8) or 109(10) of this Act if a finding is made by the 
Judicial Conference, in consultation with United States Mar-
shall Service, that revealing personal and sensitive information 
could endanger that individual. 
 “(B)  A report may be redacted pursuant to this paragraph only— 
 “(i)  to the extent necessary to protect the individual who filed 
the report; and 
 “(ii)  for as long as the danger to such individual exists. 
 “I The Administrative Office of the United States Courts shall 
submit to the Committees on the Judiciary of the House of 
Representatives and of the Senate an annual report with respect 
to the operation of this paragraph including— 
 “(i)  the total number of reports redacted pursuant to this 
paragraph; 

180 Data and Documents
 “(ii)  the total number of individuals whose reports have been 
redacted pursuant to this paragraph; and 
 “(iii)  the types of threats against individuals whose reports are 
redacted, if appropriate. 
 “(D)  The Judicial Conference, in consultation with the Department 
of Justice, shall issue regulations setting forth the circum-
stances under which redaction is appropriate under this 
paragraph and the procedures for redaction. [NOTE: 
Regulations.] 
 “(E)  This paragraph shall expire on December 31, 2001, and apply 
to filings through calendar year 2001.” [NOTE: Expiration 
date.] 
 Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998 , as amended by 
Public Law 105-318, 112 Stat. 3007, 105th Cong., 2d sess. (October 30, 
1998). http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/D?c105:4:./temp/
~c105UybEJU::. Accessed April 9, 2009. 
 Title V of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley 
Act, 1999  
 The purpose of this federal legislation is to ensure that financial institu-
tions protect the privacy and sensitive information of their customers. To 
that end, Title V of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act mandates the financial 
industry to develop safeguards. The Act also provides customers with 
the ability to opt-out of having their information shared with third par-
ties other than those directly affiliated with the institution with which 
they do business. 
 Title V—Privacy Subtitle A—Disclosure of Nonpublic 
Personal Information 
 Sec. 501. Protection of Nonpublic Personal Information. 
 (a)  PRIVACY OBLIGATION POLICY.—It is the policy of the 
Congress that each financial institution has an affirmative and 
continuing obligation to respect the privacy of its customers and 
to protect the security and confidentiality of those customers’ 
nonpublic personal information. 
 (b)  FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS SAFEGUARDS.—In furtherance 
of the policy in subsection (a), each agency or authority 
described in section 505(a) shall establish appropriate standards 

Title V of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 1999  181
for the financial institutions subject to their jurisdiction relating 
to administrative, technical, and physical safeguards— 
 (1)  to insure the security and confidentiality of customer records 
and information; 
 (2)  to protect against any anticipated threats or hazards to the 
security or integrity of such records; and 
 (3)  to protect against unauthorized access to or use of such 
records or information which could result in substantial 
harm or inconvenience to any customer. 
 Sec. 502. Obligations with Respect to Disclosures 
of Personal Information. 
 (a)  NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.—Except as otherwise provided in 
this subtitle, a financial institution may not, directly or through 
any affiliate, disclose to a nonaffiliated third party any nonpublic 
personal information, unless such financial institution provides 
or has provided to the consumer a notice that complies with 
section 503. 
 (b)  OPT OUT.— 
 (1)  IN GENERAL.—A financial institution may not disclose 
nonpublic personal information to a nonaffiliated third party 
unless— 
 (A)  such financial institution clearly and conspicuously 
discloses to the consumer, in writing or in electronic 
form or other form permitted by the regulations 
prescribed under section 504, that such information may 
be disclosed to such third party; 
 (B)  the consumer is given the opportunity, before the time 
that such information is initially disclosed, to direct that 
such information not be disclosed to such third party; 
and 
 (C)  the consumer is given an explanation of how the 
consumer can exercise that nondisclosure option. 
 (2)  EXCEPTION.—This subsection shall not prevent a financial 
institution from providing nonpublic personal information 
to a nonaffiliated third party to perform services for or 
functions on behalf of the financial institution, including 
marketing of the financial institution’s own products or 
services, or financial products or services offered pursuant 
to joint agreements between two or more financial 
institutions that comply with the requirements imposed by 
the regulations prescribed under section 504, if the financial 
institution fully discloses the providing of such information 

182 Data and Documents
and enters into a contractual agreement with the third party 
that requires the third party to maintain the confidentiality 
of such information. 
 (c)  LIMITS ON REUSE OF INFORMATION.—Except as otherwise 
provided in this subtitle, a nonaffiliated third party that receives 
from a financial institution nonpublic personal information 
under this section shall not, directly or through an affiliate of 
such receiving third party, disclose such information to any 
other person that is a non-affiliated third party of both the 
financial institution and such receiving third party, unless such 
disclosure would be lawful if made directly to such other person 
by the financial institution. 
 (d)  LIMITATIONS ON THE SHARING OF ACCOUNT NUMBER 
INFORMATION FOR MARKETING PURPOSES.—A financial 
institution shall not disclose, other than to a consumer reporting 
agency, an account number or similar form of access number 
or access code for a credit card account, deposit account, or 
transaction account of a consumer to any nonaffiliated third 
party for use in telemarketing, direct mail marketing, or other 
marketing through electronic mail to the consumer. 
 (e)  GENERAL EXCEPTIONS.—Subsections (a) and (b) shall not 
prohibit the disclosure of nonpublic personal information— 
 (1)  as necessary to effect, administer, or enforce a transaction 
requested or authorized by the consumer, or in connection 
with— 
 (A)  servicing or processing a financial product or service 
requested or authorized by the consumer; 
 (B)  maintaining or servicing the consumer’s account with 
the financial institution, or with another entity as part of 
a private label credit card program or other extension of 
credit on behalf of such entity; or 
 (C)  a proposed or actual securitization, secondary market 
sale (including sales of servicing rights), or similar 
transaction related to a transaction of the consumer; 
 (2) with the consent or at the direction of the consumer; 
 (3)  (A) to protect the confidentiality or security of the financial 
institution’s records pertaining to the consumer, the service 
or product, or the transaction therein; (B) to protect against or 
prevent actual or potential fraud, unauthorized transactions, 
claims, or other liability; (C) for required institutional risk 
control, or for resolving customer disputes or inquiries; 
(D) to persons holding a legal or beneficial interest relating 
to the consumer; or (E) to persons acting in a fiduciary or 
representative capacity on behalf of the consumer;

Title V of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 1999  183
(4)  to provide information to insurance rate advisory 
organizations, guaranty funds or agencies, applicable rating 
agencies of the financial institution, persons assessing the 
institution’s compliance with industry standards, and the 
institution’s attorneys, accountants, and auditors; 
 (5)  to the extent specifically permitted or required under other 
provisions of law and in accordance with the Right to 
Financial Privacy Act of 1978, to law enforcement agencies 
(including a Federal functional regulator, the Secretary of 
the Treasury with respect to subchapter II of chapter 53 
of title 31, United States Code, and chapter 2 of title I of 
Public Law 91–508 (12 U.S.C. 1951–1959), a State insurance 
authority, or the Federal Trade Commission), self-regulatory 
organizations, or for an investigation on a matter related to 
public safety; 
 (6)  (A) to a consumer reporting agency in accordance with the 
Fair Credit Reporting Act, or (B) from a consumer report 
reported by a consumer reporting agency; 
 (7)  in connection with a proposed or actual sale, merger, 
transfer, or exchange of all or a portion of a business or 
operating unit if the disclosure of nonpublic personal 
information concerns solely consumers of such business or 
unit; or 
 (8)  to comply with Federal, State, or local laws, rules, and other 
applicable legal requirements; to comply with a properly 
authorized civil, criminal, or regulatory investigation or 
subpoena or summons by Federal, State, or local authorities; 
or to respond to judicial process or government regulatory 
authorities having jurisdiction over the financial institution 
for examination, compliance, or other purposes as 
authorized by law. 
 Sec. 503. Disclosure of Institution Privacy Policy. 
 (a)  DISCLOSURE REQUIRED.—At the time of establishing a 
customer relationship with a consumer and not less than 
annually during the continuation of such relationship, a 
financial institution shall provide a clear and conspicuous 
disclosure to such consumer, in writing or in electronic form 
or other form permitted by the regulations prescribed under 
section 504, of such financial institution’s policies and practices 
with respect to— 
 (1)  disclosing nonpublic personal information to affiliates 
and nonaffiliated third parties, consistent with section 
502, including the categories of information that may be 
disclosed; 

184 Data and Documents
 (2)  disclosing nonpublic personal information of persons who 
have ceased to be customers of the financial institution; 
and 
 (3)  protecting the nonpublic personal information of consumers. 
Such disclosures shall be made in accordance with the 
regulations prescribed under section 504. 
 (b)  INFORMATION TO BE INCLUDED.—The disclosure required 
by subsection (a) shall include— 
 (1)  the policies and practices of the institution with respect to 
disclosing nonpublic personal information to nonaffiliated 
third parties, other than agents of the institution, consistent 
with section 502  of this subtitle, and including— 
 (A)  the categories of persons to whom the information is 
or may be disclosed, other than the persons to whom 
the information may be provided pursuant to section 
502(e); and 
 (B)  the policies and practices of the institution with respect 
to disclosing of nonpublic personal information of 
persons who have ceased to be customers of the 
financial institution; 
 (2)  the categories of nonpublic personal information that are 
collected by the financial institution; 
 (3)  the policies that the institution maintains to protect 
the confidentiality and security of nonpublic personal 
information in accordance with section 501; and 
 (4)  the disclosures required, if any, under section 603(d)(2)(A)
(iii) of the Fair Credit Reporting Act. 
 Sec. 504. Rulemaking. 
 (a) REGULATORY AUTHORITY.— 
 (1)  RULEMAKING.—The Federal banking agencies, the 
National Credit Union Administration, the Secretary of 
the Treasury, the Securities and Exchange Commission, 
and the Federal Trade Commission shall each prescribe, 
after consultation as appropriate with representatives of 
State insurance authorities designated by the National 
Association of Insurance Commissioners, such regulations 
as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this subtitle 
with respect to the financial institutions subject to their 
jurisdiction under section 505. 
 (2)  COORDINATION, CONSISTENCY, AND 
COMPARABILITY.—Each of the agencies and authorities 
required under paragraph (1) to prescribe regulations 
shall consult and coordinate with the other such agencies 

Title V of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 1999  185
and authorities for the purposes of assuring, to the extent 
possible, that the regulations prescribed by each such 
agency and authority are consistent and comparable with 
the regulations prescribed by the other such agencies and 
authorities. 
 (3)  PROCEDURES AND DEADLINE.—Such regulations shall 
be prescribed in accordance with applicable requirements of 
title 5, United States Code, and shall be issued in final form 
not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this 
Act. 
 (b) AUTHORITY TO GRANT EXCEPTIONS.—The regulations 
prescribed under subsection (a) may include such additional 
exceptions to subsections (a) through (d) of section 502 as are 
deemed consistent with the purposes of this subtitle. 
 Sec. 505. Enforcement. 
 (a) IN GENERAL.—This subtitle and the regulations prescribed 
thereunder shall be enforced by the Federal functional 
regulators, the State insurance authorities, and the Federal Trade 
Commission with respect to financial institutions and other 
persons subject to their jurisdiction under applicable law, as 
follows: 
 (1)  Under section 8 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, in the 
case of— 
 (A)  national banks, Federal branches and Federal agencies 
of foreign banks, and any subsidiaries of such entities 
(except brokers, dealers, persons providing insurance, 
investment companies, and investment advisers), 
by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency; 
(B) member banks of the Federal Reserve System 
(other than national banks), branches and agencies of 
foreign banks (other than Federal branches, Federal 
agencies, and insured State branches of foreign banks), 
commercial lending companies owned or controlled by 
foreign banks, organizations operating under section 
25 or 25A of the Federal Reserve Act, and bank holding 
companies and their nonbank subsidiaries or affiliates 
(except brokers, dealers, persons providing insurance, 
investment companies, and investment advisers), by 
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; 
(C) banks insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation (other than members of the Federal Reserve 
System), insured State branches of foreign banks, and 
any subsidiaries of such entities (except brokers, dealers, 
persons providing insurance, investment companies, 

186 Data and Documents
and investment advisers), by the Board of Directors 
of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; and 
(D) savings associations the deposits of which are 
insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 
and any subsidiaries of such savings associations 
(except brokers, dealers, persons providing insurance, 
investment companies, and investment advisers), by the 
Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision. 
 (2)  Under the Federal Credit Union Act, by the Board of the 
National Credit Union Administration with respect to any 
federally insured credit union, and any subsidiaries of such 
an entity. 
 (3)  Under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, by the Securities 
and Exchange Commission with respect to any broker or 
dealer. 
 (4)  Under the Investment Company Act of 1940, by the 
Securities and Exchange Commission with respect to 
investment companies. 
 (5)  Under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, by the Securities 
and Exchange Commission with respect to investment 
advisers registered with the Commission under such Act. 
 (6)  Under State insurance law, in the case of any person engaged 
in providing insurance, by the applicable State insurance 
authority of the State in which the person is domiciled, 
subject to section 104 of this Act. 
 (7)  Under the Federal Trade Commission Act, by the Federal 
Trade Commission for any other financial institution or other 
person that is not subject to the jurisdiction of any agency or 
authority under paragraphs (1) through (6) of this subsection. 
 (b) ENFORCEMENT OF SECTION 501.— 
 (1)  IN GENERAL.—Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
agencies and authorities described in subsection (a) shall 
implement the standards prescribed under section 501(b) 
in the same manner, to the extent practicable, as standards 
prescribed pursuant to section 39(a) of the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Act are implemented pursuant to such section. 
 (2)  EXCEPTION.—The agencies and authorities described in 
paragraphs (3), (4), (5), (6), and (7) of subsection (a) shall 
implement the standards prescribed under section 501(b) 
by rule with respect to the financial institutions and other 
persons subject to their respective jurisdictions under 
subsection (a). 
 (c)  ABSENCE OF STATE ACTION.—If a State insurance authority 
fails to adopt regulations to carry out this subtitle, such State 
shall not be eligible to override, pursuant to section 45(g)(2)(B)

Title V of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 1999  187
(iii) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, the insurance customer 
protection regulations prescribed by a Federal banking agency 
under section 45(a) of such Act. 
 (d)  DEFINITIONS.—The terms used in subsection (a)(1) that are not 
defined in this subtitle or otherwise defined in section 3(s) of the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Act shall have the same meaning as 
given in section 1(b) of the International Banking Act of 1978. 
 Sec. 506. Protection of Fair Credit Reporting Act. 
 (a) AMENDMENT.—Section 621 of the Fair Credit Reporting Act 
(15 U.S.C. 1681s) is amended— 
 (1)  in subsection (d), by striking everything following the end of 
the second sentence; and 
 (2)  by striking subsection (e) and inserting the following: 
 “(e) REGULATORY AUTHORITY.— 
 “(1)  The Federal banking agencies referred to in paragraphs 
(1) and (2) of subsection (b) shall jointly prescribe such 
regulations as necessary to carry out the purposes of 
this Act with respect to any persons identified under 
paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (b), and the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System shall have 
authority to prescribe regulations consistent with such 
joint regulations with respect to bank holding companies 
and affiliates (other than depository institutions and 
consumer reporting agencies) of such holding companies. 
 “(2)  The Board of the National Credit Union Administration 
shall prescribe such regulations as necessary to carry 
out the purposes of this Act with respect to any persons 
identified under paragraph (3) of subsection (b).” 
 (b)  CONFORMING AMENDMENT.—Section 621(a) of the Fair 
Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681s(a)) is amended by striking 
paragraph (4). 
 (c)  RELATION TO OTHER PROVISIONS.—Except for the 
amendments made by subsections (a) and (b), nothing in 
this title shall be construed to modify, limit, or supersede the 
operation of the Fair Credit Reporting Act, and no inference 
shall be drawn on the basis of the provisions of this title 
regarding whether information is transaction or experience 
information under section 603 of such Act. 
 Sec. 507. Relation to State Laws. 
 (a)  IN GENERAL.—This subtitle and the amendments made by 
this subtitle shall not be construed as superseding, altering, or 
affecting any statute, regulation, order, or interpretation in effect 
in any State, except to the extent that such statute, regulation, 

188 Data and Documents
order, or interpretation is inconsistent with the provisions of this 
subtitle, and then only to the extent of the inconsistency. 
 (b)  GREATER PROTECTION UNDER STATE LAW.— 
 For purposes of this section, a State statute, regulation, order, 
or interpretation is not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this subtitle if the protection such statute, regulation, order, or 
interpretation affords any person is greater than the protection 
provided under this subtitle and the amendments made by 
this subtitle, as determined by the Federal Trade Commission, 
after consultation with the agency or authority with jurisdiction 
under section 505(a) of either the person that initiated the 
complaint or that is the subject of the complaint, on its own 
motion or upon the petition of any interested party. 
 Sec. 508. Study of Information Sharing among Financial Affiliates. 
 (a)  IN GENERAL.—The Secretary of the Treasury, in conjunction 
with the Federal functional regulators and the Federal Trade 
Commission, shall conduct a study of information sharing 
practices among financial institutions and their affiliates. Such 
study shall include— 
 (1)  the purposes for the sharing of confidential customer 
information with affiliates or with non-affiliated third 
parties; 
 (2)  the extent and adequacy of security protections for such 
information; 
 (3)  the potential risks for customer privacy of such sharing of 
information; 
 (4)  the potential benefits for financial institutions and affiliates 
of such sharing of information; 
 (5)  the potential benefits for customers of such sharing of 
information; 
 (6)  the adequacy of existing laws to protect customer privacy; 
 (7)  the adequacy of financial institution privacy policy and 
privacy rights disclosure under existing law; 
 (8)  the feasibility of different approaches, including opt-out 
and opt-in, to permit customers to direct that confidential 
information not be shared with affiliates and nonaffiliated 
third parties; and 
 (9)  the feasibility of restricting sharing of information for 
specific uses or of permitting customers to direct the uses for 
which information may be shared. 
 (b)  CONSULTATION.—The Secretary shall consult with 
representatives of State insurance authorities designated by the 
National Association of Insurance Commissioners, and also with 

Title V of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 1999  189
financial services industry, consumer organizations and privacy 
groups, and other representatives of the general public, in 
formulating and conducting the study required by subsection (a). 
 (c)  REPORT.—On or before January 1, 2002, the Secretary shall 
submit a report to the Congress containing the findings and 
conclusions of the study required under subsection (a), together 
with such recommendations for legislative or administrative 
action as may be appropriate. 
 Sec. 509. Definitions. 
 As used in this subtitle: 
 (1)  FEDERAL BANKING AGENCY.—The term “Federal banking 
agency” has the same meaning as given in section 3 of the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Act. 
 (2)  FEDERAL FUNCTIONAL REGULATOR.—The term “Federal 
functional regulator” means— 
 (A) the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; 
 (B) the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency; 
 (C)  the Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation; 
 (D) the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision; 
 (E) the National Credit Union Administration Board; and 
 (F) the Securities and Exchange Commission. 
 (3) FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.— 
 (A)  IN GENERAL.—The term “financial institution” means any 
institution the business of which is engaging in financial 
activities as described in section 4(k) of the Bank Holding 
Company Act of 1956. 
 (B)  PERSONS SUBJECT TO CFTC REGULATION.—
Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), the term “financial 
institution” does not include any person or entity with 
respect to any financial activity that is subject to the 
jurisdiction of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission 
under the Commodity Exchange Act. 
 (C)  FARM CREDIT INSTITUTIONS.—Notwithstanding 
subparagraph (A), the term “financial institution” does not 
include the Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation or 
any entity chartered and operating under the Farm Credit 
Act of 1971. 
 (D)  OTHER SECONDARY MARKET INSTITUTIONS.—
Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), the term “financial 
institution” does not include institutions chartered by 
Congress specifically to engage in transactions described in 
section 502(e)(1)(C), as long as such institutions do not sell 

190 Data and Documents
or transfer nonpublic personal information to a nonaffiliated 
third party. 
 (4) NONPUBLIC PERSONAL INFORMATION.— 
 (A)  The term “nonpublic personal information” means 
personally identifiable financial information— 
   (i)  provided by a consumer to a financial institution; 
  (ii)  resulting from any transaction with the consumer or 
any service performed for the consumer; or 
 (iii)  otherwise obtained by the financial institution. 
 (B)  Such term does not include publicly available information, 
as such term is defined by the regulations prescribed under 
section 504. 
 (C) Notwithstanding subparagraph (B), such term— 
   (i)  shall include any list, description, or other grouping 
of consumers (and publicly available information 
pertaining to them) that is derived using any nonpublic 
personal information other than publicly available 
information; but 
  (ii)  shall not include any list, description, or other grouping 
of consumers (and publicly available information 
pertaining to them) that is derived without using any 
nonpublic personal information. 
 (5)  NONAFFILIATED THIRD PARTY.—The term “nonaffiliated 
third party” means any entity that is not an affiliate of, or related 
by common ownership or affiliated by corporate control with, 
the financial institution, but does not include a joint employee of 
such institution. 
 (6) AFFILIATE.—The term “affiliate” means any company that 
controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with 
another company. 
 (7) NECESSARY TO EFFECT, ADMINISTER, OR ENFORCE.—
The term “as necessary to effect, administer, or enforce the 
transaction” means— 
 (A)  the disclosure is required, or is a usual, appropriate, or 
acceptable method, to carry out the transaction or the 
product or service business of which the transaction is a 
part, and record or service or maintain the consumer’s 
account in the ordinary course of providing the financial 
service or financial product, or to administer or service 
benefits or claims relating to the transaction or the product 
or service business of which it is a part, and includes— 
   (i)  providing the consumer or the consumer’s agent or 
broker with a confirmation, statement, or other record of 

Title V of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 1999  191
the transaction, or information on the status or value of 
the financial service or financial product; and 
 (ii)  the accrual or recognition of incentives or bonuses 
associated with the transaction that are provided by the 
financial institution or any other party; 
 (B)  the disclosure is required, or is one of the lawful or 
appropriate methods, to enforce the rights of the financial 
institution or of other persons engaged in carrying out the 
financial transaction, or providing the product or service; 
 (C)  the disclosure is required, or is a usual, appropriate, or 
acceptable method, for insurance underwriting at the 
consumer’s request or for reinsurance purposes, or for any 
of the following purposes as they relate to a consumer’s 
insurance: account administration, reporting, investigating, 
or preventing fraud or material misrepresentation, 
processing premium payments, processing insurance claims, 
administering insurance benefits (including utilization review 
activities), participating in research projects, or as otherwise 
required or specifically permitted by Federal or State law; or 
 (D)  the disclosure is required, or is a usual, appropriate or 
acceptable method, in connection with— 
    (i)  the authorization, settlement, billing, processing, 
clearing, transferring, reconciling, or collection of 
amounts charged, debited, or otherwise paid using a 
debit, credit or other payment card, check, or account 
number, or by other payment means; 
  (ii)  the transfer of receivables, accounts or interests therein; or 
 (iii) the audit of debit, credit or other payment information. 
  (8)  STATE INSURANCE AUTHORITY.—The term “State insurance 
authority” means, in the case of any person engaged in 
providing insurance, the State insurance authority of the State 
in which the person is domiciled. 
 (9)  CONSUMER.—The term “consumer” means an individual 
who obtains, from a financial institution, financial products or 
services which are to be used primarily for personal, family, or 
household purposes, and also means the legal representative of 
such an individual. 
 (10)  JOINT AGREEMENT.—The term “joint agreement” means 
a formal written contract pursuant to which two or more 
financial institutions jointly offer, endorse, or sponsor a 
financial product or service, and as may be further defined in 
the regulations prescribed under section 504. 
 (11)  CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIP.—The term “time of establishing 
a customer relationship” shall be defined by the regulations 
prescribed under section 504, and shall, in the case of a financial 

192 Data and Documents
institution engaged in extending credit directly to consumers 
to finance purchases of goods or services, mean the time of 
establishing the credit relationship with the consumer. 
 Sec. 510. Effective Date. 
 This subtitle shall take effect 6 months after the date on which rules are 
required to be prescribed under section 504(a)(3), except— 
 (1) to the extent that a later date is specified in the rules prescribed 
under section 504; and 
 (2) that sections 504 and 506 shall be effective upon enactment. 
 Subtitle B—Fraudulent Access to Financial Information 
 Sec. 521. Privacy Protection for Customer Information of Financial 
Institutions. 
 (a)  PROHIBITION ON OBTAINING CUSTOMER INFORMATION 
BY FALSE PRETENSES.—It shall be a violation of this subtitle for 
any person to obtain or attempt to obtain, or cause to be disclosed 
or attempt to cause to be disclosed to any person, customer 
information of a financial institution relating to another person— 
 (1)  by making a false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or 
representation to an officer, employee, or agent of a financial 
institution; 
 (2)  by making a false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or 
representation to a customer of a financial institution; or 
 (3)  by providing any document to an officer, employee, or 
agent of a financial institution, knowing that the document 
is forged, counterfeit, lost, or stolen, was fraudulently 
obtained, or contains a false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
statement or representation. 
 (b)  PROHIBITION ON SOLICITATION OF A PERSON TO 
OBTAIN CUSTOMER INFORMATION FROM FINANCIAL 
INSTITUTION UNDER FALSE PRETENSES.—It shall be a 
violation of this subtitle to request a person to obtain customer 
information of a financial institution, knowing that the person 
will obtain, or attempt to obtain, the information from the 
institution in any manner described in subsection (a). 
 (c)  NONAPPLICABILITY TO LAW ENFORCEMENT 
AGENCIES.—No provision of this section shall be construed 
so as to prevent any action by a law enforcement agency, or any 
officer, employee, or agent of such agency, to obtain customer 
information of a financial institution in connection with the 
performance of the official duties of the agency. 

Title V of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 1999  193
 (d)  NONAPPLICABILITY TO FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
IN CERTAIN CASES.—No provision of this section shall be 
construed so as to prevent any financial institution, or any 
officer, employee, or agent of a financial institution, from 
obtaining customer information of such financial institution in 
the course of— 
 (1)  testing the security procedures or systems of such institution 
for maintaining the confidentiality of customer information; 
 (2)  investigating allegations of misconduct or negligence on 
the part of any officer, employee, or agent of the financial 
institution; or 
 (3)  recovering customer information of the financial institution 
which was obtained or received by another person in any 
manner described in subsection (a) or (b). 
 (e) NONAPPLICABILITY TO INSURANCE INSTITUTIONS 
FOR INVESTIGATION OF INSURANCE FRAUD.—No 
provision of this section shall be construed so as to prevent any 
insurance institution, or any officer, employee, or agency of an 
insurance institution, from obtaining information as part of an 
insurance investigation into criminal activity, fraud, material 
misrepresentation, or material nondisclosure that is authorized for 
such institution under State law, regulation, interpretation, or order. 
 (f) NONAPPLICABILITY TO CERTAIN TYPES OF CUSTOMER 
INFORMATION OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.—No 
provision of this section shall be construed so as to prevent 
any person from obtaining customer information of a financial 
institution that otherwise is available as a public record filed 
pursuant to the securities laws (as defined in section 3(a)(47) of 
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934). 
 (g) NONAPPLICABILITY TO COLLECTION OF CHILD SUPPORT 
JUDGMENTS.—No provision of this section shall be construed 
to prevent any State-licensed private investigator, or any officer, 
employee, or agent of such private investigator, from obtaining 
customer information of a financial institution, to the extent 
reasonably necessary to collect child support from a person 
adjudged to have been delinquent in his or her obligations by 
a Federal or State court, and to the extent that such action by a 
State-licensed private investigator is not unlawful under any 
other Federal or State law or regulation, and has been authorized 
by an order or judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
 Sec. 522. Administrative Enforcement. 
 (a) ENFORCEMENT BY FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION.—
Except as provided in subsection (b), compliance with this 

194 Data and Documents
subtitle shall be enforced by the Federal Trade Commission in 
the same manner and with the same power and authority as the 
Commission has under the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act to 
enforce compliance with such Act. 
 (b) ENFORCEMENT BY OTHER AGENCIES IN CERTAIN 
CASES.— 
 (1)  IN GENERAL.—Compliance with this subtitle shall be 
enforced under— 
 (A) section 8 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, in the 
case of— 
  (i)  national banks, and Federal branches and Federal 
agencies of foreign banks, by the Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency; 
 (ii)  member banks of the Federal Reserve System (other 
than national banks), branches and agencies of 
foreign banks (other than Federal branches, Federal 
agencies, and insured State branches of foreign banks), 
commercial lending companies owned or controlled 
by foreign banks, and organizations operating under 
section 25 or 25A of the Federal Reserve Act, by the 
Board; 
 (iii)  banks insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation (other than members of the Federal 
Reserve System and national nonmember banks) and 
insured State branches of foreign banks, by the Board of 
Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; 
and 
 (iv)  savings associations the deposits of which are insured 
by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, by the 
Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision; and (B) the 
Federal Credit Union Act, by the Administrator of the 
National Credit Union Administration with respect to 
any Federal credit union. 
 (2)  VIOLATIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE TREATED AS 
VIOLATIONS OF OTHER LAWS.—For the purpose of 
the exercise by any agency referred to in paragraph (1) of 
its powers under any Act referred to in that paragraph, a 
violation of this subtitle shall be deemed to be a violation 
of a requirement imposed under that Act. In addition to its 
powers under any provision of law specifically referred to in 
paragraph 
 (1), each of the agencies referred to in that paragraph may 
exercise, for the purpose of enforcing compliance with this 
subtitle, any other authority conferred on such agency by 
law. 

Title V of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 1999  195
 Sec. 523. Criminal Penalty. 
 (a) IN GENERAL.—Whoever knowingly and intentionally violates, 
or knowingly and intentionally attempts to violate, section 521 
shall be fined in accordance with title 18, United States Code, or 
imprisoned for not more than 5 years, or both. 
 (b) ENHANCED PENALTY FOR AGGRAVATED CASES.—
Whoever violates, or attempts to violate, section 521 while 
violating another law of the United States or as part of a pattern 
of any illegal activity involving more than $100,000 in a 12-
month period shall be fined twice the amount provided in 
subsection (b)(3) or (c)(3) (as the case may be) of section 3571 of 
title 18, United States Code, imprisoned for not more than 10 
years, or both. 
 Sec. 524. Relation to State Laws. 
 (a) IN GENERAL.—This subtitle shall not be construed as 
superseding, altering, or affecting the statutes, regulations, 
orders, or interpretations in effect in any State, except to the 
extent that such statutes, regulations, orders, or interpretations 
are inconsistent with the provisions of this subtitle, and then 
only to the extent of the inconsistency. 
 (b) GREATER PROTECTION UNDER STATE LAW.—For purposes 
of this section, a State statute, regulation, order, or interpretation 
is not inconsistent with the provisions of this subtitle if the 
protection such statute, regulation, order, or interpretation 
affords any person is greater than the protection provided under 
this subtitle as determined by the Federal Trade Commission, 
after consultation with the agency or authority with jurisdiction 
under section 522 of either the person that initiated the 
complaint or that is the subject of the complaint, on its own 
motion or upon the petition of any interested party. 
 Sec. 525. Agency Guidance. 
 In furtherance of the objectives of this subtitle, each Federal banking 
agency (as defined in section 3(z) of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Act), the National Credit Union Administration, and the Securities and 
Exchange Commission or self-regulatory organizations, as appropri-
ate, shall review regulations and guidelines applicable to financial 
institutions under their respective jurisdictions and shall prescribe 
such revisions to such regulations and guidelines as may be necessary 
to ensure that such financial institutions have policies, procedures, and 
controls in  place to prevent the unauthorized disclosure of customer 
financial information and to deter and detect activities proscribed 
under section 521. 

196 Data and Documents
 Sec. 526. Reports. 
 (a)  REPORT TO THE CONGRESS.—Before the end of the 18-
month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Comptroller General, in consultation with the Federal 
Trade Commission, Federal banking agencies, the National 
Credit Union Administration, the Securities and Exchange 
Commission, appropriate Federal law enforcement agencies, 
and appropriate State insurance regulators, shall submit to the 
Congress a report on the following: 
 (1)  The efficacy and adequacy of the remedies provided in 
this subtitle in addressing attempts to obtain financial 
information by fraudulent means or by false pretenses. 
 (2)  Any recommendations for additional legislative or 
regulatory action to address threats to the privacy of 
financial information created by attempts to obtain 
information by fraudulent means or false pretenses. 
 (b)  ANNUAL REPORT BY ADMINISTERING AGENCIES.—The 
Federal Trade Commission and the Attorney General shall 
submit to Congress an annual report on number and disposition 
of all enforcement actions taken pursuant to this subtitle. 
 Sec. 527. Definitions. 
 For purposes of this subtitle, the following definitions shall apply: 
 (1) CUSTOMER.—The term “customer” means, with respect to a 
financial institution, any person (or authorized representative of 
a person) to whom the financial institution provides a product 
or service, including that of acting as a fiduciary. 
 (2) CUSTOMER INFORMATION OF A FINANCIAL 
INSTITUTION.—The term “customer information of a financial 
institution” means any information maintained by or for a 
financial institution which is derived from the relationship 
between the financial institution and a customer of the financial 
institution and is identified with the customer. 
 (3) DOCUMENT.—The term “document” means any information in 
any form. 
 (4) FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.— 
 (A)  IN GENERAL.—The term “financial institution” means any 
institution engaged in the business of providing financial 
services to customers who maintain a credit, deposit, 
trust, or other financial account or relationship with the 
institution. 
 (B)  CERTAIN FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS SPECIFICALLY 
INCLUDED.—The term “financial institution” includes 
any depository institution (as defined in section 19(b)(1)

Title V of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 1999  197
(A) of the Federal Reserve Act), any broker or dealer, any 
investment adviser or investment company, any insurance 
company, any loan or finance company, any credit card 
issuer or operator of a credit card system, and any consumer 
reporting agency that compiles and maintains files on 
consumers on a nationwide basis (as defined in section 
603(p) of the Consumer Credit Protection Act). 
 (C)  SECURITIES INSTITUTIONS.—For purposes of 
subparagraph (B)— 
  (i)  the terms “broker” and “dealer” have the same 
meanings as given in section 3 of the Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78c); 
 (ii)  the term “investment adviser” has the same meaning as 
given in section 202(a)(11) of the Investment Advisers 
Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80b–2(a)); and 
 (iii)  the term “investment company” has the same meaning 
as given in section 3 of the Investment Company Act of 
1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a–3). 
 (D)  CERTAIN PERSONS AND ENTITIES SPECIFICALLY 
EXCLUDED.—The term “financial institution” does not include 
any person or entity with respect to any financial activity that 
is subject to the jurisdiction of the Commodity Futures Trading 
Commission under the Commodity Exchange Act and does not 
include the Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation or any 
entity chartered and operating under the Farm Credit Act of 
1971. 
 (E)  FURTHER DEFINITION BY REGULATION.—The Federal 
Trade Commission, after consultation with Federal banking 
agencies and the Securities and Exchange Commission, may 
prescribe regulations clarifying or describing the types of 
institutions which shall be treated as financial institutions for 
purposes of this subtitle. 
 F:\FSA99\REPORT\S900CRPT.005 
 F:\V6\102899\102899.0H6 
 Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999 , Public Law 106-102, 106th Cong., 1t sess. 
(October 28, 1999). http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.
cgi?dbname=106_cong_public_laws&docid=f:publ102.106. Accessed 
April 9, 2009. 


199
 7 
 T
his chapter offers readers a list of organizations and govern-
ment agencies that are routinely involved in identity theft is-
sues. They focus on many types of fraud, security breaches, 
identity theft, computer crimes, and/or privacy violations. The 
information included here profiles the origins of the organiza-
tions, their focus, and their Web site (if available). 
 Anti-Phishing Working Group (APWG)
www.antiphishing.org 
 Tumbleweed Communications is one of the leading providers 
of computer security products. Their focus is on making certain 
that computer communications are conducted in a safe and se-
cure manner by providing the highest level products available 
and developing new products. In 2003 Tumbleweed Communi-
cations and others in the banking, finance, and e-commerce in-
dustries founded the Anti-Phishing Working Group (APWG). The 
APWG first met in November 2003 in San Francisco, California. 
Since that time it has become an independent corporation con-
trolled and operated by its own board of directors and officers. 
The APWG has over 3,000 members who represent more than 
1,700 companies throughout the world. Membership is open to 
those who are involved with financial institutions, online retail-
ers, Internet service providers, law enforcement communities, re-
search institutions, and those who provide security solutions and 
products. Those who join the APWG are dedicated to eliminating 
identity theft and fraud. This group focuses on examining fraud 
that originates with phishing and e-mail spoofing and allows its 
 Directory of Organizations, 
Associations, and Agencies 

200  Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
members an arena to explore these issues to determine the nature 
of the problem and develop policies that can help to reduce or 
eliminate them. 
 Electronic Crimes Task Forces and Working Groups
http://www.ustreas.gov/usss/ectf.shtml 
 Under the USA Patriot Act, signed into law by President George 
W. Bush in October 2001, the United States Secret Service was di-
rected to create a nationwide network of Electronic Crimes Task 
Forces (ECTF). The idea behind the ECTF was to get the public 
and private sectors working together and focused on ways to pro-
tect the nation’s financial and other critical infrastructures. ECTF 
network participants include law enforcement personnel, prose-
cutors, and representatives from private businesses, colleges, and 
universities. 
The Secret Service was made responsible for the establish-
ment of the ECTF and Working Group because these duties 
fall under the general responsibilities assigned to the service 
upon its founding in 1865; the Secret Service is responsible for 
protecting the integrity of the financial payment system in this 
country. This responsibility typically involves the detection and 
control of counterfeit money; however, as new payment meth-
ods evolved, the Secret Service’s responsibilities changed in 
order to protect the United States’ financial payment system. 
Given that computers and other technological devices are com-
monly used in criminal activities that impact the United States’ 
financial structure, the Secret Service also focuses on deterring 
cyber crime. 
 The Secret Service’s ECTF and Electronic Crimes Working 
Group prioritize cases that involve electronic crime, then they 
provide support and resources to aid in the investigations of these 
cases. Typically, investigations that have a significant economic 
impact or involve domestic or transnational organized criminal 
rings are within the realm of the ECTF. Currently the Secret Service 
maintains ECTFs in the following U.S. cities and states: Atlanta, 
Baltimore, Birmingham, Boston, Buffalo, Charlotte, Chicago, 
Cleveland, Dallas, Houston, Las Vegas, Los Angeles, Louisville, 
Miami, Minneapolis, New York/New Jersey, Oklahoma, Orlando, 
Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, San Francisco, Seattle, South Carolina, 
and Washington, D.C. 

 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 201
 Federal Trade Commission
www.ftc.gov 
 The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) was created in 1914 through 
the Federal Trade Commission Act. It was   designed to be staffed 
by five commissioners who were appointed by the President of 
the United States with the consent of the Senate. While the first 
commissioners were to be appointed for terms that varied in 
length, today all serve a seven-year term. Only three members of 
the commission may be of the same political party. The president 
is also responsible for selecting a commissioner to serve as the 
FTC chairperson. As of this writing, the members of the Com-
mission are: Chairman John Leibowitz, Pamela Jones Harbour, 
William E. Kovacic, and J. Thomas Rosch.  Currently, there is one 
vacant seat on the Commission.
 The FTC was created to help prevent unfair competition 
amongst businesses. As time has progressed, the FTC was given 
authority to create policies for protecting consumers. 
 The FTC consists of several offices. The Office of Public Af-
fairs provides information to the public through various media 
outlets. The Office of Congressional Relations updates commis-
sioners and other FTC staff members of pertinent Congressional 
legislation. The Office of the Executive Director is responsible for 
managing finances, personnel, technology, programs, and poli-
cies. The Office of the General Counsel acts as the Commission’s 
legal advisors and also represents the FTC in court. The Office of 
International Affairs brings a global component to the FTC as it 
works with other consumer protection agencies around the world 
to address international issues of consumer protection. The Office 
of the Secretary is responsible for documenting decisions and for 
coordinating responses to inquiries by congressional constituents. 
The Office of the Inspector General is the policing arm of the Com-
mission and is charged with preventing waste, fraud, and abuse 
within FTC. The  Office of the Inspector General also investigates 
instances of staff misconduct. The Bureau of Competition is con-
sidered the antitrust component of the Commission. The Bureau 
of Economics analyses the economic impact of the actions taken 
by the FTC. The Bureau of Consumer Protection is designed spe-
cifically to protect consumers from fraud. The FTC has over 1,000 
people on its staff and they all hold positions that are designed to 
protect U.S. consumers. 

202  Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
 Given the consumer protection aspect of the FTC, it seems 
reasonable that the responsibility for collecting identity theft case 
data and providing statistics about the crime should fall under 
its umbrella, thus the FTC set up the Identity Theft Data Clear-
inghouse in November 1999. This clearinghouse allows victims of 
identity theft to report their crime to the FTC. The goal of this en-
deavor is to generate reliable records about the scope of identity 
theft in the United States. The data is used to understand the crime 
better and to detect developing trends. Internet users can access 
this information on the FTC Web site. In addition, consumers who 
visit this Web site can learn more about the “Deter, Detect, De-
fend” program that the Commission established to educate peo-
ple about what to do if they are a victim of identity theft, and also 
what they can do to reduce their likelihood of becoming a victim. 
 Identity Theft 911
http://www. identitytheft911.com/home.htm 
 Identity Theft 911 started in 2003 with the goal of assisting in 
identity theft resolutions. Currently, the headquarters for Iden-
tity Theft 911 is located in Scottsdale, Arizona, and in 2008 the 
organization opened an office on the east coast, in Providence, 
Rhode Island. 911 offers educational information to help busi-
nesses and their clients gain a greater knowledge of identity theft 
and how to protect themselves from becoming victims. In addi-
tion, Identity Theft 911 offers assistance to victims. 
 The organization was founded to fill the need for an identity 
theft resolution specialist to partner with businesses. Adam K. 
Levin, one of the organization’s co-founders, is the current Chair-
man of Identity Theft 911. His desire to start Identity Theft 911 
stems from his interest in protecting and educating consumers. 
With over 30 years of experience to build upon Levin and other 
executives with experience in credit and financial services, law 
enforcement, and consumer advocacy worked together to found 
Identity Theft 911. 
The Organization’s  leadership team is comprised of Levin, 
Matthew Cullina, and Sean Daly. Cullina is the Chief Executive 
Officer and has a background in the insurance industry. Daly is 
the President and Chief Financial Officer and is responsible for 
the financial aspects of the organization. His experience is in fi-
nance, business, and technology. Together, this group works to 
resolve the problems of identity theft and provide individual 

 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 203
 assistance while giving consumers the knowledge they need to 
protect themselves. 
 Identity Theft 911 also has a diverse group of members on its 
Advisory Council who come from various fields including finance, 
security, law enforcement, law, and technology. The members of 
the Advisory Committee offer additional insight and information 
on identity theft that assisting victims used to pursue the goal of 
the crime. 
 Identity Theft Partnerships in Prevention
http://www1.cj.msu.edu/~outreach/identity/ 
 While the crime of identity theft was still in its infancy, Dr. Ju-
dith Collins created one of the first programs at a major univer-
sity, the Michigan State University Identity Theft Partnerships 
in Prevention, now known as the Identity Theft Program. 
Dr. Collins sought out experts in the private security and law 
enforcement fields and brought them together for the purpose 
of establishing a program that offers training, conducts research, 
assists in investigations, and provides assistance to victims of 
the crime. 
 The initial research involved an identity theft case that took 
place at an international corporation. In this particular case, many 
of the corporate executives had their identities stolen by a person 
who was also employed by the company. This study became the 
basis on which future research was built. Tracy McGinley joined 
the staff in 2000 and Sandra Hoffman joined in 2001 as research 
assistants. Collins left the program in 2006 to take a job with the 
U.S. State Department in Washington, D.C. At that time, Sandra 
Hoffman was appointed interim director and was later appointed 
director. Tracy McGinley remains on the staff as an instructor. The 
program offers educational opportunities for victim assistance 
personnel and law enforcement officials at the local, state, and 
federal levels. The program’s Web site provides step-by-step in-
structions in the form of worksheets for victims of identity theft to 
use in clearing their names. 
 Identity Theft Prevention and Mitigation Program—New York 
State Consumer Protection Board 
http://www.nysconsumer.gov/ 
 The New York Consumer Protection Board was established in 
1970 and acts as a consumer advocate to protect the citizens of 

204  Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
New York. Its protection comes in a variety of methods. The Board 
investigates complaints, researches problems that arise, examines 
questionable business practices, offers educational information, 
works to bring about change through legislation, and speaks on 
behalf of consumers. The New York Consumer Protection Board 
addresses the issue of identity theft and works toward offering 
greater assistance residents of the state. 
 In 2008, Governor David A. Paterson signed legislation that 
required the creation of the Identity Theft Prevention and Mitiga-
tion Program, which is housed under the Consumer Protection 
Board, and the program went into effect in January 2009. The 
Identity Theft Prevention and Mitigation Program is designed 
specifically to help New Yorkers better understand identity theft 
and what to do if they become a victim. 
 The Web site for the Identity Theft Prevention and Mitigation 
Program is part of the New York Consumer Protection Board’s 
Web site. As users access the homepage, they can read about 
the program and also click on various links to learn more about 
identity theft, including a video quiz show designed to test their 
knowledge about identity theft. In this quiz show format, users 
can watch contestants attempt to answer questions, and see the 
correct answers displayed. Other aspects of the Web site include 
ways to protect oneself from the crime and information on fraud 
schemes currently operating in the state. In addition, there are 
sample forms that can be used to document the steps that victims 
must take to restore their identities and a form to document their 
losses and expenses. This information can then serve as proof for 
restitution if the case is prosecuted. 
 Identity Theft Resource Center
http://www.idtheftcenter.org/index.html 
 Linda and Jay Foley started the Identity Theft Resource Cen-
ter (ITRC) in 1999 under the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse. It 
was originally known as Victims of Crimes Extended Services 
(VOICES). In 2000, the name was officially changed to the Iden-
tity Theft Resource Center. Initially, Lindy Foley, a victim of iden-
tity theft, ran the ITRC alone. She started a support group for 
victims and spoke at national symposiums about the problem of 
identity theft. In 2001, as the center continued to grow, Jay Foley 
became its full-time director. ITRC also hired Sheila Gordon; she 
is currently the Director of Victim Services. By 2002, the ITRC was 

 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 205
working with more than 150 victims and consumers each week. 
Their dedication and hard work earned them commendations for 
their fight against identity theft. In addition, the ITRC’s reputa-
tion led law enforcement and other government agencies to make 
continual referrals to the organization. In 2003, the ITRC officially 
received 501(c)(3) nonprofit status. Also that same year, the ITRC 
conducted and published its first major study on identity theft. 
The study explored the impact that the crime has on its victims. 
Over the past six years, the ITRC has continued to conduct re-
search on the impact of identity theft on victims. In addition, the 
organization continues to offer advice to lawmaker seeking new 
identity theft legislation both on the state and national levels. The 
ITRC and its successes have been featured in many national mag-
azines. Realizing the need to continue to reach out to members of 
the community who may not have services available to them, the 
ITRC added a Spanish section to its Web site and also created the 
first teen video on identity theft,  Stolen Futures . 
 The main goal of the ITRC is to offer quality victim assistance 
and to do so at no charge to the consumer. Although located in 
Cali fornia, the ITRC serves victims located all over the country. Not 
only does the center seek to help victims, it also strives to  educate 
people about identity theft and help them to develop quality poli-
cies and individual practices that can help to prevent the crime. 
Furthermore, the ITRC acts as a consultant to companies seeking 
specific advice about identity theft. The ITRC works to help both 
consumers and businesses that have been victimized. Those work-
ing for the ITRC realize that addressing the identity theft prob-
lem is not an easy task, and they recognize the need to continue to 
educate consumers and build support between consumers, private 
businesses, law enforcement agencies, and the government. 
 The ITRC Web site reveals its commitment to education. Nu-
merous articles and surveys are available there. In addition, there 
is information aimed at diverse audiences. 
 Identity Theft Victims Advocate Network (IVAN)
http://s1.webstarts.com/ivan/ 
 The Identity Theft Victims Advocate Network (IVAN) was started 
in 2006 in Colorado. The purpose of this organization is to as-
sist victims of identity theft through a network of participants 
that include government and law enforcement agencies. There 
are currently over 60 IVAN members. Representatives from the 

206  Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
 Division of Motor Vehicles, the Colorado Bureau of Investiga-
tion, Vital Records, the United States Postal Service, local law 
enforcement agencies, and attorneys are all part of the network. 
IVAN’s Web site offers the names, jurisdictions/locations, and 
contact information for all the members, thus providing victims 
a centralized location where they can find assistances. The Web 
site also offers information about resources that are available at 
the state and federal level. 
 Institute of Consumer Financial Education (ICFE)
http://www.financial-education-icfe.org/default.asp 
 The Institute of Consumer Financial Education was founded by 
Loren Dunton and Paul Richard in 1982. It is a nonprofit organi-
zation based in San Diego, California that was created as a public 
education organization and designed to help people learn about 
ways to handle their money and their credit. The program is fo-
cused on teaching consumers how to control spending,  increase 
savings, and use credit wisely. As with many programs, the insti-
tute’s goal is to educate people about using money so that they are 
empowered to use it more wisely. The institute also offers assis-
tance to businesses that wish to provide personal finance classes 
as an option for their employees. 
 In addition to teaching consumers how to handle their 
money better, the institute offers certification programs, including 
a Certified Credit Report Reviewer program, a Certified Home 
Equity Conversion Mortgage Specialist program (a.k.a., Reverse 
Mortgage Specialist), and a Certified Identity Theft Risk Manage-
ment Specialist program. The institute developed the certification 
program used by Identity Theft Risk Management Specialists in 
response to the country’s growing number of identity theft cases. 
 The program is designed to help law enforcement officials, 
financial planners, accountants, lawyers, debt counselors, and 
anyone else who may interact with consumers who have been 
victims of identity theft or who want to protect themselves from 
becoming victims. The program features five main areas of study. 
The first area focuses on understanding identity theft. The second 
area looks at credit reports, specialty reports, and public records 
and helps students to identify vulnerabilities. The third area fo-
cuses on risk management and resolution. The fourth area con-
cerns consumer protection laws. The fifth area of the certification 
program is on the risks and concerns related to businesses.  

 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 207
 International Association of Financial Crimes Investigators 
(IAFCI)
www.iafci.org 
 The International Association of Financial Crimes Investiga-
tors (IAFCI) is a nonprofit international organization located in 
El  Dorado Hills, California with chapters throughout the world. 
Members of the IAFCI include law enforcement, personnel, pros-
ecutors, private security specialists, and financial industry repre-
sentatives. The IAFCI provides services and information about 
various fraud-related concerns, including financial fraud, fraud 
investigation, and fraud prevention methods. Its objective is to 
help foster a better understanding of the issues surrounding fi-
nancial fraud and what can be done to stop it. 
 The IAFCI evolved from the International Association of 
Credit Card Investigators (IACCI), which was created in 1968 in 
response to the increasing number of credit card crimes. In 1996, 
the IACCI saw the need to include a larger variety of financial 
crimes in its mission and changed its name to the International 
Association of Financial Crimes Investigators. The IAFCI works 
to reduce and eliminate fraudulent financial transactions and to 
encourage its members to share intelligence information. 
 The organization offers its members many benefits, such as 
investigation assistance. IAFCI investigators work to track pat-
terns of spending to determine a person’s whereabouts and are 
able to use the information from financial transactions to de-
termine the location of witnesses and suspects. The group also 
conducts annual training seminars throughout the world to help 
investigators learn more about current fraud schemes and how 
to investigate their cases more effectively. The IAFCI also works 
with manufacturers of transaction cards and checks to help them 
improve their current physical security and internal controls such 
as audits, storage, and delivery. 
 The IAFCI Web site offers information to both consumers 
and its members. The information aimed at the general public, 
for example, outlines eight basic fraud tactics: advance fee scams, 
employment scams, prizes that come with a price, money- making 
schemes, online auctions, bogus charities, identity theft, and 
products that are too good to be true. The Web site also has a sec-
tion dedicated to identity theft that includes information about 
what to do if you are a victim and explains strategies for reducing 
the risk of victimization. Furthermore, the site offers a page of 

208  Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
links to available public resources that are available. There is a 
members-only section of the Web site where members can share 
information about financial crimes, upcoming conferences, and 
other pertinent information. 
 Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3)
http://www.ic3.gov 
 Originally known as the Internet Fraud Complain Center, the Inter-
net Crime Complaint Center (IC3) is the product of a  partnership 
between the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the  National 
White Collar Crime Center (NW3C). It is an online system that al-
lows its users to file complaints about cyber crimes; these can range 
from identity theft complaints, to money laundering complaints, 
to intellectual property rights violations, or even computer hack-
ing complaints. The purpose of developing the IC3 was to create a 
centralized location for gathering information on cyber crimes and 
to then use the data for research.  Furthermore, the research can 
help to develop policies, regulations, and recommendations for 
law enforcement on both the domestic and international levels. 
 On the IC3 Web site, users can find scam alerts, fraud pre-
vention tips, and statistics. Victims will find a straightforward 
 reporting mechanism that informs law enforcement about poten-
tial violations. 
 Maryland Crime Victims’ Resource Center (MCVRC): Identity 
Theft & Fraud Assistance
http://www.mdcrimevictims.org/ 
 The Maryland Crime Victims’ Resource Center (MCVRC) began 
as the Stephanie Roper Committee and Foundation, which was 
created as a means for addressing crime in Prince George’s 
County, Maryland. The organization was named in memory of 
Stephanie Roper, a college student who was home visiting her 
family in 1982. While driving, her car broke down and two men 
stopped and kidnapped, raped, and tortured her for hours be-
fore killing her. In 2002, as the result of a merger, the committee’s 
name changed to the Maryland Crime Victims’ Resource Cen-
ter. The MCVRC seeks to help victims in Maryland and focuses 
on providing advocacy, education, counseling, support groups, 
legal information, representation, and other assistance to victims 
of crimes. The MCVRC also offers free assistance to those who 
are victims of identity theft and fraud. 

 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 209
 The Web site for the MCVRC offers a variety of informa-
tion for victims of crime. In addition to explaining the cre-
ation of the MCVRC, the site also offers information about the 
center’s board members, how to be a supporter, and copies 
of their newsletter. The site identifies specific information on 
crisis assistance, legal and financial help, victim notification, 
and resources that are available in the state of Maryland and 
throughout the country. 
 National Association of Consumer Advocates
http://www.naca.net/ 
 The National Association of Consumer Advocates (NACA) is 
a nonprofit association whose members, mostly attorneys and 
consumer advocates, seek to represent the best interests of 
consumers. In order to accomplish this, NACA members are 
dedicated to sharing information and ideas with one another 
and representing consumers as they fight unfair business prac-
tices. 
 NACA offers a great deal of information on their Web site to 
help consumers understand their rights. The site offers specific 
information about consumers’ rights when purchasing a new or 
used vehicle, including information on the lemon law. The site 
also informs consumers on their rights when dealing with debt 
collectors and when trying to correct issues on their credit report; 
it features a section on identity theft, military consumer rights, 
predatory lending practices, and student loans. Another section 
of the Web site assists consumers by listing attorneys and their 
areas of specialization or expertise. 
 National Check Fraud Center
http://www.ckfraud.org/ 
 The National Check Fraud Center is a private organization lo-
cated in Charleston, South Carolina. It focuses on offering assis-
tance and information about counterfeit checks, fraud, and other 
white collar crimes. There are several components to the National 
Check Fraud Center, including the National Crime Alert Network. 
The network is designed to share information pertaining to check 
fraud and white collar crime among businesses, law enforcement 
officials, and financial institutions. The information shared with 
the network is in real time; this allows the network to help prevent 
fraud crimes from occurring by providing up-to-date information 

210  Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
on scams and crimes that may impact businesses and financial 
institutions. The timely distribution of information is one of the 
network’s key functions. 
 The Web site for the National Check Fraud Center offers a 
great deal of information about identity theft and other fraud-
related crimes. Users may access many links to learn more about 
fraud crimes, liability, laws, and other factors relevant to white 
collar crime. The topics include information on bad check laws 
as they pertain to each state, a definition of check fraud, infor-
mation about check washing, identity theft, counterfeit checks, 
and links to federal resources. In addition, the Web site provides 
a list of workshops and seminars that are available through the 
center. 
 National Fraud Information Center
http://www.fraud.org/ 
 The National Consumers League established the National Fraud 
Information Center in 1992. Founded in 1899, the National Con-
sumers League is the oldest nonprofit consumer advocacy group 
in the United States. The League was originally established to 
help promote fairness in the marketplace for both consumers 
and employees; this principle remains the League’s focus today. 
It has fought to protect in-home workers from exploitation, to 
promote the Pure Food and Drug Act, to people for the passage 
of state minimum wage laws pertaining to women, to promote 
Social Security legislation, to support the concept of equal pay 
for equal work, and to support the enforcement powers of the 
Federal Trade Commission. In the 1980s, the League formed 
the Alliance Against Fraud in Telemarketing. This alliance later 
became the National Fraud Information Center, a joint effort 
by the National Consumers League, the Federal Trade Com-
mission, the National Association of Attorneys General, and 
PhoneBusters of Canada. 
 The National Fraud Information Center is the only toll-free 
hotline designed to help consumers learn more about telemar-
keting schemes, offer consumers a place to call and speak to some-
one directly about potential telemarketing fraud, and to report 
possible telemarketing scams. The center is designed to fight the 
growing problem and irritations associated with  telemarketing 
fraud and to help determine ways to improve the tools and re-
sources available to those investigating it. 

 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 211
 The Web site for the National Fraud Information Center of-
fers valuable information on a variety of fraud schemes. It offers 
consumer advice and discusses current trends in telemarketing 
fraud, Internet fraud, scams against businesses, scams against 
the elderly, counterfeit drug information, and general fraud 
 information. 
 National White Collar Crime Center (NW3C)
http://www.nw3c.org/index.cfm 
 The National White Collar Crime Center (NW3C) is a nonprofit 
organization focused on developing policies, practices, and 
training to address issues related to economic and technologi-
cally advanced crimes. The Institute for Intergovernmental Re-
search (IIR) provides management performance, policy research, 
technical training, and activity analysis for the NW3C. For over 
30 years, the NW3C has been the recipient of competitive grant 
funding. 
 The NW3C provides a variety of services. They offer 
training seminars to law enforcement agencies and other or-
ganizations in areas such as crime investigative techniques. 
There are many other training programs offered, too, such 
as those focusing on better understanding computer crimes. 
These classes vary, and may include courses on electronic 
evidence collection, data recovery, or even cellular telephone 
investigation. Other classes focus on financial crimes, intel-
ligence analysis, and instructor developments. NW3C also 
offers an online Economic Crime Foundation Series program 
for its members and a three-day Identity Theft Investigations 
(IDTI) course that was developed for law enforcement officers 
and prosecutors. 
 Other services offered by the NW3C come in the more di-
rect form of investigative support. The center does not have any 
independent investigative powers, but it is able to send analysts 
to assist in the investigative process. Ways in which analysts 
may assist law enforcement include the creation of financial 
transaction patterns, conducting network analysis, or even car-
rying out searches of public databases. 
 The NW3C’s Web site contains information about the services 
offered to assist their members, a comprehensive list of the types 
of training available, data on the research that the center has done 
or is currently conducting, contact information for  investigative 

212  Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
services, and a list of partnerships that are available. The site also 
has answers to frequently asked questions about the center, press 
releases, and a listing of employment opportunities currently 
available. 
 OnGuard Online
http://www.onguardonline.gov 
 OnGuard Online is a Web site maintained by the Federal Trade 
Commission. Many other agencies and organizations provide 
valuable information for the site, too. OnGuard Online’s partners 
include the U.S. Department of Justice, the Office of Justice Pro-
grams, the Department of Homeland Security, the Internal Rev-
enue Service, the U.S. Postal Inspection Service, the Securities and 
Exchange Commission, the Naval Criminal Investigative Service, 
the U.S. Army Criminal Investigation Command, and many other 
organizations dedicated to protecting Internet users from fraud, 
scams, and other crimes. The Web site offers a plethora of infor-
mation. Some of it is in the form of documents and reports. Other 
information is provided through online games and quizzes that 
test users’ knowledge of identity theft, fraud scams, computer se-
curity, and other Internet related issues. There are also videos on 
the Web site that demonstrate how phishing occurs. 
 PhoneBusters—Canada
http://www.phonebusters.com/ 
 PhoneBusters, the Canadian Anti-Fraud Call Centre that is man-
aged by the Ontario Provincial Police, the Royal Mounted Police, 
and the Competition Bureau in Canada, was founded in 1993. 
The Ontario Provincial Police is the second largest police force in 
Canada. The Royal Mounted Police was founded in 1873 and is 
the national police service and an agency of the Ministry of Public 
Safety Canada. The Competition Bureau is an independent agency 
designed to protect competitive markets. Canadians believe that 
competition is a positive thing, not only for businesses but also 
for consumers, thus the Competition Bureau seeks to promote 
competitive markets and keep consumers informed so that they 
can make educated decisions. These three groups, whose interests 
focus on consumer information, protection, and law enforcement, 
manage the call center. 
 PhoneBusters plays an integral part in educating the public 
about fraudulent practices, especially telemarketing scams that 

 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 213
are common and often hard to detect. Not only does PhoneBusters 
offer educational information about these scams, it also collects 
evidence, statistics, documents, tape recordings, and other im-
portant information that can be used by outside law enforcement 
agencies. PhoneBusters is considered the centralized Canadian 
agency for acquiring and maintaining information on telemarket-
ing scams, fraud letters, and identity theft complaints. The data 
that PhoneBusters collects and analyzes helps to determine what 
the current trends are for these types of crimes and to discover 
what needs to be done to prevent these crimes from happening 
again. Originally, PhoneBusters was limited to the prosecution 
of offenders in Ontario and Quebec who were in violation of the 
Criminal Code of Canada, but today the call center also works 
with U.S.-based agencies through extradition treaties. 
 The PhoneBusters Web site is user-friendly and available in 
both English and French. Visitors to this site may access statis-
tical information about the calls the center receives; this data is 
arranged so that viewers can compare current information with 
past statistics. Once a user selects the language he desires, he is 
directed to the home page, which offers a list of the latest scams 
reported to the center. These scams range from bomb threat 
e-mails to puppy scams. Puppy scams take place when someone 
places an advertisement to sell a puppy or other pet, even though 
in many cases he or she does not even have the animal. The seller 
often states that the owner has recently relocated to another coun-
try and needs to sell the pet because he or she can not take it with 
them. The advertisement requires that the buyer wire the fees in 
advance and to cover shipping and customs charges. Once the 
fees are paid, the pet is supposed to be shipped; however, the vic-
tim never receives the pet or hears from the seller again. The site 
also has a specific section  devoted to identity theft. Once viewers 
select this option, they are directed to a page that talks about the 
types of identity theft scams that are most commonly reported, 
how to determine if one is a victim, and the steps to take to rem-
edy the situation. The PhoneBusters slogan is “Fraud: Recognize 
It, Report It, Stop It.” 
 President’s Identity Theft Task Force 
http://www.idtheft.gov/ 
 In response to the growing concern about identity theft in the 
United States, President George W. Bush created a task force 

214  Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
on identity theft through Executive Order 13402 in May 2006. 
Knowing that victims of identity theft face financial and emo-
tional challenges as they try to reclaim their names, and rec-
ognizing that identity theft not only impacts individuals but 
also has a direct impact on the economy, Bush felt it was nec-
essary to have government agencies work together to try and 
combat this problem. The President’s Identity Theft Task Force 
was comprised of the Attorney General (Chairman of the Presi-
dent’s Identity Theft Task Force), the Chairman of the Federal 
Trade Commission (co-Chair of the Task Force), the Secretary 
of the Treasury, the Secretary of Commerce, the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, 
the Secretary of Homeland Security, the Director of the Office 
of Management and Budget, the Commissioner of Social Secu-
rity Administration, the Chairman of the Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System, the Chairperson of the Board 
of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the 
Comptroller of the Currency, the Director of the Office of Thrift 
Supervision, the Chairman of the National Credit Union Ad-
ministration Board, the Postmaster General, the Chairman of 
the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Director of 
the Office of Personnel Management. 
 The mission of the task force’s members was to develop a 
comprehensive plan for making the federal government more 
 effective in its efforts to promote identity theft awareness, to 
prevent identity theft, to detect cases of identity theft, and to 
prosecute criminals who commit identity theft. The task force 
focused on several key aspects of the crime, one of which was to 
examine the role that law enforcement plays when dealing with 
identity theft. The task force identified the methods that were 
currently being used to combat the crime. Another area of focus 
was to assess the current educational efforts by the private and 
the public sectors to inform people about identity theft and how 
to protect their personal information. The third focus of the task 
force was to examine the safeguards that the government has 
used to prevent identity theft and to determine how these safe-
guards can be improved. In April 2007 the task force released a 
report to the public that detailed their findings and made rec-
ommendations for preventing the crime of identity theft. A sub-
sequent report was released in October 2008 that outlined the 
actions that had been taken in response to the recommendations 
made in 2007. 

 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 215
 Privacy Rights Clearinghouse 
http://www.privacyrights.org/ 
 Located in San Diego, California, the Privacy Rights Clearing-
house was founded in 1992 by Beth Givens, and she currently 
serves as its director. In 2005, Paul Stephen joined the organiza-
tion. He uses his expertise in public policy, regulatory issues, and 
legislation to fulfill his responsibilities as the part-time Director of 
Policy and Advocacy. The Clearinghouse is a nonprofit organiza-
tion dedicated to addressing the issues associated with identity 
theft. It seeks to educate and provide information to those who 
request it as well as serves as an advocate on behalf of consumers. 
Through education, the Clearinghouse focuses on demonstrating 
how technology can impact a person’s privacy and what needs 
to be done to protect one’s privacy in a society where technologi-
cal advancements are taking place every day. Furthermore, the 
Clearinghouse works to provide information to all consumers 
about how their information is being used and what they can do 
to stop it from being available to so many different sources. The 
Clearinghouse also records complaints from consumers about is-
sues that are privacy-related and offers assistance when possible. 
The organization maintains a consumer hotline where callers can 
report privacy-related abuses and request information on protect-
ing themselves. The hotline’s phone number is 619-298-3396. 
 Among other services, the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse has 
fact sheets available on their Web site in English and Spanish. These 
fact sheets pertain to various privacy issues and are written in an 
easy to understand format. The Clearinghouse works not only with 
consumers, but also with legislators to help develop policies to pro-
tect consumers’ private information. Although the organization is 
not focused solely on identity theft, it deals with issues related to the 
crime. The Clearinghouse tries to detect potential problems within 
the acquisition of, maintenance, and access to identifying informa-
tion even before an actual crime of identity theft takes place. The 
organization also breaks down privacy concern issues into smaller 
topics that allow for a more detailed understanding. These   issues 
include financial privacy, Internet privacy, medical records privacy, 
telephone and telecommunications problems, public and govern-
ment records privacy, and direct marketing concerns. 
 The Clearinghouse’s Web site also offers a “Consumers Speak 
Out” page, which allows consumers to offer their input and share 
experiences in situations pertaining to privacy. 

216  Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
 Stop Atlanta Fraud Empower (SAFE) 
http://www.atlantava.org/default.asp 
 Stop Atlanta Fraud Empower (SAFE) is part of Atlanta Victim 
 Assistance, Inc., a nonprofit organization that seeks to assist 
victims of crime and to strengthen them and their families. The 
Atlanta Victim Assistance program was founded in 1984 as the 
Victim Witness Assistance Program, and changed its name in 
2005. The program specializes in helping victims of child abuse, 
domestic violence, identity theft, bank fraud, human trafficking, 
and the families of homicide victims. One of the public outreach 
programs that it offers is the Stop Atlanta Fraud Empower (SAFE) 
program, which is designed to provide education and support 
to help combat the identity theft and fraud problem in Atlanta, 
Georgia. 
 The SAFE program offers a three-part approach to address 
the problem of identity theft: education, advocacy, and training. 
Those working and volunteering within the SAFE program help 
victims file reports, address inaccuracies in their credit reports, and 
locate referral agencies to address other aspects of identity theft 
that are not covered by SAFE. The program also seeks to educate 
law enforcement officials about how to handle cases of identity 
theft and other fraud crimes more effectively. The group employs 
first responders to go to crime scenes or make home visits to offer 
support to victims. The assistance program also provides short-
term counseling victims and their families. Details about the SAFE 
program can be found on the Atlanta Victim  Assistance Web site. 
 United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (CERT)
http://www.us-cert.gov/ 
 In September 2003, the Department of Homeland Security and 
Carnegie Mellon University announced that they would partner 
to create the U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-
CERT), an agency that works toward preventing, protecting, and 
responding to cyber attacks on the Internet. Not limiting itself, 
US-CERT also partners with others in the private sector whose 
primary focus is on security. 
 Carnegie Mellon formed the first Computer Emergency 
Response Team/Coordination Center (CERT/CC) in 1988. The 
program was created in response to a worm that attacked com-
puters and interrupted 10 percent of the systems connected 
to the  Internet. The Carnegie CERT/CC is part of the Software 

 Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies 217
 Engineering  Institute, which is sponsored by the U.S. Department 
of Defense. The Carnegie Software Engineering Institute is fed-
erally funded and conducts research and develops products for 
the Department of Defense. The Carnegie Mellon CERT/CC is-
sues alerts about potential cyber attacks and provides informa-
tion about how to prevent them or how to recover from damages 
inflicted by such attacks. 
 US-CERT is located in Washington, D.C. and is part of the 
National Cyber Security Division in the Department of Home-
land Security. There are over 250 organizations located around 
the world that are identified by the name “CERT”; however, 
US-CERT is only affiliated with the Carnegie Mellon program. 
 US-CERT is charged with helping to defend the United 
States from cyber attacks and to act as a source for the gather-
ing and sharing of information between the private and public 
sectors. US-CERT’s Web site is designed for audiences of vary-
ing levels. Within the site there are sections for both technical and 
novice users. The technical users section is aimed at those who 
are already familiar with computer security and are most likely 
the systems administrators. The novice section is written for 
the average home user or a business owner who is just begin-
ning to learn about computer security. There is also a government 
 section to help foster information sharing about cyber security 
among government agencies. Other options on the Web site in-
clude alerts, a place to report phishing attempts, vulnerabilities, 
and other incidents that might occur. In addition, the site features 
publications and information on ways to protect oneself from 
cyber attacks. 
 United States Department of the Treasury Financial Crimes 
Enforcement Network (FinCEN) 
 In 1990, the U.S. Department of the Treasury established the 
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN). Its main 
objective is to combat money laundering and other financial 
crimes in the United States and throughout the world. FinCEN 
is responsible for helping to protect the United States’ financial 
infrastructure from possible corruption and crime, and it is the 
responsibility of the network’s director to obtain and review 
banking records that may assist in the collection of  intelligence 
information or which may be useful in  investigations. In March 
2004, FinCEN became a part of the Office of Terrorism and Fi-
nancial Intelligence under the Department of the Treasury. 

218  Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
 The FinCEN Web site is designed to provide information for 
a variety of financial institutions, including depository institu-
tions, the insurance industry, casinos, money services businesses, 
securities and futures, and the precious metals/jewelry industry. 
Furthermore, the site offers information about financial fraud 
and identity theft crimes, including a section designed to inform 
users about the new fraud scams taking place and a section to 
help victims of identity theft. 
 Victims Initiative for Counseling, Advocacy, and Restoration 
of the Southwest (VICARS)
http://www.idvictim.org 
 The Victims Initiative for Counseling, Advocacy, and Restora-
tion of the Southwest (VICARS) is a nonprofit law firm located in 
Texas. It is funded by a grant that was received as a result of needs 
identified in the reports of the President’s Task Force on Identity 
Theft. VICARS was developed under the Texas Legal Services 
Center; its purpose is to help victims of identity theft and other 
forms of financial fraud. Their work is limited mostly to residents 
of Texas, New Mexico, Colorado, and Oklahoma. This victims’ 
assistance program helps victims of identity theft in a variety of 
ways. They inform victims of their rights, help victims file iden-
tity theft complaints, dispute errors on credit reports, and docu-
ment their cases. 
 VICARS maintains a Web site and a toll-free number to 
assist victims of identity theft. The Web site provides informa-
tion to residents living in the four states. The “Victim’s Toolkit” 
section, which is available in both English and Spanish, allows 
site visitors to learn what to do if they are a victim of identity 
theft. The toolkit features sample letters to send to credit report-
ing agencies, businesses, and collection companies. The toolkit 
also includes specific information on issues relating to medical 
and criminal identity theft. The Web site’s links section connects 
visitors to other state and federal programs that offer informa-
tion on identity theft. The news section keeps users updated on 
recent fraud schemes and trends, and the site also has a list of 
upcoming events during which VICARS will be distributing 
 information and answering questions. 

219
 8 
 Print Resources 
 Books 
 Abagnale, Frank W. The Art  of the Steal: How to Protect Yourself 
and Your Business from Fraud, America’s #1 Crime.  New York: 
Broadway Books, 2001. 
 This book describes the most common techniques used to de-
fraud businesses and individuals. Through text and illustrations, 
the author gives advice on detecting vital document fraud, check 
fraud, counterfeit currency, Social Security number misuse, and 
other types of fraud plaguing modern society. 
 Abagnale, Frank W.  Stealing Your Life :  The Ultimate Identity 
Theft Prevention Plan . New York: Broadway Books, 2008. 
 Identity theft prevention is the subject of Frank Abagnale’s latest 
book. Based on the author’s experience as a con artist and his sub-
sequent security consultant career, the author discusses the role of 
technology in the crime and offers specific options for deterring 
it. He describes how to detect the crime, how to determine where 
the compromise most likely occurred, and how to find out who 
the probable perpetrator is. The book also defines identity theft 
and talks about why it is a profitable crime. 
 Abagnale, Frank W. and Stan Redding.  Catch Me If You Can: The 
True Story of a Real Fake . New York: Broadway Books, 2000. 
 Resources 

220 Resources
 This book is based on the author’s personal knowledge of identity 
theft. It gives readers an intimate account of Abagnale’s global ex-
ploits, which began when he was a teenager and continued nearly 
25 years. While serving a prison term, the book chronicles how 
and why the famous con man came to the decision to change his 
life and try to make up for his past life of crime. 
 Arata, Michael J., Jr.  Preventing Identity Theft for Dummies . 
Indiana polis, IN: Wiley Publishing, 2004. 
 This book is a comprehensive guide that provides strategies for 
deterring identity theft and also includes the resources victims 
need in order to reclaim their identities. Some of the subjects cov-
ered are reading credit reports, choosing safe account personal 
identification numbers, determining when it is appropriate to 
share personal information, safeguarding personal information, 
and avoiding the most common scams. 
 Biegelman, Martin T.  Identity Theft Handbook: Detection, Preven-
tion, and Security. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2009. 
 Identity theft as well as its connection to other crimes is discussed 
in this book. Among other issues, the author examines the global 
aspect of the crime, recent research, data breaches, and efforts of 
the criminal justice system to combat identity theft. Suggestions 
are also provided for preventing the crime. 
 Casey, Eoghan.  Digital Evidence and Computer Crime . San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press, 2001. 
 This book, written to address the issues unique to investigating 
computer-related crimes, incorporates three disciplines: forensic, 
computer, and behavior sciences. It features case studies, step-
by-step instructions, and hands-on exercises to help readers un-
derstand the role of digital evidence in all types of crimes. The 
companion CD contains exercises that compliment lessons in the 
book. 
 Collins, Judith M.  Preventing Identity Theft in Your Business: 
How to Protect Your Business, Customers, and Employees . Hobo-
ken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2005. 
 A guide for businesses, this book provides step-by-step instruc-
tions for securing sensitive information in the workplace. It 

Print Resources 221
 advocates the need for employees and managers to work together 
in fostering an honest workplace culture, developing security pol-
icies, and implementing security measures. Advice is also given 
on hiring practices. Hands-on exercises are provided to guide 
businesses through each step of achieving a workplace free of 
business and personal identity theft. 
 Collins, Judith M.  Investigating Identity Theft: A Guide for 
Businesses, Law Enforcement, and Victims . Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2006. 
 This book is a guide to developing a methodology for investigat-
ing identity theft cases. It was written for investigators, but can 
also be used by victims, law enforcement, and investigators em-
ployed in the public and private sectors. Real life case studies are 
used to illustrate the steps required to facilitate a successful reso-
lution to identity theft cases. These case studies help investiga-
tors gain a better understanding of the crime, perpetrator, victim, 
technology, and the criminal justice system. A list of investigative 
resources is also included in the book. 
 Collins, Judith M., and Sandra K. Hoffman.  Identity Theft First 
Responder Manual for Criminal Justice Professionals . Flushing, 
NY: Looseleaf Law Publications, Inc., 2003. 
 This training manual for police officers, attorneys, judges, prosecu-
tors, and members of their respective staffs is divided into two parts. 
The first section serves as a guide for professionals as they assist 
identity theft victims and conduct investigations. The second sec-
tion assists victims through the process of reclaiming their identities. 
The book contains a “Victim’s Checklist” to guide victims through 
the process of collecting and documenting evidence pertaining to 
their cases. A stand-alone guide for victims is also available. 
 Cullen, Terri.  Complete Identity Theft Guidebook: How to Pro-
tect Yourself from the Most Pervasive Crime in America .  The Wall 
Street Journal Series . New York: Three Rivers Press, 2007. 
 Some of the major information breaches of recent years and the 
responses to them by the affected businesses are discussed in 
this book. It examines the most common types of identity theft, 
such as credit card fraud, and offers suggestions on how to avoid 
 becoming a victim. In addition, a guide to reclaiming a stolen 

222 Resources
identity is provided; the guide includes letter and form templates 
suitable for use by victims. 
 Doerner, William G. and Steven P. Lab.  Victimology . 4th ed. Cin-
cinnati, OH: LexisNexis Publications, 2005. 
 This book offers a general understanding of the key concepts as-
sociated with the study of victimology. It explores many specific 
crimes such as spousal, elder, and child abuse and how victims 
respond to these crimes. The book also provides insight into vic-
tim empowerment strategies and what the criminal justice system 
can do to address victims’ needs. 
 Frank, Mari J. and Dale Fetherling.  From Victim to Victor: A Step 
by Step Guide for Ending the Nightmare of Identity Theft. 2nd ed. 
Laguna Nigel, CA: Porpoise Press, 2005. 
 Mari Frank, an attorney and identity theft victim, wrote this book 
as a response to the theft of her identity in 1996. The book is a 
complete guide to helping victims work through the process of 
clearing their names. The accompanying CD contains ready-to-use 
forms and letters. 
 Garner, Bryan A., ed.  Black’s Law Dictionary. 7th ed. St. Paul, 
MN: West Group, 1999. 
 This comprehensive dictionary includes over 24,000 legal defi-
nitions that are clear and concise. It also contains government-
 related information such as the Constitution of the United States. 
 Hemphill, Ronald.  Rollin: True Confessions of a Former Identity 
Thief . Federal Way, WA: D’Lanor Publishing, 2005. 
 This book chronicles the life of a former ringleader of a multi-
million dollar identity theft organization. Without being a how-to 
manual, it demonstrates how a network is formed and how it op-
erates. The author, now dedicated to eradicating identity theft, of-
fers suggestions on securing sensitive information. 
 Karmen, Andrew.  Crime Victims: An Introduction to Victimol-
ogy. 5th ed. Belmont, CA: Thomson Publishing, 2003. 
 Crime victims are the focus of this book. It defines victimology 
and discusses its history. The book explores many types of crimes, 

Print Resources 223
including assault, rape, and robbery, and looks at how victims 
typically respond to each of these crimes. It also provides insight 
into how the criminal justice system deals with victims and dem-
onstrates how to transform the system to meet victims’ needs. 
 Lininger, Rachael, and Russell D. Vines.  Phishing: Cutting the 
Identity Theft Line. Indianapolis, IN: Wiley Publishing, 2005. 
 This book provides an in-depth examination of phishing, includ-
ing how it evolved over time to incorporate malicious codes, and 
why it leads to identity theft. Technical information is given to 
help businesses and individuals reduce phishing occurrences. The 
book includes strategies for an effective response should an inci-
dent occur. Pictures and diagrams illustrate phishing Web sites, 
phishing e-mails, and the execution of various phishing scams. 
 May, Johnny R.  Johnny May’s Guide to Preventing Identity Theft: 
How Criminals Steal Your Personal Information, How to Prevent 
it, and What to do if You Become a Victim . Bloomfield Hills, MI: 
Security Resources Unlimited, LLC, 2004. 
 Written by a security professional, this book is a comprehensive 
guide on how to prevent personal and business identity theft. It 
includes a thorough definition of identity theft, describes the role 
of technology in the crime, and explains how the crime is commit-
ted. Step-by-step instructions are also provided to assist victims in 
reclaiming their identities. 
 McMillan, Edward J.  Policies and Procedures to Prevent Fraud 
and Embezzlement: Guidance, Internal Controls, and Investiga-
tion . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2006. 
 This book is written for accountants, auditors, managers, and in-
vestigators, regardless of the size or type of business with which 
they are associated. It provides the tools needed to implement 
policies and procedures for protecting organizations against fraud 
and individuals against identity theft. It leads readers through a 
risk assessment process ranging from procedures for hiring per-
sonnel to forensic accounting. Included in the book are numerous 
forms, checklists, and sample documents. 
 Stickley, Jim.  The Truth about Identity Theft. The Truth about Se-
ries.  Upper Saddle River, NJ: FT Press, 2008. 

224 Resources
 Stickley, a security expert, has breached the security of all types of 
institutions across the United States as part of his job. Included in 
this book are detailed examples about the online and offline meth-
ods used to steal identities and the preventative measures that can 
be instituted by both individuals and businesses. 
 Sullivan, Bob.  Your Evil Twin: Behind the Identity Theft Epi-
demic. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2004. 
 This book covers many facets of identity theft. Some of the most 
notorious heists of high-profile victims are covered, including 
hacking incidents carried out over the Internet. The author scruti-
nizes responses to the crime by the financial industry, law enforce-
ment, and legislators. Advice for preventing identity theft is also 
provided. 
 Weisman, Steve.  50 Ways to Protect Your Identity and Your 
Credit: Everything You Need to Know about Identity Theft, Credit 
Cards, Credit Repair, and Credit Reports.  Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall, 2005. 
 Real-life case examples are used in this book to illustrate how 
identities are stolen. The book offers advice on detecting iden-
tity theft scams and preventing victimization. Should the crime 
occur, it covers the steps victims need to take in order to clear their 
names. The book also discusses legislation such as The Gramm-
Leach-Bliley Act and FACTA. Forms and letter templates are in-
cluded in the book. 
 Journals and Magazines 
 Allison, Stuart F. H., Amie M. Schuck, and Kim Michelle Lersch. 
2005. “Exploring the crime of identity theft: Prevalence, clearance 
rates, and victim/offender characteristics.”  Journal of  Criminal 
Justice  33 (1): 19–29. 
 This article was written in response to the need for more  empirical 
research on the topic of identity theft. Data for the study was col-
lected from a Florida police department. The authors discuss com-
mon characteristics of the perpetrators as well as their victims. 
The article addresses the fact that, while the volume of identity 
theft cases continues to grow, the number of perpetrators con-
victed of the crime continues to decline. 

Print Resources 225
 Berghel, Hal. 2000.  “ Identity Theft, Social Security Numbers, 
and the Web .” Communication of the ACM  43 (2): 17–21. 
 The author of this article addresses privacy concerns related to 
the overuse of Social Security numbers (SSNs), computer technol-
ogy, and the Internet. Since SSNs are commonly used as personal 
identifiers by public and private entities, the author points out 
how this practice makes individuals vulnerable to identity theft. 
The article contends that the use of SSNs for anything other than 
credit purposes exposes individuals to unnecessary risk and 
warns that SSNs should not be used as a  record-keeping tool. 
As technology advances and reliance on the Internet increases, 
the author discusses concerns about future online privacy and 
security. 
 Boyter, Jennifer Horne. 2009. “Crimes in Another Name: States 
Trying to Address Criminal Identity Theft.”  State News (Coun-
cil of State Governments) 52 (1): 32–33. 
 This article explores the issues surrounding criminal identity 
theft. As defined in the article, criminal identity theft occurs when 
an offender is questioned about or arrested for committing a fel-
ony or misdemeanor and provides law enforcement officials with 
someone else’s identifying information. The author discusses the 
many problems encountered by victims as they work through the 
process of removing criminal charges from their records. Addi-
tionally, the article describes the programs implemented by dif-
ferent state governments to assist victims in clearing their names 
and to protect them from future victimization. 
 Britt, Phillip. 2009a. “Identity Thieves Hit a New Low.”  Infor-
mation Today 26 (2): 1–44. 
 This article predicts that incidences of identity theft will drastically 
increase in the near future due, in part, to the economic recession. 
Although the article discusses the prevalence of the crime, it fo-
cuses mainly how and why thieves steal the identities of recently 
deceased persons and the strategies to prevent it. 
 Britt, Phillip. 2009b. “Tax-Time Phishing Scams Out to Lure the 
Unsuspecting.”  Information Today 26 (4): 17. 
 According to this magazine article, the threats to personal infor-
mation and the potential for identity theft increases during tax 

226 Resources
season. Focusing on the 2009 tax season, the author noted an 
 increase in the number of phishing scams alleged to be from the 
U.S. Internal Revenue Service and other agencies. In the article, 
the U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team warned of a new 
e-mail scam that invites recipients to apply for stimulus package 
funds. 
 Choice . 2008. “10 threats to your good name.” (October): 12–16. 
 This article provides information on identity theft that is spe-
cific to the country of Australia. The author states that 499,500 
citizens became victims in 2007. The article names the top 10 
threats that put Australians at risk of becoming victims of iden-
tity theft. 
 Computer Fraud & Security. 2008. “TJX hackers caught.” 8:1–2. 
 This article chronicles the TJX security breach and the arrests that 
have been made in the case. It states that 11 individuals, including 
three U.S. citizens, were charged with hacking into the TJX da-
tabase and stealing customers’ information, including credit and 
debit card numbers. The article alleges that the group was also 
responsible for several other security breaches. 
 Consumer Reports. 2009. “Debit-card dilemma.” 74 (3): 8. 
 This article examines the risks associated with the use of debit 
cards. It explains that when a debit card is used to make a pur-
chase, the cash comes out of the cardholder’s checking or savings 
account. However, a compromised debit card can lead to many 
problems for the cardholder. The article discusses how thieves 
steal debit card information and provides options to help con-
sumers keep their debit cards safe. 
 Goldsborough, Reid. 2008. “Phishing Away Your Identity.”  Tech 
Directions 67 (8): 12. 
 The connection between phishing and identity theft is addressed 
in this article. The author gives a brief history of how phishing 
began and how it has evolved over the years. 
 Goodman, Eduard F. 2008. “Your Duty if You Discover a Data 
Breach.”  GPSolo 25 (8): 16–19. 

Print Resources 227
 This article offers readers a different approach to identity theft 
because it is written by an attorney to inform others in the profes-
sion of their responsibilities should a data breach occur at their 
law firms. The author discusses the ethical and legal obligations 
for disclosing a breach without jeopardizing their law careers. 
Furthermore, the author predicts that breach coverage insurance 
will be available by 2013 and become as commonplace as mal-
practice insurance. 
 Greenberg, Andy. 2008. “Stop, Thief.”  Forbes 181 (11): 60. 
 This article is a review of cutting-edge technology and how it can 
be used to prevent identity theft. The author provides examples of 
many security options ranging from the receipt of a text message 
from the bank when an online transaction is attempted to biomet-
ric authentication. 
 Groc, Isabelle. 2008. “Payback for ID Theft.”  PC Magazine 27(3): 20. 
 This article was written prior to the passage of the Identity Theft 
Enforcement and Restitution Act which became federal law in 
2008. One provision of the Act discussed in the article is that vic-
tims will have the opportunity to seek restitution if their imposter 
is convicted. While the bill may appear to be a solid attempt to 
help address the plight of victims, the article points out that only a 
small number of victims will benefit since very few identity theft 
cases are investigated. 
 Higgins, Michael. 1998. “Identity Thieves.”  ABA Journal 84 (10): 
42–48. 
 This article outlines the responses to the identity theft problem in 
the United States during the 1990s, as it was during the 1990s that 
the phrase  identity theft  was coined. According to the article, the 
federal government reacted by holding training seminars, sum-
mits, and legislative hearings in efforts to solve the problems as-
sociated with this crime. 
 Information Management Journal. 2006. “Does FACTA Go Far 
Enough?” 40 (6): 11. 
 The Fair and Accurate Credit Transaction Act (FACTA) that be-
came federal law in 2003 is the subject of this article. A provision 

228 Resources
of FACTA that became effective in 2005, the Disposal Rule, man-
dates the proper destruction and disposal of records containing 
credit information. However, this article argues that the law is not 
board enough to cover all of the personal information routinely 
collected and destroyed by businesses. It concludes that while 
FACTA is a good piece of legislation, it does not do enough on its 
own to protect consumers from identity theft. 
 Jackson, Margaret and Julian Ligertwood. 2006. “Identity Man-
agement: Is an Identity Card the Solution for Australia?”  Pro-
metheus 24 (4): 379–387. 
 This article examines the benefits and consequences of establish-
ing a national identity card program in Australia that is based 
on the model utilized in the United Kingdom. The authors 
begin by offering a historical perspective on the use of national 
identity cards in Australia. Although national identifiers have 
been temporarily implemented in the past, the article discusses 
the potential benefits of establishing an identity card program 
such as improving the efficiency of the government and detecting 
fraud. The article also talks about the legal and social implications 
that could arise. However, the authors offer other options that 
would protect the privacy of citizens and secure personal data. 
 Koops, Bert-Jaap, et al. 2009. “A Typology of Identity-Related 
Crime.”  Information, Communication & Society 12 (1): 1–24. 
 This article begins by acknowledging that a standardized, widely 
accepted, inclusive definition of identity-related crimes is non-
existent. The authors developed the typology to address this 
problem. The article states that the information can be used as a 
building block for subsequent research, to enhance policy making 
decisions, and to aid in the development of preventive measures. 
 Lacey, David and Suresh Cuganesan. 2004. “The Role of Organi-
zations in Identity Theft Response: The Organization-Individual 
Victim Dynamic.”  Journal of Consumer Affairs 38 (2): 244  –261. 
 This study examines the relationship between identity theft and 
the role of organizations in detecting identity theft, serving as the 
location where identities are used or abused, and serving as a lo-
cation where identity theft can be addressed to ensure a level of 
responsibility in protecting sensitive information, and  responding 

Print Resources 229
to victims of the crime. After analyzing the data, the authors 
found that many factors influence an organization’s ability to 
anticipate identity theft incidences and respond to victims of the 
crime. One example cited in the study was employee training. 
The study found that most organizations provide training either 
at the time the employees are hired or do not provide training at 
all. Even though this research involved organizations located in 
Australia, the authors suggest that the results are internationally 
applicable. 
 Lankford, Kimberly. 2008. “Your ID-Theft Prevention Kit.”  Kip-
linger’s Personal Finance 62 (4): 72–74. 
 The author of this article discusses everyday activities that make 
individuals vulnerable to identity theft and how to avoid becom-
ing victims. It also covers the types of personal information that are 
most desired by identity thieves. Additionally, the article explains 
how credit reports are useful tools for detecting victimization. 
 Lee, Victor. 2008. “Biometrics and Identity Fraud.”  Biometric 
Technology Today  16 (2): 7–11. 
 This article acknowledges that identity theft is a growing concern 
and addresses the connection between biometrics and identity 
fraud. The author discusses the monetary losses sustained in the 
United Kingdom and the United States as a direct result of the 
crime and argues that biometric technologies have the potential 
to reduce those losses. The article addresses how biometrics tech-
nologies can improve the identification and authentication sys-
tems that are currently in use. It addresses the vulnerabilities of 
biometric systems and how to secure the technology. The author 
also discusses the publics’ reaction to using biometrics as a means 
of preventing identity theft. 
 Linnhoff, Stefan and Jeff Langenderfer. 2004. “Identity Theft Leg-
islation: The Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003 and 
the Road Not Taken.”  Journal of Consumer Affairs 38 (2): 204  –216. 
 The authors of this article address the Fair and Accurate Credit 
Transactions Act of 2003 (FACTA) as it relates to identity theft. The 
article examines the provisions of the Act that help combat the 
crime such as giving consumers free access to their credit reports 
every 12 months, prohibiting organizations that process credit 
card payments from printing the complete number on  receipts, 

230 Resources
and requiring credit card companies to confirm address change 
requests before updating the cardholders’ accounts. Next, the ar-
ticle discusses proposed legislation and its effectiveness in pre-
venting identity theft. The authors conclude that, while FACTA 
improves the manner in which sensitive information is protected, 
there are issues that must addressed such as the overuse of Social 
Security numbers as personal identifiers. 
 LoPucki, Lynn M. 2001. “Human Identification Theory and the 
Identity Theft Problem.”  Texas Law Review 80 (1): 89–136. 
 This article reviews the Human Identification Theory and applies 
it to the identity theft issues that plague modern society. LoPucki 
addresses the role of identification as it relates to consumers and 
their ability to obtain credit. Since past approaches have been in-
effective, the author suggests an identification system that would 
be effective in combating identity theft. The system would give 
consumers the option of managing the flow of their own personal 
information. At the same time, it would provide the credit indus-
try with an identity verification method that protects consumer 
privacy. 
 Lynch, Jennifer. 2005. “Identity Theft in Cyberspace: Crime 
Control Methods and Their Effectiveness in Combating Phish-
ing Attacks.”  Berkeley Technology Law Journal 20(1): 259–300. 
 This article discusses identity theft and phishing, a common 
method used to steal identities. The author examines the increas-
ing number of phishing attacks and the costs associated with 
identity theft. Also, the article explores statistics that are associ-
ated specifically with the phishing aspect of identity theft and 
addresses crime control strategies that have been utilized on the 
primary, secondary, and tertiary levels. Primary control strate-
gies address society as a whole and focus on the root causes of 
the problem. Secondary control strategies identifies those who 
are most at risk of becoming victims and offers them information 
about how to protect themselves. On the tertiary level, a crime 
is addressed after it happens and the response is aimed at deter-
ring future occurrences. The author explains how each of the crime 
control strategies is being used to fight identity theft. In conclu-
sion, the article states that it is essential to utilize all levels of crime 
control in combating phishing attacks as well as identity theft. 

Print Resources 231
 “Medical Identity Theft.” 2008.  Biomedical Safety & Standards 
38(18): 137–139. 
 This article was written to specifically address cases of medical 
identity theft within the United States. It discusses the Federal 
Trade Commission’s data analysis of medical identity theft for the 
year 2005. Medical identity theft is defined and recommendations 
for combating the crime are provided in the article. 
 Milne, George R. 2003. “How Well do Consumers Protect Them-
selves from Identity Theft?”  Journal of Consumer Affairs 37(2): 
388–402. 
 This exploratory research was conducted to determine the degree 
to which consumers implement measures to protect themselves 
from becoming victims of identity theft. The author discusses the 
results of a self-report survey. Two sample groups participated 
in the project. One group consisted of college students who, on 
average, were 21 years of age. The other group was nonstudents 
whose average age was 36. The research found that both groups 
did not practice the same types of preventative measures. For 
example, students were more likely to give their Social Security 
numbers as identification when cashing checks than nonstudents. 
The findings also show that some preventative measures were 
barely utilized by either group such as reviewing their credit re-
ports. The author concludes that there are specific areas in which 
further consumer education is necessary. 
 Pastrikos, Catherine. 2004. “Identity Theft Statutes: Which Will 
Protect Americans the Most?”  Albany Law Review 67(4): 1137–
1157. 
 This article examines some of the state and federal identity theft 
legislation enacted in the United States. The author discusses the 
Identity Theft and Assumption and Deterrence Act of 1998, a fed-
eral law, and the state statutes adopted in Arizona, California, and 
New York. The strengths and weaknesses of each law are explored. 
Based upon the strengths, the author proposes a new statute that 
would effectively address the identity theft problem. 
 Saunders, Kurt M. and Bruce Zucker. 1999. “Counteracting 
Identity Fraud in the Information Age: The Identity Theft and 

232 Resources
 Assumption Deterrence Act.”  International Review of Law, 
Computers & Technology  13 (2): 183–192. 
 This article explores the issues surrounding identity theft and 
the potential effects of federal legislation. First, the authors de-
fine identity theft and examine the problems associated with the 
crime. The next section explores the importance of identity in 
modern society from both a sociological and practical perspec-
tive. The authors discuss the need for identity verification as well 
as the need to protect personal information. Lastly, the authors 
assess the Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998 
and its potential role in protecting the privacy of U.S. citizens. 
 Seltzer, Larry. 2008. “Measuring Identity Theft at Top Banks.” 
 PC Magazine  27 (7): 104. 
 The author of this article reports the findings of a study con-
ducted at the University of California’s Berkeley Center for Law 
and Technology. The purpose of the research was to ascertain the 
major institutions that are most often targeted by identity thieves. 
Researcher, Chris Hoofnagle, contends that financial institutions 
should disclose identity theft statistics so consumers can make 
informed decisions when choosing a bank with which to do busi-
ness. Statistics should include how many times identity theft was 
attempted as well as the number of times it occurred, the method 
used, and the type of account targeted. The author of the study 
proposes that this information ought to be voluntarily disclosed 
by the banking institutions. 
 Sharp, Tracy, et al. 2004. “Exploring the Psychological and So-
matic Impact of Identity Theft.”  Journal of Forensic Sciences 
(ASTM International)  49 (1): 131–136. 
 This article examines identity theft from the victims’ perspective. 
It discusses the psychological and somatic impact of the crime 
and pinpoints some of the most effective coping mechanisms. The 
article is based upon the results of an exploratory study in which 
victims completed a questionnaire. Based upon the responses, 
the authors determined that victims of identity theft experienced 
higher levels of psychological and physical difficulties than non-
victims. The study also found that victims whose identity theft 
problems were unsettled continued to suffer as compared to 
victims whose cases had been resolved. As noted in the article, 

Print Resources 233
 victims reported that one of the most effective coping techniques 
was active participation in working through the problems associ-
ated with the crime. 
 Smith, Lamar. 2008. “The New Challenges of Cybercrime.”  Fed-
eral Sentencing Reporter 20(5): 356. 
 Lamar Smith, member of the Committee on the Judiciary, House 
of Representatives, wrote this article to address the challenges fac-
ing the United States pertaining to cybercrimes. From a historical 
perspective, the author notes that criminal law has always been 
a reactive response to crime. In addition to responding to cyber-
crimes, the author demonstrates that it is also essential for the U.S. 
government to become proactive in the battle against it. By look-
ing forward to new technologies and how they can be exploited, 
proactive measures can be instituted to deal with the issues inher-
ent in a virtual world. 
 Sullins, Lauren L. 2006. “‘Phishing’ for a Solution: Domestic and 
International Approaches to Decreasing Online Identity Theft.” 
 Emory International Law Review  20 (1): 397–433. 
 This article addresses online identity theft and phishing, a tech-
nique used to trick individuals into revealing their personal in-
formation. It discusses the impact that phishing and identity theft 
has on consumers as well as corporations. The author contends 
that identity theft jeopardizes the future of Internet-based transac-
tions because consumers will lose trust in the authenticity of Web 
sites. 
 Sullivan, Clare. 2009. “Is Identity Theft Really Theft?”  Interna-
tional Review of Law, Computers & Technology 23 (1/2): 77–87. 
 The author of this article discusses identity theft in the United 
Kingdom. It builds upon a previous article in which the concept of 
identity and the definition of identity theft were discussed in the 
context of the UK Identity Cards Act of 2006. The author explores 
the idea that an identity is not comparable to an individual’s ma-
terial possessions that can be stolen. Rather, an identity may be 
considered an emerging legal concept that is not subject to theft. 
 Sullivan, Richard J. 2008. “Can Smart Cards Reduce Payments 
Fraud and Identity Theft?”  Economic Review 93 (3): 34–62. 

234 Resources
 The author of this article offers insight into the use of smart cards 
as a means for reducing payments fraud and identity theft. The 
article outlines the costs related to fraud cases, including identity 
theft, since payments fraud frequently involves a stolen identity. 
The author suggests that the use of smart cards would result in a 
savings for the financial industry, merchants, consumers, and law 
enforcement agencies. In addition, the author states that smart 
cards would provide a more secure and efficient payment system. 
The author also compares the strengths and weaknesses of the 
security features available through smart card technology. 
 Swartz, Nikki. 2008. “FTC Settles with TJX, Data Brokers.”  In-
formation Management Journal 42 (4): 14. 
 The author of this article writes about three companies that 
reached settlements with the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) for 
failing to protect personal information. According to the article, a 
hacker gained access to TJX’s computer network and stole debit 
and credit card information belonging to the retailer’s customers. 
The other cases involved data brokers Reed Elsevier and Seisint 
who allowed criminals to access their databases containing the 
sensitive information of U.S. consumers. 
 Swartz, Nikki. 2009. “Will Red Flags Detour ID Theft?”  Infor-
mation Management Journal 43 (1): 38–41. 
 This article explains the “red flags” rule and its potential role in 
reducing the losses that victims and businesses incur. The Iden-
tity Theft Red Flags program revised the Fair and Accurate Credit 
Transactions Act of 2003 (FACTA) to require specific entities, such 
as banks, to develop and implement an identity theft prevention 
program. The author also presents the arguments of proponents 
and advocates regarding the effectiveness of the rule in combat-
ing the identity theft problem. 
 Tynan, Dan, Tim Moynihan, and Tom Spring. 2008. “Identity 
Protectors: Who Can You Trust?”  PC World 26 (6): 105–112. 
 This article is a review of some of the identity theft protection ser-
vices that were available to consumers as of 2008. The services 
offered by six different companies were tested to determine if the 
services were effective in protecting against identity theft and 
if the protection was worth the price of the services. The article 

Print Resources 235
reported that four of the companies offered services designed to 
protect against financial identity theft and did not address other 
types of the crime. The authors concluded the article with a list of 
steps consumers can take to reduce the risk of becoming victims 
of identity theft. 
 Vijayan, Kaikumar. 2008. “Feds Nab More Members of Alleged 
Identity Theft Gang.”  Computerworld 42 (48): 8. 
 In this article, the author discusses the arrests of several individu-
als and their alleged involvement in a multimillion, global, cy-
bercrime network. The article examines the techniques used by 
the suspects to facilitate the theft of over $2.5 million from banks 
and credit unions. It also discusses the underground market and 
the amount and type of personal information that is sold in this 
venue. 
 White, Anthony E. 2005. “The Recognition of a Negligence 
Cause of Action for Victims of Identity Theft: Someone Stole 
my Identity, Now Who is Going to Pay for It?”  Marquette Law 
Review 88 (4): 847–866. 
 This article is an in-depth discussion of identity theft. The au-
thor explores the background of the crime, defines identity theft, 
and explains how and why the crime happens. In addition, the 
article examines responses to the crime in the form of civil litiga-
tion and legislative actions. Some of the laws discussed are the 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, the Fair Credit Reporting Act, and the 
Database Breach Notification Security SB 1386 Act. 
 White, Michael D. and Christopher Fischer. “Assessing Our 
Knowledge of Identity Theft.” 2008.  Criminal Justice Policy Re-
view 19 (1): 3–24. 
 The authors of this article explore the many unanswered ques-
tions pertaining to identity theft. They point out that the crime 
continues to escalate; yet knowledge of the topic is relatively lim-
ited. According to the article, there is much to learn about identity 
theft such as how often it occurs, the amount of losses incurred 
by victims, the nature of the crime, and a definitive profile of the 
victims and the perpetrators. The authors identify many obstacles 
that must be overcome if a greater understanding of the crime is to 
be realized. The article states, for example, that the  inconsistencies 

236 Resources
between the state and federal definitions of identity theft need to 
be addressed. 
 Winterdyk, John and Nikki Thompson. 2008. “Student and Non-
Student Perceptions and Awareness of Identity Theft.”  Cana-
dian Journal of Criminology & Criminal Justice 50 (2): 153–186. 
 This article opens by offering some statistical information about 
identity theft in Canada. Although Canadian scholars are begin-
ning to do more research on the topic, the authors note that most 
of the available research is generated in the United States. The 
article then provides a comparison of the research conducted in 
both countries. U.S. researchers tend to focus on law enforce-
ment approaches for detection and prevention of the crime. On 
the other hand, Canadian researchers mainly concentrate on how 
individuals can protect themselves from becoming victims of 
identity theft. The authors conducted a self-report study to assess 
how well college students and nonstudents understood the crime 
and the methods that they can use to protect themselves. Based 
upon the results, the authors offer information that can be use-
ful in policy decisions and suggest techniques to help educate the 
public about identity theft. 
 Pamphlets/Booklets 
 Federal Trade Commission.  Take Charge: Fighting Back Against 
Identity Theft.  Washington, DC: Author, 2006. http://www.ftc.
gov/bcp/edu/microsites/idtheft/become-a-partner.html. Accessed 
March 31, 2009. 
 This booklet guides victims of identity theft through the process of 
reclaiming their identities. It includes charts, letter templates, and 
the Identity Theft Affidavit. The booklet is available in English 
and Spanish, and can be downloaded in PDF form from the FTC’s 
Web site. Copies may also be ordered directly from the FTC. 
 Federal Trade Commission.  Talking About Identity Theft: A 
How-to Guide.  Washington, DC: Author, n.d. http://www.
ftc.gov/bcp/edu/microsites/idtheft/become-a-partner.html. 
 Accessed March 31, 2009. 
 The purpose of this booklet is to provide the tools necessary 
for implementing an awareness program in a community or 

Nonprint Resources 237
 workplace. It includes a definition of identity theft, information 
about assisting victims, deciding on a location to hold a semi-
nar, and issuing a statement to the media regarding the event. 
The booklet is available in English or Spanish, and can be down-
loaded from the Web site in PDF form or may be ordered from 
the FTC. A companion PowerPoint presentation is also available 
on the Web site. 
 Federal Trade Commission.  AvoID Theft: Deter, Detect, De-
fend. Fighting Back against Identity Theft.  Washington, DC: 
Author, n.d. http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/microsites/idtheft/be 
come-a-partner.html. Accessed March 31, 2009. 
 This pamphlet, written for consumers, outlines how to protect 
personal information and how to take action, should an identity 
theft occur. The pamphlet is available in English or Spanish, and 
can be downloaded from the FTC’s Web site in PDF form or or-
dered from the FTC. 
 Federal Trade Commission.  AvoID Theft: Deter, Detect, Defend. 
Military Personnel & Families. Fighting Back against Identity 
Theft . Washington, DC: Author, n.d. http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/
microsites/idtheft/become-a-partner.html. Accessed March 31, 
2009. 
 This pamphlet addresses issues related to identity theft that are 
unique to military personnel and their families. It outlines how 
to protect personal information and how to take action should an 
identity theft occur. The pamphlet can be downloaded from the 
FTC’s Web site in PDF form, or may be ordered from the FTC. 
 Nonprint Resources 
 AARP. 2004.  One identity theft victim’s ‘living hell.’ Available 
at: http://www.aarp.org/bulletin/yourlife/Articles/a2004-01-28-
livinghell.html. Accessed January 23, 2007. 
 The article chronicles one woman’s experience as a victim of iden-
tity theft. It discusses the problems she encountered as a result 
of another person using her identifying information following 
an automobile accident. The victim in this case received medical 
bills in her name and she was sued by another person who was 
injured. 

238 Resources
 Anti-Phishing Working Group. 2008.  Phishing activity trends: 
Report for the month of November, 2007.  Available at: http://www.
antiphishing.org/reports/apwg_report_nov_2007.pdf.  Accessed 
April 2, 2009. 
 The Anti-Phishing Working Group (APWG) is an organization 
dedicated to eradicating fraud, such as identity theft, perpetrated 
by online tactics such as phishing, pharming, and spoofing. It 
was founded in 2003 and is the largest repository of its kind. 
Members include law enforcement agencies, financial institu-
tions, retailers, Internet service providers, and solution suppliers. 
APWG tracks phishing incidents, phishing Web sites, spoofed e-
mails, and malicious crimeware. The findings are published once 
a month in the  Phishing Activity Trends Report.  The November 2007 
report notes that phishing incidents decreased, yet at the same 
time there was an increase in phishing e-mails targeting business 
recipients (e.g., executives and employees). The goal of these e-
mails was to commit business identity theft. 
 California Department of Motor Vehicles. 2007.  DMV Investiga-
tors Arrest Fresno Dealer on Charges of Identity Theft  Available 
at: http://www.dmv.ca.gov/pubs/newsrel/newsrel07/2007-7_10.
htm. Accessed April 2, 2009. 
 This news release by the California DMV is an example of busi-
ness owners accused of stealing the identities of their customers. 
The California DMV is the governmental agency responsible for 
issuing drivers’ licenses, state identification cards, and vehicle 
registrations. All documents submitted (applications, proof of 
legal presence, medical reports, driver tests, alcohol program 
completion certificates, etc.) are reviewed for possible fraud. If 
fraud is detected, the DMV participates in the investigation and 
prosecution of the wrongdoers. Since identity theft often involves 
a driver’s license or state identification card, the DMV’s Web site 
offers information to victims and businesses about preventing 
the crime. News releases are also available on the Web site dating 
from 2004 to the present. 
 Collins, Judith M. and Sandra K. Hoffman. 2004.  Identity theft: 
Predator profiles. Unpublished Paper, School of Criminal Jus-
tice, Michigan State University. 
 This exploratory research was conducted by researchers of the 
Michigan State University’s Identity Theft Program. At the time of 

Nonprint Resources 239
the research, it was the only comprehensive, on-campus program 
consisting of training, victim advocacy, research, and investiga-
tive service or support. This research is one of the first studies to 
offer a profile of perpetrators of identity theft. The study provides 
a foundation upon which to base future research. The data was 
collected between 1999 through 2002 and was gleaned from 486 
sources across the nation through systematic online searches that 
utilized search engines and databases. 
 Deloitte Services LP. 2004.  The Titans Take Hold. How  Offshoring 
has Changed the Competitive Dynamic for Global  Financial Ser-
vices Institutions. Available at: http://www. deloitte.com/dtt/cda/
doc/content/Offshoring%20Final%281%29.pdf. Accessed Janu-
ary 16, 2006. 
 This article discusses the practice of offshoring and clarifies some 
of the confusion surrounding it by first defining and  identifying 
the distinction between offshoring and outsourcing. Then, the 
article talks about the benefits of offshoring as it pertains to 
the financial industry and addresses the risks associated with it. 
The article also explores some of the issues that should be taken 
into account when planning to offshore such as regulatory com-
pliance, cost effectiveness, emergency preparedness, and protect-
ing intellectual property. 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2006.  Financial Crimes Report 
to the Public, Fiscal Year 2006.  Available at: http://www.fbi.gov/
publications/financial/fcs_report2006/financial_crime_2006.
htm. Accessed June 2, 2007. 
 The U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) is responsible for 
the investigation of fraud, theft, and embezzlement that occurs 
within the financial community. This report represents the Bu-
reau’s investigations and findings for the fiscal year 2006 and 
covers elements from various units within the FBI, offering an 
indicator of the latest crime trends. The crimes summarized in 
this report include: corporate fraud, securities and commodities 
fraud, health care fraud, mortgage fraud, identity theft, insur-
ance fraud, mass marketing fraud, asset forfeiture, and money 
laundering. 
 Federal Trade Commission. n.d.  Consumer Sentinel/Military.  
Available at: http://www.ftc.gov/sentinel/military/index.shtml. 
Accessed April 6, 2009. 

240 Resources
 The Consumer Sentinel/Military database was founded in 2002 
and is run by the Federal Trade Commission. The online portal 
collects consumer complaints from military personnel and their 
families; this data is then used as a means to analyze identity theft 
trends among military personnel and to offer advice on ways to 
protect themselves, especially during times of deployment. 
 Federal Trade Commission. 2001.  Identity Theft Victim Com-
plaint Data: Figures and Trends on Identity Theft, January 2000 
through December 2000.  Available at: http://ftc.gov/bcp/edu/mi 
crosites/idtheft/downloads/clearinghouse_2000.pdf. Accessed 
April 2, 2009. 
 This national statistical data, presented in the form of colorful 
charts and graphs, depicts complaints filed by identity theft vic-
tims. Covering the year 2000, it is the first report available for 
a complete year. The statistical information was compiled from 
databases maintained by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). 
The report may be downloaded in PDF form from the FTC’s Web 
site. 
 Federal Trade Commission. 2007.  Consumer Fraud and Identity 
Theft Complaint Data, January—December 2006. Available at: 
http://www.ftc.gov/sentinel/reports/sentinel-annual-reports/
sentinel-cy2006.pdf. Accessed April 3, 2009. 
 This national statistical data, presented in the form of color-
ful charts and graphs, depicts complaints filed by identity theft 
and consumer fraud victims with the Federal Trade Commission 
(FTC). The annual report compares 2006 data with that from 2004 
and 2005 and provides detailed statistics for each state. The report 
may be downloaded in PDF form from the Consumer Sentinel 
Web site. 
 Federal Trade Commission. 2008.  Consumer Fraud and Identity 
Theft Complaint Data: January—December 2007. Available at: 
http://www.ftc.gov/sentinel/reports/sentinel-annual-reports/
sentinel-cy2007.pdf. Accessed April 3, 2009. 
 This file offers a national look at the issue of identity theft. It al-
lows readers to examine the problem of identity theft through the 
use of colorful charts, tables, and graphs. The information in this 
report was collected by the Federal Trade Commission and the 

Nonprint Resources 241
report depicts complaints filed by identity theft and consumer 
fraud victims. The annual report compares 2007 data with that 
from previous years. It also provides detailed statistics for each 
state. The report may be downloaded in PDF form from the Con-
sumer Sentinel Web site. 
 Gayer, Jennette. 2003.  Policing Privacy: Law Enforcement’s 
Res ponse toIdentity Theft . CALPIRG Educational Fund. Avail-
able at: http://www.calpirg.org/home/reports/ report-archives/
campaign-finance-reform/campaign-finance-reform/ 
policing-privacy-law-enforcements-response-to-identity-
theft#dzyQhMxIWX4i6d33b6aLPg. Accessed April 3, 2009. 
 This is a summary of the information gleaned from interviews with 
law enforcement personnel in cities that have elevated incidences 
of identity theft. The research was conducted by the CALPIRG 
Education Fund, a nonprofit organization based in  California. 
As consumer advocates, the organization does research and pub-
lishes their findings on issues ranging from health care-related is-
sues to privacy issues. 
 Gordon, Gary R., et al. 2007.  Identity Fraud Trends and Patterns: 
Building a Data-Based Foundation for Proactive Enforcement. 
Available at: http://www.utica.edu/academic/institutes/ecii/publi 
cations/media/cimip_id_theft_study_oct_22_noon.pdf. Accessed 
February 27, 2008. 
 This research was done by the Center for Identity Management 
and Information Protection (CIMIP) at Utica College, a center that 
was founded in 2006. CIMIP is a joint research initiative made 
up of public and private entities. One of their goals is to provide 
proactive solutions to the growing problem of identity theft. 
The nature of this research was designed to assist law enforce-
ment in the development of strategies to control and prevent the 
crime. While many research projects focus specifically on the vic-
tims, this project concentrates mainly on the offenders. The study 
addresses one of the concerns expressed in the President’s Iden-
tity Theft Task Force report, the lack of information pertaining to 
the perpetrators of identity theft. The data used in this study came 
from the identity theft case files of the U.S. Secret Service from 
2000 to 2006. Based upon the data analysis and the understanding 
gained through the research, the authors offer several  suggestions 

242 Resources
that would allow the criminal justice system to take a proactive 
stance in controlling or preventing identity theft. 
 Greenfeld, Lawrence A. and Tracy L. Snell. 1999. Women Offend-
ers. Revised October 3, 2000. U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau 
of Justice Statistics. NCJ 173688. Available at: http://www.ojp.
gov/bjs/pub/pdf/wo.pdf. Accessed February 29, 2008. 
 This report analyzes the trends surrounding women offenders 
and explores the aggregate statistics regarding them. The authors 
discuss the number and types of violent crimes committed by fe-
males as compared to males. Several factors are considered such 
as the offender’s race, offender’s relationship to the victim, loca-
tion of the crime, age of the victim and offender, and the role of 
alcohol, drugs, or weapons in commission of the crime. The report 
provides specific data pertaining to the number of women who 
commit murder, including those who murder their children and 
stepchildren. The authors discuss the demographic information 
associated with arrest data, conviction rates, and incarceration of 
females in the prison system. The report addresses the frequency 
with which woman commit violent, property, and drug felo-
nies. It also examines the common characteristics of incarcerated 
women such as race, age, and marital status, level of education, 
age of their children, economic situation, health problems, and 
criminal history. Lastly, the recidivism rate among women is dis-
cussed. The data for this report was gleaned from many sources 
including the National Crime Victimization Survey, the Uniform 
Crime Reporting program, and the National Corrections Report-
ing Program. 
 Helmkamp, James, Richard Ball, and Kitty Townsend, eds. 1996. 
 Definitional Dilemma: Can and Should There be a Universal 
Definition of White Collar Crime?  Proceedings of the academic 
workshop of the National White Collar Crime Center and West 
Virginia University, West Virginia. Available at: http://www.nw3c.
org/ research/site_files.cfm?mode=p. Accessed April 3, 2009. 
 The workshop was sponsored by the National White Collar 
Crime Center (NW3C) and West Virginia University. It was held 
to provide an opportunity for experts on white collar crime to 
come together and discuss two main issues, the lack of research 
on the subject and the lack of a universally accepted definition of 
white collar crime. Bill McDonald, NW3C chairman of the Board 

Nonprint Resources 243
of  Directors, suggested that the term  white collar crime contributes 
to the perception that economic crimes are not serious crimes. 
He discussed changing the name altogether to reflect the harm 
perpetrated upon victims such as individuals, businesses, and 
the financial market. His comments were followed by three days 
of academic presentations given by experts from 15 colleges and 
universities across the United States. At the end of the workshop, 
participants agreed on a definition of white collar crime. 
 Identity Theft 911 Knowledge Center. 2005.  Identity Theft: The 
Meth Connection.  Available at: http://www.identitytheft911.org/ 
articles/article.ext?sp=81. Accessed June 25, 2007. 
 This brief online article outlines legislation proposed by U.S. Sen-
ator Maria Cantwell of Washington to authorize a study to deter-
mine if there is a relationship between identity theft and the use 
of methamphetamines. At the time of the proposed legislation, 
no research had been conducted in this area. The proposed study 
would focus on the sentences commensurate with crimes com-
mitted in which both methamphetamine and identity theft are in-
volved, the need for creating a database to facilitate information 
sharing among law enforcement agencies, and types of identity 
theft crimes that are most often associated with the use of meth-
amphetamines. 
 Identity Theft 911, LLC. 2008.  Identity Theft in Arizona. Available 
at: http://identitytheft911.org/attachment.do?sp=0408. Accessed 
April 3, 2009. 
 This white paper is unique because it addresses identity theft is-
sues pertaining to the state of Arizona. According to the report, 
this state led the nation in the highest number of victim com-
plaints filed for five consecutive years. The paper examines the 
root causes behind the explosion of the identity theft in Arizona, 
with the goal of gaining a better understanding of the crime and 
offering potential remedies to the problem. Statistics provided 
by the Federal Trade Commission’s annual reports are analyzed. 
In the report, the connection between identity theft, specifically 
employment fraud and illegal immigration, is examined. It dis-
cusses the marked increase in the numbers of children who be-
came  victims of the crime between 2003 and 2006. The report also 
examines the connection between identity theft and methamphet-
amine use. The white paper talks about some of the initiatives that 

244 Resources
have been undertaken in Arizona to combat the crime such as the 
establishment of Investigation Jurisdiction Protocol to aid police 
agencies in the Phoenix area in taking victim complaints. 
 Internal Revenue Service. 2005. “Examination  Techniques for 
Specific Industries (Direct  Sellers),” In  Retail Industry Audit 
Technique Guide (ATG). http://www.irs.gov/businesses/small/
article/0,,id=141491,00.html#top. Accessed December 27, 2005. 
 This audit guide is published by the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) and is available online in PDF and HTML formats. For ease 
of use, the guide is divided into chapters. The third chapter dis-
cusses electronic business (e-business) and how it is constantly 
growing, changing, and evolving. It explores the types of busi-
ness transactions that are routinely conducted online in addition 
to shopping. The chapter then provides techniques to aid IRS au-
ditors in determining if a company is engaged in e-business. 
 Jabaily, Bob, ed. 2004. “Credit history: The Evolution of  Consumer 
Credit in America.”  The Ledger Spring/Summer. Available at: 
http://www.bos.frb.org/education/ledger/ledger04/sprsum/ 
credhistory.htm. Accessed April 2, 2009. 
 This article outlines the history of credit from 1810 forward. It ex-
plores how technology made it possible for Americans to enjoy 
leisure time, which triggered the invention of various forms of 
credit, including credit cards.  The Ledger  is published two times 
annually by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston to promote edu-
cation on economic topics. It is available online in HTML and PDF 
formats from 1997 to the present . Consumers may also subscribe 
to free print issues for home delivery. 
 Lyzhina, Svetlana, and Zaghid Yusoupov, trans. “The Unsolved 
Riddle of Princess Anastasia.”  Pravda (Russia) (July 13) http://eng
lish.pravda.ru/main/18/90/363/13367_Nicholas.html. 
Accessed 
April 3, 2009. 
 This article documents some of the many imposters of Anastasia 
Nikolayevna Romanova, the daughter of Tsar Nicholas of Russia. 
After the execution of Nicholas’ family, many women claimed to 
be the princess and told stories about how they escaped death. 
The author examines the stories of three of the most convincing 
imposters. 

Nonprint Resources 245
 McMillan, Robert. 2006. “Paris Hilton Accused of Voice-Mail 
Hacking.”  PC World. http://www.pcworld.com/article/id,126923/ 
article.html. Accessed June 22, 2007. 
 This article uses a Hollywood experience to demonstrate how 
easy it is to break into mobile phone voicemail accounts. The 
article also talks about Tim Murphy, a U.S. Representative, who 
was a victim of spoofing. The author explains how technology 
has spawned new business opportunities, selling caller ID spoof-
ing services. In the article, one vendor, SpoofCard.com, advocates 
that there are legitimate uses for the technology despite the fact 
it has been used to hack into voicemail accounts and for carrying 
out telemarketing scams. Finally, the author offers a solution to 
the problem. A security expert suggests that hackings could be 
eliminated if all cell phone companies required their customers to 
place passwords on their voicemail accounts. 
 Morris, Robert G., II. 2004.  The Development of an Identity Theft 
Offender Typology: A Theoretical Approach . Available at: http://
www.shsu.edu/~edu_elc/journal/research%20online/re2004/
Robert.pdf. Accessed March 9, 2008. 
 This research project was conducted at Sam Houston State Uni-
versity, College of Criminal Justice and published in  The Graduate 
Research Journal.  The journal, which is only published online twice 
a year, offers a place for students to share their research with the 
academic community and those working in related fields. The pur-
pose of this particular exploratory research is to provide a foun-
dation for future research regarding identity theft perpetrators in 
order that solutions for combating the crime might be forthcoming. 
The author points out that little empirical research exists on this 
topic so data and information gathered from a police department 
are the major sources utilized in the study. The author begins with 
a general discussion of the nature of the identity theft problem and 
the government’s reactions to the crime. The author then examines 
who commits identity theft and why they commit it. 
 Newman, Graeme R. and Megan M. McNally. 2005.  Identity Theft 
Literature Review . Document No. 210459. Available at: http://www.
nc j rs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/210459.pdf. Accessed March 1, 2008. 
 The authors of this literature review received a grant from the 
U.S. Department of Justice to conduct an assessment of existing 

246 Resources
research and available resources related to identity theft. The goal 
of the review is to determine the identity theft topics that warrant 
research in the future. Many possibilities are identified and they 
encompass nearly every aspect of the crime. For example, more 
research is needed to ascertain the extent that organized crime is 
involved in identity theft. Such research may discover a means to 
prevent identity theft from becoming a tool for crime syndicates. 
This report is available online, or paper copies can be ordered 
from the National Criminal Justice Reference Service (NCJRS) 
Web site. 

247
 Glossary 
 $299 ring A type of scam in which Medicare recipients are targeted and 
offered additional coverage. Scammers take payments over the phone by 
requesting the victim’s credit card or checking account information. 
 aggravated identity theft The unlawful transfer, possession, or use of 
another person’s identifying information related to the commission of 
specific felonies. For example, a terrorism conviction involving stolen 
personal information or false identification documents results in two sen-
tences (i.e., one for the terrorism conviction and an additional five-year 
sentence for aggravated identity theft). 
  better business bureau (BBB)  According to its mission statement, the 
BBB is a private, non-profit organization founded in 1912 to promote 
trust between consumers and businesses in the marketplace. 
 business identity theft The use of identifying information pertaining to 
a company or corporation without its knowledge and with the intent to 
aid or abet in any unlawful activity such as obtaining services, merchan-
dise, money, and/or credit, committing felonies and/or misdemeanors, 
or filing for bankruptcy. 
 check cleaning (washing) A process by which household chemicals 
are utilized to remove the handwritten information from a check, leav-
ing only the preprinted information placed on the check at the time of 
ordering. 
 child identity theft The fraudulent use of the identifying information 
of a minor with the intent to aid or abet in any unlawful activity such as 
obtaining services, merchandise, money, and/or credit, committing felo-
nies and/or misdemeanors, or filing for bankruptcy. 
 common identifiers Personal information that might be targeted for 
identity theft, including a person’s name, address, and telephone number. 
 consumer sentinel A database maintained by the Federal Trade Com-
mission that contains the complaints of victims of identity theft, scams, 
and other types of fraud. The database is accessible to approved users, 

248 Glossary
including law enforcement personnel, consumer protection agencies in 
the United States and abroad, state and federal Attorneys General offices, 
and Department of Defense personnel. 
 credit card fraud When an unauthorized person opens credit cards 
in someone else’s name, uses someone else’s credit card, or instigates 
changes to someone’s credit card information without the knowledge or 
permission of the credit card holder. 
  do not call registry  A program created by the federal government in 
2003 to allow consumers to remove their home and cell phone numbers 
from telemarketing call lists. 
 Dumpster diving The act of searching through the trash of residences 
or businesses in order to locate personal information that can be used to 
commit identity theft. 
 federal trade commission (FTC) Created in 1914 by the Federal Trade 
Commission Act, the FTC is an independent agency of the federal gov-
ernment designed to promote consumer protection and to help eliminate 
and prevent anti-competitive business practices. 
 financial identifiers Personal identifying information that is associated 
with an individual’s finances. This may include account numbers that are 
issued by banks, credit unions, and credit card companies. 
 fraud alert An official notification a person places on their credit bu-
reau reports. This alert tells creditors to contact the claimant prior to 
opening any new accounts or making any changes to his or her existing 
accounts. 
 government issued identifiers Personal information that is assigned 
to an individual by the government for record-keeping purposes. Social 
Security numbers are an example of government issued identifiers. 
 Gypsy scammers A group of people who travel from one area to an-
other to commit fraud and other crimes. The group does not establish 
residency, thus making it harder to track them. Often times, the scams are 
committed under the guise that the scammers are going to perform some 
type of service. They collect the money up-front and then never return to 
complete the job. 
 hacker Someone who gains unauthorized access to computer data-
bases, computer networks, or other technological device. 
 hacking The process of gaining unauthorized access to a computer da-
tabase, computer network, or other technological device. 
  health insurance portability and accountability act (HIPAA)  This act 
was passed by Congress in 1996 and designed to address issues of secu-
rity and efficiency within the nation’s health care system. 

Glossary 249
 identity theft According to federal law, identity theft is the transfer or 
use of another person’s  identifying information  without their knowledge 
and with intent to aid or abet in any unlawful activity such as obtaining 
services, merchandise, money, and/or credit, committing felonies and/
or misdemeanors, or filing for bankruptcy. 
  identity theft assumption and deterrence act of 1998  This Act, passed 
by Congress in October 1998 to amend 18 U.S.C. § 1028, makes it a federal 
offense for a person to transfer or use the personal identifying informa-
tion of another with the intent to commit a crime or to aid in the commis-
sion of other crimes. It also enhanced the penalties when identity theft is 
committed in order to facilitate drug trafficking and violent crimes. The 
Act also mandated that the Federal Trade Commission establish a central-
ized complaint and education service for victims of identity theft. 
 identity theft clearinghouse A database established by the Federal 
Trade Commission as mandated by the Identity Theft and Assumption 
Deterrence Act of 1998. Launched in November 1999, the database col-
lects identity theft complaints directly from victims. 
 identity theft networks A group of individuals who work together to 
commit identity theft. The networks resemble organized crime in that the 
information and the benefits are commonly shared. Some networks are 
made up of smaller groups that offer certain specializations necessary to 
perpetuate the identity thefts. 
  identity theft penalty enhancement act  This Act, passed by Congress 
in 2004 to amend 18.U.S.C. § 1028, created the offense of aggravated 
 identity theft and implemented mandatory sentences. The Act also man-
dates that those convicted of aggravated identity theft must serve out 
their sentences instead of being placed on probation. 
 living trust A trust created during the lifetime of the grantor. 
 medical identity theft This occurs when someone receives medical ser-
vices, equipment, or doctor visits using the identity of another person 
without that person’s knowledge. 
 military sentinel A database established in September 2002 by the Fed-
eral Trade Commission. The database collects identity theft and fraud-
related complaints from members of the armed forces, military civilian 
employees, and their families. 
  mystery shopping providers association  Established in 1998, this is 
the largest professional trade association dedicated to improving service 
quality using anonymous resources (http://www.mysteryshop.org/). 
 Nigerian 419 scam A type of money transfer fraud or advance fee fraud 
named after the Nigerian criminal code it violates. Victims are promised 
large sums of money upon paying an advance fee or tax and providing 

250 Glossary
bank account information. All scams of this nature are called Nigerian 
419 Scams, even though they may not originate in Nigeria. 
 offshoring The practice of employing third-party vendors located out-
side the United States to perform jobs requiring access to the personal 
identifying information of U.S. citizens, such as medical records and in-
come tax returns. 
 OPT-OUT A program that gives consumers the option of removing 
their names from marketing lists to reduce the amount of pre-approved 
credit card offers and promotional materials they receive by mail. 
 passport program (Ohio) A pilot program developed in the state of 
Ohio in which law enforcement officials forward information to the At-
torney General’s office in cases of identity theft. Victims then receive a 
passport identification card providing them with documentation of their 
victimization. 
 personal identifying information Personal identifiers distinguish one 
person from all other people. There are four basic types of identifiers: 
common identifiers, government issued identifiers, financial identifiers, 
and other identifiers. “Other identifiers” is a category that encompasses 
the identifiers that do not fall into the first three categories. Other identi-
fiers include medical record information, employee identification num-
bers, student identification numbers, and biometric data. 
 phantom seller scam An online auction scam in which a seller has 
friends and family members create bogus feedback to give the impres-
sion that the seller is reliable. 
 phishing Sending deceptive e-mails for the purpose of tricking recipi-
ents into providing their personal information. 
  phone or utilities fraud  The use of a person’s identifying information 
to obtain phone or other utility services without their knowledge. 
 pre-texting Making deceptive telephone calls for the purpose of trick-
ing individuals into providing their personal identifying information. 
 search engine An online database of Web pages and programs through 
which users can search for information on a specific topic. 
 security breach The unauthorized access to personal identifying 
information of those who have had contact with the institution tar-
geted. This access may be the result of lost, stolen, unsecured, or even 
mishandled personal identifying information. This type of attack has 
the potential for hundreds or thousands of victims, depending on the 
target. 
 skimmer A small electronic device used to read and/or record the in-
formation on the magnetic strips of debit and credit cards. 

Glossary 251
 skimming A method used to capture debit and credit card information 
with a small electronic device called a skimmer. 
 spam Sending numerous copies of the same e-mail to various Internet 
users in an attempt to reach recipients who would not normally receive 
the message. It is often used for commercial advertising, get-rich-quick 
schemes, or quasi-legal services. 
 third-party billing The process of an operator-assisted telephone call 
in which the cost of the call is charged to a third party, separate from the 
caller, or the person receiving the phone call. 
  verified internet pharmacy practice sites (VIPPS)  An online database 
initiated by the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy to help con-
sumers identify legitimate pharmacies licensed to conduct business on 
the Internet. 
 vishing A combination of pre-texting, phishing, and/or the use of ad-
vanced voice technology for the purpose of tricking individuals into pro-
viding their personal information. This practice is also known as “voice 
phishing.” 
 war dialers An automated dialing program that allows scammers to 
call numerous numbers simultaneously. 


253
 Index 
 Abagnale, Frank, Jr., 140 
 Afghanistan, 117 
 age of perpetrators, 23 – 24 
 age of victims, 32 – 34 
 Al-Qaeda, 27 – 28, 92, 93, 117 
 Allie, Mohamed, 112 
 Anderson, Anna, 9 
 Anti-Phishing Working Group, 
199 – 200 
 arrests for crimes, 43 
 Ashcroft, John, 140 – 141 
 Asia, 113 – 115 
 attempted identity theft, 29 
 attributed identity, 101 
 Automatic Teller Machines (ATMs), 
 79 
 “AvID Theft: Deter, Detect, 
Defend” (FTC), 66 
 Aylmer, John, 6 – 7 
 background and history, 1 – 39 
 bank fraud, 29, 30 
 Bank of America, 11, 73 – 74 
 bank robbery, first documented 
multinational Internet bank 
robbery, 12 – 13 
 banking/credit/financial data 
breaches, 59, 60, 61 
 Beers, Rand, 116 
 Belgium, 102 
 benefits fraud, 29, 30 
 Better Business Bureau (BBB), 76 
 bills and account statements, 80 
 Bin Laden, Osama, 91, 93 
 biographical identity, 101 
 biographical sketches, 139 – 161 
 biometric identity, 101 
 birth certificates, 2, 98 
 and terrorists plots, 116 
 Bliley, Thomas Jerome, Jr., 
141 – 142 
 border security, Canada and US., 
94 
 Bowen, Debra, 142 
 Boyer, Amy, 15 – 16 
 breeder documents, 2 
 British Crime Survey, 104 
 business data breaches, 59, 61 
 business identity theft, 3 – 5 
 business interactions, 75 – 76 
 businesses 
 data breaches, 59, 61 
 early detection procedures, 42, 
43 – 44 
 Cade’s Rebellion of 1450, 6 – 7 
 Calderon, Charles, 143 
 Canada, 89 – 100 
 Canadian Security Intelligence 
Service (CSIS), 91 
 Canadian Social Insurance 
Number (SIN), 98 – 99 
 Cantwell, Maria, 143 – 144 
 Carter, Steve, 144 – 145 

254 Index
 categories of perpetrators, 
18 – 19 
 Chicago debacle, 11 – 12 
 ChoicePoint incident, 52 – 53 
 Chugaev, Aleksey, 111 
 Citibank, 12 – 13 
 Cogdill, David, 145 – 146 
 collection agencies, 42 
 computer security systems, 79 
 computers and other electronic 
devices, discarding, 79 – 80 
 Consumer Sentinel, Federal 
Trade Commission (FTC), 
65, 67, 95 
 Coppolino, Justine, 4 
 corporate identity crime, 
defined, 103 
 corporate identity fraud, 
defined, 103 
 corporate identity theft, 103 
 costs, of identity theft, 62.  
See also financial losses 
 country of origin of perpe -
trators, 26 
 credit and debit cards, 77 
 credit bureaus, 66 
 credit card fraud, 29, 30, 31 
 charges on statements, 42 
 Chicago debacle, 11 – 12 
 early case of, 13 – 15 
 existing credit cards only, 
44 – 45 
 credit monitoring for identity 
theft, 1 
 credit reporting bureaus, 50 
 credit reports, 1, 43, 50, 80 
 Fair Credit Reporting Act 
(FCRA), 80 
 creditors, 42, 50 
 criminal history of perpe -
trators, 25 – 26 
 criminal justice system 
 responses from, 72 – 73 
 victims’ experiences, 50 
 CSIS.  See Canadian Security 
Intelligence Service 
 Cuccinelli, Ken, 146 
 Czar Nicholas II and his family, 
8 – 9 
 Dahoumane, Abdelmajid, 93 
 data and documents, 163 – 197 
 Executive Summary Consumer 
Fraud and Identify Theft 
Complaint Data ( January-
December 2008), 163 – 164 
 Identity Theft and Assumption 
Deterrence Act (amended 
1998), 173 – 180 
 President’s Identity Theft 
Force (April 2007), 165 – 173 
 Title V of the Gramm-Leach-
Bliley Act (1999), 180 – 197 
 data breaches, 59 – 61 
 banking/credit/financial, 59, 
60,  61 
 businesses, 59, 61 
 educational institutions, 50, 60, 
61 
 government/military, 59, 60, 
61 
 medical/healthcare, 59, 61 
 Demara, Ferdinand Waldo, Jr., 
9 – 10 
 “The Development of an Identity 
Theft Offender Typology: 
A Theoretical Approach” 
(Morris), 17 – 18 
 Diners Club, 11 
 Dinerstein, Marti, 108, 109 
 Directory of Organizations, 
Associations, and Agencies, 
199 – 221 
 discarding computers and other 
electronic devices, 79 – 80 
 document shredding, 82 
 Docusearch, 15 – 16 
 Doha, Abu, 92 
 driver’s licenses, 2, 98, 104 
 and illegal immigrants, 107 
 and terrorist plots, 116 
 drug trafficking, 89, 111 

Index 255
 e-commerce, 13 – 15 
 E. H. Ferree Company, 10 – 11 
 early credit card fraud, 13 – 15 
 early detection procedures, 
by businesses, 42 
 early detection products for 
identity theft, 1 
 educated citizens, 81 
 educational institution data 
breaches, 50, 60, 61 
 EFTs (electronic funds transfers), 
30 
 EIN (employer identification 
number), 4 
 Electronic Crimes Task Forces 
and Working Groups, 
200  
 electronic funds transfers (EFTs), 
30 
 emotional and medical concerns, 
47 – 48 
 employer identification number 
(EIN), 4 
 employment of perpetrators 
in private businesses 
and financial industry, 
51 – 52 
 employment-related fraud, 29, 30, 
31 
 Equifax, 66 
 ethnicity of perpetrators, 
24 – 25 
 evading law enforcement, 30 
 Executive Summary Consumer 
Fraud and Identify 
Theft Complaint Data 
( January-December 2008), 
163 – 164 
 Experian, 66 
 “Exploring the Crime of Identity 
Theft: Prevalence, 
Clearance Rates: and 
Victim/Offender Charac-
teristics” 
 affiliation with other 
criminals, 28 
 age of perpetrators, 24 
 ethnicity and race of 
perpetrators, 24 – 25 
 gender of perpetrators, 20 
 Fair Credit Reporting Act 
(FCRA), 80 
 familial identity theft, 46 – 47 
 fax machines, 82 
 federal offense, identity theft 
as, 1 
 Federal Trade Commission 
(FTC), 201 – 202 
 age of victims, 33 – 34 
 “AvID Theft: Deter, Detect, 
Defend,” 66 
 Consumer Sentinel, 65, 67, 
95 
 data from victims, 53 
 identity theft complaints, 22 
 Identity Theft Data Clearing 
House, 65 – 68 
 “Identity Theft Survey Report,” 
44 
 Feinstein, Dianne, 146 – 147 
 Fighting Back Against Identity 
Theft (FTC web site), 81 
 financial accounts, 2 
 financial losses, 41 – 42, 48, 49.  
See also costs 
 financial security, 47 
 first documented multinational 
Internet bank robbery, 
12 – 13 
 first Internet murder, 15 – 16 
 Foley, Linda, 147 – 148 
 Frank, Mari, 148 – 149 
 Franklin National Bank, 11 
 fraud, identity theft as, 21 
 FTC.  See Federal Trade 
Commission 
 gender of perpetrators, 19 – 23 
 geographical location of victims, 
31 – 32 
 Giverns, Beth, 149 

256 Index
 government documents or 
benefits fraud, 29, 30 
 government-issued identification 
records, 2 
 government/military data 
breaches, 59, 60, 61 
 government responses to identify 
theft, 64 – 72 
 “AvID Theft: Deter, Detect, 
Defend” (FTC), 66 
 Consumer Sentinel Network, 
65, 67 
 Identity Theft and Assumption 
Deterrence Act of 1998, 
64 – 65 
 Identity Theft Data Clearing 
House, 65 – 68 
 Identity Theft Enforcement and 
Restitution Act of 2008, 
68 – 69 
 Identity Theft Penalty Enhance-
ment Act of 2004, 68 
 Identity Theft Prevention and 
Mitigation Program, 71 – 72 
 identity theft task forces, 70 – 71 
 National Data Privacy Day, 71 
 passport programs, 70 
 state-level legislative responses, 
69 – 72 
 See also solving identity theft 
 Gramm, William Philip, 149 – 150 
 Great Depression, 10 
 The Great Imposter,  9 – 10 
 “Hacking, Why Not?,” 117 
 Hannachi, Abderraouf, 91 
 Health Information Portability 
and Accountability Act of 
1996 (HIPAA), 81 
 Helen Remsburg v. Docusearch , 
16 
 Henry VI (Shakespeare), 7 
 HIPPA.  See Health Information 
Portability and Account-
ability Act of 1996 
 hiring practices, 83 
 history of identity theft, 5 – 16 
 Cade’s Rebellion of 1450, 6 – 7 
 Chicago debacle, 11 – 12 
 Czar Nicholas II and his family, 
8 – 9 
 early credit card fraud, 13 – 15 
 first documented multinational 
Internet bank robbery, 
12 – 13 
 first Internet murder, 15 – 16 
 the Great Imposter, 9 – 10 
 Jacob and Esau, 6 
 most misused Social Security 
number (SSN) in history, 
10 – 11 
 Sarah Wilson in Colonial 
America, 7 – 8 
 Home Office Identity Fraud 
Steering Committee 
(United Kingdom), 103 
 human trafficking, 89, 111 
 identity cards, 102 
 Mexico, 107 
 South Africa, 113 
 United Kingdom, 106 
 identity documents, 116 
 identity fraud 
 defined, 103, 115 
 and terrorist plots, 116 
 Identity Fraud—The UK Manual , 
104 
 “Identity Fraud and Transnational 
Crime,” 94 – 95 
 “Identity Fraud Trends and 
Patterns: Building a Data-
Based Foundation for 
Proactive Enforcement,” 
51 – 52 
 affiliation with other crimes, 
27 
 affiliation with other criminals, 
28 
 age of perpetrators, 23 – 24 
 country of origin of perpe -
trators, 26 

Index 257
 criminal history of perpetrators, 
26 
 ethnicity and race of perpetra-
tors, 25 
 gender of perpetrators, 20 
 Identity Theft 911, 202 – 203 
 identity theft 
 and Al-Qaeda, 27 – 28 
 business, 3 – 5 
 defined, 1 – 5, 103, 115 
 as federal offense, 1 
 as fraud, 21 
 hidden costs of, 62 
 and illegal immigration, 32 
 and the Internet, 13 – 15 
 personal, 2 – 3 
 by state, 31 – 32 
 statistics for 2008, 29 
 and terrorist plots, 116 
 as white collar crime, 21 
 See also solving identity theft; 
types of identity theft 
 “Identity Theft: Predator Profiles,” 
52, 53 
 affiliation with other crimes, 
27 
 affiliation with other criminals, 
27 
 age of perpetrators, 23 
 criminal history of perpetrators, 
26 
 gender of perpetrators, 20, 21 
 Identity Theft and Assumption 
Deterrence Act of 1998, 
64 – 65 
 Identity Theft and Assumption 
Deterrence Act (amended 
1998), 173 – 180 
 Identity Theft Enforcement and 
Restitution Act of 2008, 
68 – 69 
 identity theft marriages, 113 
 Identity Theft Partnerships in 
Prevention, 203 
 Identity Theft Penalty Enhance-
ment Act of 2004, 68 
 Identity Theft Prevention 
and Mitigation Program, 
New York Consumer 
Protection Board, 71 – 72, 
203 – 204 
 Identity Theft Resource Center, 42, 
45, 204 – 205 
 “Identity Theft Survey Report,” 
Federal Trade Commission 
(FTC), 44 
 identity theft task forces, 70 – 71 
 Identity Theft Victims Advocate 
Network, 205–206 
 identity thief categories, 18 – 19 
 circumstantial, 18 
 professional, 18 – 19 
 semi-pro, 18 
 survivalist, 19 
 See also types of identity 
theft 
 Ikhlef, Mourad, 92 
 illegal immigrants, 107 
 and identity theft, 32 
 immigration policies 
 Canada and US, 94 
 Mexico and US, 108 
 impersonation, 5 
 Indonesia, 117 
 information collected by organiza-
tions, 81 – 82 
 Institute of Consumer Financial 
Education, 206 
 Instituto Federal Electoral, 
Mexico, 107, 109 
 insurance for identity 
theft, 1 
 Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS), 4 
 International Association of 
Chiefs of Police and Bank 
of America, 73 – 74 
 International Association 
of Financial Crimes 
Investigators, 207 – 208 
 international organized 
crime, 94 – 95 

258 Index
 Internet 
 first documented multinational 
Internet bank robbery, 
12 – 13 
 first Internet murder, 15 – 16 
 and identity theft, 13 – 15 
 purchases on, 76 
 service providers, 14 
 Internet Crime Complaint Center, 
208 
 IRS (Internal Revenue Service), 4 
 Jacob and Esau, 6 
 Japan, 114 
 job procedures in businesses, 82 
 Kaine, Timothy M., 150 – 151 
 Karelov, Roman, 111 
 Kourani, Fadi, 109 
 Kyl, Jon, 151 
 Leach, James Albert Smith, 
151 – 152 
 Leahy, Patrick, 152 – 153 
 Levin, Vladimir, 12 – 13 
 loan fraud, 29, 30 
 lost productivity in the workplace, 
42 
 Lyakhov, Artur, 110 
 Madigan, Lisa, 153 
 mail protection, 77 – 78 
 marriages of convenience, 112 
 Maryland Crime Victims’ 
Resource Center: Identity 
Theft & Fraud Assistance, 
208 – 209 
 Mashokwe, Leslie, 113 
 matriculas consulares , 107 – 109 
 May, Johnny, 153 – 154 
 medical concerns, 47 – 48 
 medical fraud, 54 – 56 
 medical/healthcare data 
breaches, 59, 61 
 methods of detection and time 
lapse, 42 – 44 
 Mexico, 107 – 109 
 Millennium Bomber, Ressam, 
Ahmed, 90 – 94 
 Miller, Noel, 5 
 Miskini, Abdelghani, 94 
 modus operandi (MO) of perpe-
trators, 16 – 17 
 Morris, Robert II, “The Develop-
ment of an Identity Theft 
Offender Typology: A 
Theoretical Approach,” 
17 – 18 
 most misused Social Security 
number (SSN) in history, 
10 – 11 
 mother’s maiden name, 2, 82 
 motives of perpetrators, 16, 17 
 murder, first Internet murder, 
15 – 16 
 National Association of Boards 
of Pharmacy (NAPB), 76 
 National Association of Consumer 
Advocates, 209 
 National Check Fraud Center, 
209 – 210 
 National Data Privacy Day, 71 
 National Fraud Information 
Center, 210 – 211 
 National Identity Register (NIR) 
database, UK, 106 – 197 
 National White Collar Crime 
Center, 211 – 212 
 “White Collar Crime Statistics,” 
21 – 22 
 new accounts and other frauds, 
44 – 45 
 Nizamov, Radik, 111 
 non-credit card accounts, 
44 – 45 
 O’Carroll, Patrick, 116 
 offshoring identities, 57 – 59 
 Oller, Thomas, 154 
 O’Neil, Kevin, 107 
 OnGuard Online, 212 

Index 259
 opportunity takers or makers, 
17 – 19 
 organized criminal syndicates, 
58 – 59 
 See also international organized 
crime; Russian Organized 
Crime 
 Ostergren, Betty, 155 
 passport programs, 70 
 passports, 2 
 Canada, 89, 98 
 United Kingdom, 104, 106 
 password protection, 78 
 Paterson, David A., 155 – 156 
 perpetrators, 16 – 29 
 affiliation with other crimes, 
27 
 affiliation with other criminals, 
27 – 29 
 age, 23 – 24 
 categories of, 18 – 19 
 ChoicePoint incident, 52 – 53 
 country of origin, 26 
 criminal history, 25 – 26 
 employment in private 
businesses and financial 
industry, 51 – 52 
 ethnicity, 24 – 25 
 gender, 19 – 23 
 “Identity Theft: Predator 
Profiles,” 52 
 modus operandi (MO), 16 – 17 
 motives, 16, 17 
 opportunity takers or makers, 
17 – 19 
 phishing e-mail, 51 
 sources and methods for 
accessing identities, 51 – 53 
 personal identifying infor ma-
tion, 2 
 of customers, employees, and 
vendors of businesses 
 personal identity theft, 2 – 3 
 Petro, James, 156 – 157 
 phishing activity, 51, 74 – 75, 114 
 PhoneBusters (Canada), 95 – 96, 
212 – 213 
 Police and Justice Act of 2006 (UK), 
 105 
 Poochigian, Charles, 157 
 President’s Identity Theft Task 
Force (April 2007), 165 – 173 
 President’s Identity Theft Task 
Force (May 2006), 213 – 214 
 prevention measures, solving 
identity theft, 62 
 Privacy Act of 1983 (Canada), 
99 – 100 
 Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, 
215 
 private and public partnerships, 
solving identity theft, 
73 – 74 
 problems, controversies, and 
solutions, 41 – 87 
 proprietary information storage, 
82 
 protecting personal information, 
74 – 81 
 Automatic Teller Machines 
(ATMs),  79 
 awareness, 74 
 Better Business Bureau (BBB), 
76 
 bills and account statements, 80 
 business interactions, 75 – 76 
 computer security systems, 79 
 credit and debit cards, 77 
 credit reports, 80 
 discarding computers and other 
electronic devices, 79 – 80 
 educated citizens, 81 
 Internet purchases, 76 
 mail protection, 77 – 78 
 National Association of Boards 
of Pharmacy (NAPB), 76 
 password protection, 78 
 phishing, 74 – 75 
 shoulder-surfing, 79 
 shredding documents, 78 
 skimming, 77 

260 Index
protecting personal information 
(continued )
 Social Security number (SSN), 74 
 unsolicited mail, 77 – 78 
 Verified Internet Pharmacy 
Practice Sites (VIPPS), 76 
 vishing, 75 
 See also solving identity theft 
 protecting workplace information, 
81 – 83 
 fax machines, 82 
 Health Information Portability 
and Accountability Act of 
1996 (HIPAA), 81 
 hiring practices, 83 
 information collected by 
organizations, 81 – 82 
 mother’s maiden names, 82 
 proprietary information storage, 
82 
 security policies and job proce-
dures, 82 
 shredding documents, 82 
 Social Security number (SSN), 
81,  82 
 See also solving identity theft 
 refugee policies, Canada, 89 
 Reid, Michael, 97 – 98 
 responsibility theories, solving 
identity theft, 63 – 64 
 Ressam, Ahmed, Millennium 
Bomber, 90 – 94 
 restoration period and types of 
identity theft, 44 – 45 
 Romanova, Anastasia Niko-
layevna, 8 – 9 
 Roosevelt, Franklin D., 10 
 Russia, 109 – 111 
 Russian Organized Crime, and 
fraud, 109, 110, 111 
 Salgado, Carlos Felipe, Jr., 14 
 security policies, 82 
 September 11, 2001, 115 
 Shakespeare, William,  Henry VI , 7 
 shoulder-surfing, 79 
 shredding documents, 82 
 Simitian, Joe, 157 – 158 
 SIN.  See Canadian Social 
Insurance Number 
 Single Points of Contact (SPOC) 
network, 104 – 105 
 skimming, 77 
 Sloan, Shovana, 17 
 Social Security Act (1935), 10 
 Social Security Administration, 11 
 Social Security number (SSN), 
116 – 117 
 abuse of, 2, 31 
 defined, 3 
 and illegal immigrants, 107, 109 
 most misused in history, 10 – 11 
 protecting personal information, 
74 
 protecting workplace informa-
tion, 81, 82 
 solving identity theft, 62 – 83 
 criminal justice system 
response, 72 – 73 
 Fighting Back Against Identity 
Theft (FTC web site), 81 
 prevention measures, 62 
 private and public partnerships, 
73 – 74 
 responsibility theories, 63 – 64 
 victim blaming, 63, 64 
 victim-defending, 63 – 64 
 See also government responses 
to identify theft; protecting 
personal information; 
protecting workplace 
information 
 Sourcebook of Criminal Justice 
Statistics 
 age of perpetrators, 23 
 ethnicity and race of perpetra-
tors, 24, 25 
 gender of perpetrators, 19, 21 
 sources and methods for accessing 
identities, 51 – 53 
 South Africa, 112 – 113 

Index 261
 South Korea, 114 
 Spain, 102 
 Specter, Arlen, 159 
 SSN.  See Social Security number 
 standardized definitions of iden-
tity theft, 100 – 101, 103 – 104, 
118 
 state-level legislative responses, 
31 – 32, 69 – 72 
 statistics for identity theft in 2008, 
29 
 Steffer, Fred, 112 
 Stop Atlanta Fraud Empower, 
216 
 Strategic Council for the 
Competition Bureau of 
Canada, studies by, 95 – 96 
 Suzanne Sloane v. Equifax 
Information Services , 17 
 tax returns, 4 
 fraudulent, 30, 31 
 telephone or cell phone bills, 42 
 telephone or utilities fraud, 29, 30 
 terrorism, 89, 90 
 terrorist plots, and identity theft, 116 
 Thomas, Nicholas, 114, 115 
 threat to international and home-
land security, 115 – 118 
 transnational crimes, 89 
 See also worldwide perspective 
 time lapse and methods of detec-
tion, 42 – 44 
 Title V of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley 
Act (1999), 180 – 197 
 Torlakson, Tom, 159 – 160 
 transnational crimes, 89 
 TransUnion, 66 
 trends and special issues, 53 – 62 
 medical fraud, 54 – 56 
 offshoring identities, 57 – 59 
 organized criminal syndicates, 
58 – 59 
 real estate fraud, 56 – 57 
 tax fraud, 54 
 See also data breaches 
 types of identity theft, 29 – 31 
 attempted identity theft, 
29 
 bank fraud, 29, 30 
 credit card fraud, 11 – 12, 13 – 15, 
29, 30, 31 
 employment-related fraud, 29, 
30,  31 
 existing credit cards only, 
44 – 45 
 existing non-credit card 
accounts, 44 – 45 
 government documents or 
benefits fraud, 29, 30 
 loan fraud, 29, 30 
 new accounts and other frauds, 
44 – 45 
 other identity theft, 29, 30 – 31 
 phone or utilities fraud, 29, 30 
 and the restoration period, 
44 – 45 
 See also identity thief categories 
 underground marketplace, 116 
 Uniform Crime Reporting system 
(US), 104 
 United Kingdom, 100 – 107 
 United States Computer 
Emergency Readiness 
Team, 216 – 217 
 United States Department of 
the Treasury Financial 
Crimes Enforcement 
Network, 217–218 
 United States of America v. 
ChoicePoint , 52 – 53 
 unsolicited mail, 77 – 78 
 utilities fraud, 29, 30 
 utility services interruptions, 42 
 Verified Internet Pharmacy 
Practice Sites (VIPPS), 76 
 victim blaming, solving identity 
theft, 63, 64 
 victim-defending, solving identity 
theft, 63 – 64 

262 Index
 victims, 29 – 34 
 age, 32 – 34 
 geographical location, 31 – 32 
 see also types of identity theft 
 victims’ experiences, 41 – 51 
 criminal justice system, 50 
 effects on relationships, 
46 – 47 
 emotional and medical 
concerns, 47 – 48 
 familial identity theft, 46 – 47 
 financial losses, 41 – 42, 48, 49 
 financial security, 47 
 lost productivity in the work-
place, 42 
 methods of detection and time 
lapse, 42 – 44 
 types of identity theft and the 
restoration period, 
44 – 45 
 Victims Initiative for Counseling, 
Advocacy, and Restoration 
of the Southwest, 218 
 vishing, 75 
 Wahid, Abdul, 5 
 weapon trafficking, 111 
 Whitcher, Hilda Schrader, 11 
 white collar crime, 21 – 22 
 “White Collar Crime Statistics,” 
National White Collar 
Crime Center (NW3C), 
21 – 22 
 Wilson, Sarah, 7 – 8 
 “Women Offenders,” 21 
 worldwide perspective, 89 – 121 
 Asia, 113 – 115 
 Canada, 89 – 100 
 Mexico, 107 – 109 
 Russia, 109 – 111 
 South Africa, 112 – 113 
 United Kingdom, 100 – 107 
 See also threat to international 
and homeland security 
 Wyland, Mark, 160 – 161 
 Youens, Liam, 15 – 16 
 Zubaydah, Abu, 91 

  SANDRA K. HOFFMAN  is the Director of the Identity Theft Program 
at Michigan State University, School of Criminal Justice, East Lansing, 
Michigan. She holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in Human Services.  Sandra 
is the coauthor of the book  Identity Theft First Responder Manual for Crimi-
nal Justice Professionals  and its companion manual,  Identity Theft Victims’ 
Assistance Guide.  Sandra is also an Identity Theft Specialist for the Adrian 
Charter Township Police Department. 
  TRACY G. MCGINLEY  holds a Masters Degree and works as an instruc-
tor at Bowling Green State University Firelands in Huron, Ohio. She has 
coauthored a chapter in the book  The Move to Community Policing, and 
regularly conducts seminars to raise awareness of identity theft issues. 
 About the Authors 




