
SILVER LAKE PUBLISHING
LOS ANGELES, CA   ABERDEEN, WA
How to Protect
Your Name,
Your Credit and
Your Vital Information
…and What to Do
When Someone Hijacks
Any of These
Identity
Theft

Identity Theft
How to Protect Your Name, Your Credit
and Your Vital Information…and What to
Do When Someone Hijacks Any of These
First edition, 2004
Copyright © 2004 by Silver Lake
Publishing
Silver Lake Publishing
111 East Wishkah Street
Aberdeen, WA  98520
For a list of other publications or for more
information from Silver Lake Publishing,
please call 1.888.638.3091. Outside the
United States and in Alaska and Hawaii,
please call 1.323.663.3082. Find our
Web site at www.silverlakepub.com.
All rights reserved. No part of this book
may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transcribed in any form or by
any means (electronic, mechanical, pho-
tocopy, recording or otherwise) without
the prior written permission of Silver Lake
Publishing.
The Silver Lake Editors
Identity Theft
Includes index.
Pages: 264
ISBN: 1-56343-777-5
Printed in the United States of America.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Silver Lake Editors who have contributed to
this book are Kristin Loberg, Steven Son, Megan
Thorpe and James Walsh.
This is the 12th title in Silver Lake Publishing’s se-
ries of books dealing with risk and insurance issues.
Throughout this book, we refer to insurance policy
forms and legal decisions from the United States—
but the discussion about risk and insurance can apply
beyond the jurisdiction of the courts cited.
Most importantly: Identity theft is a phenomenon that’s
still developing. The legal precedents and insurance
forms involved are in relatively early stages. Expect
both to change as ID theft becomes a more familiar
topic to judges and actuaries.
This book is designed to give consumers a basic
understanding of ID theft and its legal and financial
effects. However, if you’ve been the victim of ID
theft, consult with law enforcement agencies or an
attorney in your area before taking any legal action.
The Silver Lake Editors welcome any feedback. Please
call us at 1.888.663.3091 during regular business
hours, Pacific time. Or, if you prefer, you can fax us
at 1.323.663.3084. Finally, you can e-mail us at
TheEditors@silverlakepub.com.
James Walsh, Publisher
Los Angeles, California

I N D E X

C H A P T E R  1
1
CHAPTER
WHY ID THEFT HAS
BECOME SUCH A
PROBLEM
1
Imagine getting a knock at your door one evening
while you’re having dinner with your family. When
you open the door, two federal agents and a local
cop stand on your doorstep ready to arrest you.
The problem? You’re accused of cocaine possession,
distribution and money laundering. The Miranda be-
gins.
The police have the wrong person. You’ve never even
seen cocaine in your life. But it’s going to take
hours…maybe days…to straighten everything out. In
the meantime, the Feds have banking records with
your name and Social Security number on them that
say you’ve been a drug dealer and money launderer
for several years. You’re handcuffed and shoved into
the backseat of a policecar while your kids cry on the
front lawn. And—despite your alleged drug wealth—
you can’t post bail to get out that night.
Identity theft has become the fastest-growing crime;
over 40 percent of all consumer complaints in the
U.S. involve identity theft. ID theft will cost U.S.

2
W H Y  I D  T H E F T  H A S  B E C O M E  S U C H  A  P R O B L E M
consumers and their banks or credit card companies
more than $1.4 billion in 2004. By 2006, losses could
reach $3.68 billion.
Being dragged off to jail in front of your family may
not be the worst that could happen. There you are—
in jail for three days while you prove that the person
committing all the crime in your name isn’t you.
But, once you get out of jail you still live in fear of
getting arrested again and again.
Meanwhile, your imposter continues to use your iden-
tity to commit crimes and no one seems to be help-
ing you find this crook and prosecute him. When you
try to correct your criminal record, you run into sev-
eral stumbling blocks. So, you contemplate a name
change.
You’d think it would be easy to eliminate a record
that clearly doesn’t reflect you. You’d think it would
be easy to convince the police, a judge, a government
agency or similar authority that you’re not a thief,
crook, debtor, felon and conman.
But it’s not so easy. It becomes your word against a
database. To people who work with the database,
you’re a criminal—guilty until proven innocent.
A  R E A L  L I F E  E X A M P L E
Another scenario: A man quits his job in the hopes of
finding a more rewarding career, only to learn that he
can’t get another job because his cousin had been ar-
rested years earlier and had used his name in the ar-
rest.

C H A P T E R  1
3
Terrance Summers worked as a Baltimore correc-
tions officer for 17 years, then tried to start a new
career. But he didn’t get far. As soon as he applied for
new jobs, he discovered that he had a criminal record;
prospective employers found several drug felonies
on his record. What had happened? His cousin Earl
Anthony Thomas had given his name in 1987 when
arrested on felony drug charges. This put Summers’s
name on the record, above his cousin’s fingerprints.
When Summers turned to Baltimore’s district
attorney’s office, he learned the hard truth: Once a
person’s name is entered into a criminal justice da-
tabase, it’s not easy to get it purged. And, once
someone’s name is attached to a set of fingerprints—
as Summers’s name was linked to his cousin’s—it’s
very difficult to change.
For Summers, the experience caused a financial cri-
sis. Unable to secure a job and an income, he lost his
fiancée (who left him due to the financial pressures),
burned through his retirement money and lost his ca-
pacity to make ends meet for his 10-year-old daugh-
ter. Getting justice was going to be tough. His cousin,
the man responsible for the trouble, had died in 1994.
Some victims of ID theft find that their names have
been misused after police stop them for a traffic
violation and discover that there is a warrant for
their arrest. There are also times when an innocent
person receives a summons to appear in court to
answer for a criminal act.

4
W H Y  I D  T H E F T  H A S  B E C O M E  S U C H  A  P R O B L E M
When cases like this reach the Baltimore D.A.’s office,
the prosecutors investigate the stories and usually start
with a fingerprint search. If a mistaken identity claim
checks out, the prosecutor writes a letter stating that
the victim has not been convicted of the charges on
his record. That is all the office has the power to do.
But for people like Summers, that’s not always enough
to convince prospective employers who find crimi-
nal charges during background checks.
There’s nothing new about criminals using aliases
to evade the law. But the sudden increase in identity
theft and the availability of stolen digital dossiers
on innocent victims makes it too easy for criminals
to get arrested and booked under a fake—possibly
your—name. Once police have booked a suspect un-
der your name, you could be plagued for life.
Identity theft is not just about getting falsely accused
of crime or living with serious marks on your crimi-
nal record (now that you have one!). ID theft covers
a wide range of issues and crimes. It goes from
the trivial to the outrageous. From jail houses to cof-
fee houses.
Most people don’t think or worry about ID theft
until they’ve become a victim. By then, it’s often too
late to prevent the situation from worsening before it
gets better. A typical victim spends an average of $808
and 175 hours over almost two years cleaning up
after an ID theft incident.

C H A P T E R  1
5
W H A T  I S  I D E N T I T Y  T H E F T ?
ID theft happens when someone steals a piece of
personal information about you and uses it to com-
mit a fraud in your name. The thief might steal your
Social Security number, name, date of birth, credit
card information, bank account numbers, mother’s
maiden name, etc., and use these things to:
•
Open up new accounts;
•
Change the mailing address on your cur-
rent credit cards;
•
Rent apartments;
•
Establish services for utility companies;
•
Write fraudulent checks;
•
Steal and transfer money from a bank
account;
•
File bankruptcy;
•
Obtain employment;
•
Establish a new identity; and/or
•
Apply for a mortgage, car loan or cell
phone.
Once someone assumes your identity to get credit in
your name and steal from businesses, you probably
won’t realize it happened until months later. Federal
law limits a consumer’s liability for credit card fraud
to $50 per account. Visa and MasterCard have
adopted zero-liability policies, but the real problem
remains in the clean-up of your credit report.

6
W H Y  I D  T H E F T  H A S  B E C O M E  S U C H  A  P R O B L E M
According to a survey conducted by Privacy Rights
Clearing and the California Public Interest Research
Group, victims spend from $30 to $2,000 on costs
related to identity theft, not including lawyer fees.
The average loss: $808. (Interestingly, the FTC re-
ported in December 2001 that 16 percent of all iden-
tity theft victims reported a loss of more than
$10,000.)
And don’t think that ID theft is only a hassle for adults.
About 2 percent of identity thefts involve a child’s
Social Security number. Parents should check their
children’s credit history reports as they would their
own for signs of theft. If your child receives mail,
like unsolicited credit cards or pre-approved applica-
tions, this may point to someone assuming your son’s
or daughter’s identity to establish credit.
T H E  S C O P E  O F  T H E  P R O B L E M
Identity theft is the fastest-growing crime in America.
And it extends across borders and involves other parts
of the globe. The Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
estimates that 10 million people were victims in 2002.
Determining the exact scope and financial impact of
identity theft on people and businesses is hard. There’s
been disagreement over what defines identity theft
(e.g., does a one-time joyride with someone’s credit
card equal identity theft?) and it’s hard to calculate the
impact when many incidents go unreported and it
can take years for a series of incidents to be tracked
and calculated.

C H A P T E R  1
7
The lack of a central command post for dealing with
ID theft—it often involves local, state and federal
offices—makes it difficult to understand the prob-
lem clearly. This mechanical challenge caused early
government statistics to underestimate the numbers.
In 2002, the General Accounting Office (GAO) re-
leased a year-long study that found that complaints
of identity theft to the FTC were up 33 percent and
the Social Security Administration had a 500 per-
cent increase in allegations of Social Security num-
ber fraud. According to the FTC, victims lost $5 bil-
lion due to ID theft in 2002. Businesses lost close to
$50 billion dealing with the problem.
ID theft can be extremely lucrative for criminals. A
clever thief can walk away with over $10,000 per
victim. Other facts about ID theft released by the
FTC in a survey:
•
About half of victims do not know
how the identity thief obtained their per-
sonal information. Nearly one out of
four victims said their information was
lost or stolen—including credit cards,
checkbooks, Social Security cards or sto-
len mail.
•
One out of 25 of those surveyed said
identity thieves misused their personal in-
formation to evade law enforcement,
such as presenting the victim’s name and
identifying information when stopped by
law enforcement authorities or charged
with a crime.

8
W H Y  I D  T H E F T  H A S  B E C O M E  S U C H  A  P R O B L E M
•
The Identity Theft and Assumption De-
terrence Act of 1998, which made iden-
tity theft itself a crime, designated the
FTC as the central storehouse for iden-
tity theft complaints.
The FTC Identity Theft Clearinghouse (established in
November 1999) received 161,819 reports of identity
theft in 2002, up 88 percent from 86,198 in 2001.
The FTC estimates it will receive 210,000 identity
theft complaints in 2003.
•
The District of Columbia has the high-
est incidence of identity theft, followed
by California.
In 2002, there were 123.1 victims per 100,000 people
in D.C., or 704 victims. In California, there were
90.7 victims per 100,000 people, or 30,738 people.
In New York, there were 66.9 victims per 100,000
people, or 12,698 victims.
Most often, identity thieves use the victim’s informa-
tion to commit credit card fraud. However, more
than one in five victims reported their information
was used to commit more than one type of fraud.

C H A P T E R  1
9
How Your Information Is Misused1
(Percent of reports)
Credit card fraud: 42%
Phone or utilities fraud: 22%
Bank fraud: 17%
Employment-related fraud: 9%
Govn’t documents or benefits fraud: 8%
Loan fraud: 6%
Other fraud: 16%
•
About one in six identity theft victims
said the thief used their personal infor-
mation to open at least one new account,
such as new credit card accounts, new
loans or other new accounts.
•
Over half of identity theft victims are
under age 40. About 11 percent of vic-
tims are age 60 or older.
•
According to the Social Security Admin-
istration Inspector General’s analysis of
the SSA’s Fraud Hotline data, more than
80 percent of SSN misuse allegations
were related to identity theft.
1 Refer to the FTC’s Web site at www.ftc.gov for more informa-
tion. Some of this information was adapted from the site.

10
W H Y  I D  T H E F T  H A S  B E C O M E  S U C H  A  P R O B L E M
•
On average, identity thieves misused vic-
tims’ information for about three
months. However, when the identity
thief opens new accounts with the victim’s
information, the misuse lasts longer—
more than one out of four of these vic-
timizations lasted six months or more.
Despite the FTC’s best efforts, there is no single data-
base in the U.S. that captures all investigations and
prosecutions of identity theft cases. Enforcement ac-
tions on identity theft law may be undercounted. Be-
cause identity theft is usually committed to facilitate
another crime, criminals often are charged with those
other crimes like bank, wire or mail fraud rather than
with identity theft.
Reporting on ID theft is surprisingly low. Victims
might first try to clear up the mess through their credit
bureaus, credit agencies, DMV and the such. They
don’t necessarily run to their local police department
or fill out the affidavit provided by the FTC for re-
porting the crime (more on this later). In 2002, 47
percent of those reporting identity theft to the FTC
said they notified the police department, but only
roughly one-third had a report taken; 53 percent of
victims had not notified a police department.
Only about one out of four identity theft victims
polled in a FTC-sponsored survey said they reported
the crime to local police. Only about one in five said
they notified one or more credit bureaus about the
identity theft.

C H A P T E R  1
11
H O W  T H E Y  S T E A L
There are so many ways for someone to steal your
identity. Only about one in 100 identity thieves is ever
caught. Think of all the people who hold they key to
your identity via your Social Security number alone:
your banks; credit card companies; credit bureaus;
insurance companies; brokerage houses; doctors’ of-
fices; dental offices; phone companies; cable compa-
nies; fitness gym; local rec center; public library; school;
baseball league; tennis club; DMV; department and
specialty stores (e.g., Bloomingdale’s, Victoria’s Se-
cret, Eddie Bauer) where you purchase items regu-
larly with their card; apartment building manager; sub-
scriptions that catalogue subscribers by their SSNs;
airlines with your frequent flyer programs…and all
those Internet sites you’ve joined using your SSN as
an identifier or username.
This book will detail the How’s, Why’s, When’s and
Where’s to ID theft, but here’s a brief list of some of
the places where thieves can get your information.
Some are obvious areas of vulnerability; others are
not. Become familiar with these things.
•
Mail: Your mailbox—filled with incom-
ing or outgoing mail—is an easy target.
A thief can look through the mail for
bills or bank statements and pilfer the
information. Check washing is another
method; a thief can wash out the ink on
a signed check, change the amount and
rewrite the check to himself. Watch out
for those pre-approved credit cards that
come in the mail, too.

12
W H Y  I D  T H E F T  H A S  B E C O M E  S U C H  A  P R O B L E M
•
Fraudulent change of address: A thief
can fill out a change-of-address form at
the post office or with the victim’s credit
card company so the mail and bills get
redirected to the thief’s address or mail
drop.
•
Trash cans and dumpsters: Business
and building dumpsters are attractive
items to thieves looking for discarded
letters with business and customer ac-
count information. A thief can disguise
himself as a homeless person digging
through garbage.
•
Onlookers: Whenever you expose your
ATM or calling card in a public place,
someone might be looking. Criminals
lurk around ATM machines and pub-
lic phones in high-traffic areas for vic-
tims. They might even look from afar
with the help of binoculars, camcorders
or a zooming camera.
•
Lost or stolen purse or wallet: If a
thief comes across a lost purse or wallet,
or steals it himself, he’ll have a lot of per-
sonal information to use. This is when
keeping certain things like your Social
Security card and health insurance card
(which often bears your SSN) out of your
purse is key.
•
Inside jobs: An employee of a business
might illegally retrieve information that a
business has collected for legitimate rea-
sons. An entry-level employee at a fi-
nancial institution, for example, might be

C H A P T E R  1
13
able to access others’ personal informa-
tion, and sell it to identity thieves.
•
Internet: Computer-savvy criminals can
use the Internet to hunt down victims
easily. Personal Web pages are targets,
and genealogical databases give thieves
access to maiden names, which are often
used as passwords to bank accounts and
the like.
•
Skimmers: Thieves who carry skimmers,
devices that can read the magnetized strip
from a credit card, bank card for ac-
count numbers, balances, verification
codes, are hard to spot because they of-
ten work where you’re using your card
to make purchases. First your card is run
through the regular credit card reader,
then through the skimmer without you
knowing.
•
Pretexting: You might be duped into
giving up your personal information over
the phone with someone who disguises
himself as a representative with a reli-
able company that you use, like your
phone company, local department store
or cable company.
In Chapter 4, we’ll consider more details on each of
these topics. In that chapter, the mechanics of ID theft
get described in detail.
W H Y  T H E  I N C R E A S E  I N  T H E F T ?
We live in an age of information and digitization;
we’ve traded privacy for convenience. We buy gad-

14
W H Y  I D  T H E F T  H A S  B E C O M E  S U C H  A  P R O B L E M
gets to make remote transactions and have greater
access to publicly available information.
Although the Internet makes it easier to steal data
needed to pass as somebody else, ID theft was be-
coming a problem before surfing the Web became
popular. At the heart of the problem is the issue of
Social Security numbers being our sole code for our
identity.
It’s very easy to obtain Social Security numbers.
Non-Social Security Administration uses of Social
Security numbers have not been prohibited, so So-
cial Security numbers are used as identification and
account numbers by many entities.
The expanded use of the SSN as a national identi-
fier has given rise to individuals using counterfeit SSNs
and SSNs belonging to others for illegal purposes.
Stolen SSNs have been used to gain employment, es-
tablish credit, obtain benefits and services and hide
identity to commit crimes.
Web sites sell individuals’ Social Security numbers,
some for as little as $20. Self-regulatory efforts by
information brokers have been ineffective in restrict-
ing the sale of sensitive personal information to the
general public. Creditors, generally, have failed to
adopt better policies.

C H A P T E R  1
15
ID theft will worsen because there are indications
that organized crime gangs are gravitating toward
identity theft as a low-risk, high-payoff crime.
Stealing a credit card number is the easiest way to
commit identity fraud. Thieves can find receipts left
on tables in restaurants or in shopping bags, thrown
away in a trash can or dumpster, or left behind at the
gas pump. Identity theft, however, has gotten more
sophisticated than that, which means you can’t simply
be super-careful about those receipts to protect your-
self. The problem we face today is a result of many
things that have been happening (or not happening) in
the past 40 years.
In the 20th Century, a vast system of third-party
record keeping arose. Personal information was col-
lected and maintained by banks, doctors and hospi-
tals, credit reporting agencies, pharmacies, utilities,
insurers, employers and government agencies.
In 1976, the U.S. Supreme Court, in U.S. v. Miller,
ruled that Americans do not have a Constitutional
right to privacy in personal data held by third par-
ties. The court reasoned that when you open a bank
account, you surrender your data to the flow of
commerce. Absent statutory protection, the bank is
more or less free to give your financial data to whom-
ever it pleases. So, even though the information was
about you, those that collected it and kept it, owned
it. The Supreme Court ultimately extended this rea-
soning to telephone records and garbage.

16
W H Y  I D  T H E F T  H A S  B E C O M E  S U C H  A  P R O B L E M
In 1977, a bipartisan commission created by Con-
gress when it enacted the Privacy Act recommended
a comprehensive legislative package, concluding that
protections were needed in such areas as financial,
medical, communications and government records
and Social Security numbers. It also recommended a
national office to oversee and enforce privacy policy.
As you can assume, most of those recommendations
were not carried out.
T O O  M A N Y  B E D M A T E S
By 1990, the U.S. was the only nation with a law to
protect the privacy of video rental records, but with-
out a law to protect medical records. What we have
today is a system by which each person is linked to
one number and that number gets used to do every-
thing, from buying houses and cars, to transferring
money, selling on eBay, renting a video, getting a tooth
extracted and registering your car.
ID thieves bribe clerks, steal from mailboxes, filch
data from computers and garbage and raid per-
sonnel files.
The underworld of “carders”— that is, hackers, who
specialize in stealing and selling credit card numbers—
is steadily growing. Some are connected to organized
crime groups in Russia, Eastern Europe and Nige-
ria. Victimized Web sites include Western Union, Egg-
head, CD Universe and CreditCards.com. Identity
thieves are using stolen credit card numbers to buy
names, addresses and SSNs from legitimate infor-

C H A P T E R  1
17
mation brokers, and then use the fraudulently-pur-
chased identifiers to commit identity theft.
The consolidation of the banking industry also
has contributed to the upsurge in ID theft. As little
banks get eaten up by bigger banks, the consolidation
pinpoints one’s personal information to huge data-
bases and prevents a spreading-out of information
that would help hide or scramble one’s personal in-
formation. It also kills personal connections, chang-
ing the standard by which you are evaluated finan-
cially. Nowadays, people are more attached to their
impersonal FICO2 score than their reputation in
town. You become a number rather than a face to
which your identity is attached. The growing impor-
tance of consumer credit makes every Social Security
number a potential charge account.
Financial institutions largely have ignored federal
regulators’ recommendations that they guard
against would-be privacy invaders by asking custom-
ers for personal identification numbers (PINs) or pass-
words before giving out their personal data. More-
over, the government isn’t pushing credit bureaus and
credit issuers who gather and use private information
to stamp out fraud. Until that happens, consumers’
finances remain vulnerable.
2FICO stands for Fair, Isaac & Company, which develops the
mathematical formulas used to obtain snapshots of your credit
risk at any given point in time. These scores are the most widely
used and recognized credit ratings, and they are used by the
three largest credit reporting agencies (Equifax, Experian and
TransUnion).

18
W H Y  I D  T H E F T  H A S  B E C O M E  S U C H  A  P R O B L E M
Financial institutions continue to participate in
telemarketing schemes in which customers are solic-
ited for 30-day free trials and memberships, and
then the telemarketer either charges it to the
customer’s credit card or adds a monthly charge to
his or her mortgage statement.
There’s a mixture of activities that should not be
mixed. Would you want your bank selling your name
and good reputation to retailers? Would you want the
same institutions that track personal credit histories to
market personal information to other companies?
Probably not. But that’s what they do. The lines be-
tween e-commerce, Internet-based financial services,
banking, selling and buying have all blurred. Every-
thing is computer-based, and everything is stream-
lined to a nine-digit number that puts you in a vulner-
able center. It’s no wonder that banks, credit bureaus
and credit card companies don’t like to talk about ID
theft. They’ve been part of the problem.
Credit bureaus should be required to notify people
when someone accesses their file or they receive a
bad credit report. But few states have adopted such
needed reforms.
Only Colorado requires credit agencies to advise con-
sumers of new bad-credit ratings. California lets people
freeze their credit reports, preventing access to their
files without permission. And only six states have taken
the modest step of letting individuals get one free

C H A P T E R  1
19
copy of their credit report a year. Congress has failed
to enact any of these measures.
W H A T  C O N G R E S S  I S  D O I N G
So, what is Congress doing? Federal legislators have
been slow to react to the problem. New legislation,
which, among other things, would impose limits on
the misuse of personal information and prohibit the
unauthorized sale or display of Social Security num-
bers to the public, have been introduced but not
passed. Combating identity theft will require a multi-
pronged approach at the local, state and federal level,
including the FTC, the Secret Service, the Postal In-
spection Service, the FBI, the Office of the Inspector
General of the Social Security Administration, the IRS’s
Criminal Investigation Division, as well as a range of
other state and local agencies.
Congress passed the first federal law dealing with ID
theft in 1998 called the Identity Theft and Assump-
tion Deterrence Act, which we’ll go over in more
detail in Chapter 6. This statute has a sweeping sub-
stantive breadth that reaches all identity thefts that have
a federal interest—even those involving state law felo-
nies. But it still lacks the punch consumers really need.
Violations of the Identity Theft and Assumption De-
terrence Act are investigated by federal agencies
(e.g., Secret Service, the FBI, etc.). The Department
of Justice prosecutes the cases, usually through one
of the U.S. Attorneys’ offices.

20
W H Y  I D  T H E F T  H A S  B E C O M E  S U C H  A  P R O B L E M
California passed the first law to thwart identity theft
in 1999. It prohibits businesses from printing more
than the last five digits of an account number. The
law applies to any new cash register. Existing registers
must be in compliance by January 1, 2004. The law
provides an exception for transactions in which the
sole means of recording a person’s credit card num-
ber is by handwriting or photocopying the card. Other
states are following, but the U.S. government is con-
sidering legislation on the federal level.
Laws take time to get introduced as bills, passed into
law and then enacted. One problem related to ID
theft involves the statute of limitations, which is
often based on the date of the criminal occurrence
rather than date of discovery. ID theft takes a long
time to emerge…and a long time to investigate. The
gap between the criminal act and its discovery also
allows offenders to cover tracks and destroy infor-
mation that may otherwise prove invaluable to the
investigative efforts.
In addition to a lack of resources as it relates to
unraveling the complex underpinnings of an invest-
ment or securities fraud, criminal cases are not being
brought because state and local law enforcement and
prosecutorial agencies lack the technology and train-
ing to investigate and prosecute them effectively.
The U.S. Attorney General has announced that com-
batting the problem is a two-pronged step:
1)
instigate a coordinated, nationwide sweep
to prosecute cases involving ID theft; and
2)
develop new legislation to enhance the
penalties for ID theft.

C H A P T E R  1
21
In Chapters 6 and 7, we’ll detail the laws and agen-
cies available to protect you. You’ll get a better un-
derstanding of the Fair Credit and Reporting Act, the
1998 federal Act, as well as a list of agencies that will
respond to you in a case of ID theft.
P R E V E N T I O N  S T A R T S  W I T H  Y O U
There are many ways to prevent ID theft, and it’s
important to incorporate as many theft-prevention
tactics into your life as possible. It requires a level of
lifestyle alteration. You can’t simply run to Staples,
buy a shredder and start shredding all of your junk
mail and bank statements. You can’t remove your
Social Security card from your wallet and assume that
keeps your number safe.
Protecting your identity is much more than that.
Preventing ID theft today—in the age of the Internet
and digitization—requires an array of changes at
home, in the workplace and even among friends in
large gatherings.
Later on you’ll learn the mechanics of ID theft, the
specific ways to prevent ID theft as well as how to
incorporate those practices in your daily life. The key
is to prevent the theft from happening in the first
place, rather than dealing with it once it has occurred.
The most important tool you can have to prevent ID
theft is common sense. Until government catches

22
W H Y  I D  T H E F T  H A S  B E C O M E  S U C H  A  P R O B L E M
up with laws to prevent theft, aid victims and pros-
ecute thieves, you need to rely on your own tactics
first. You have to hope that the minimum-wage input
clerk who processes your application for a grocery
store check cashing card doesn’t get greedy. Or that
the minor federal functionary who files your son’ ap-
plication for college financial aid doesn’t get too in-
terested in the data on your form. Or that the person
working the Help Desk at an office superstore doesn’t
decide to sell a crook the codes to access consumer
credit reports that contain the information needed to
assume your identity and destroy your finances.
Later in this book (Chapter 10), you’ll find a chapter
on lifestyle changes that you should follow and check-
lists (in Chapter 11) for everyday living.
I N  T H I S  B O O K
In the next chapter, you’ll learn that no one is immune
to identity theft. It can happen to you.
This book gives you the tools for making lifestyle
changes in your daily routines in order to prevent
identity theft. It also give you the tools you need to
tackle an identity theft problem should you face one
in the future. You’ll find real-life examples of people
like you who’ve become victims…as well as profiles
of the most pernicious thieves.
Also included in this book is information about how
IDs work, from your Social Security card to your
military discharge papers and driver’s license. The me-
chanics of ID theft will be explained in detail; as well
as the effects of immigration on identities and the
horrific role terrorists have played in the growing prob-

C H A P T E R  1
23
lem; and the laws and agencies available to protect
you.
In the end, you should feel better equipped to go
about your daily transactions without too much worry.
Getting peace of mind when it comes to any hassle
in life—like identity theft—is about being a smart and
aggressive consumer.

24
W H Y  I D  T H E F T  H A S  B E C O M E  S U C H  A  P R O B L E M

C H A P T E R  2
25
CHAPTER
IT CAN HAPPEN TO
YOU…NO MATTER
WHO YOU ARE
2
You can be rich, famous, a struggling middle-class
unknown with major debts to pay off or a college
student who has had a credit card for only a few
weeks and be a victim of identity theft. You can be a
two-year-old in diapers or an 86-year-old with false
teeth and no memory. You could even be dead.
Because the world has become so electronic and au-
tomated, identity theft has become a crime that’s en-
abled by computers, databases and the impersonal
nature of transactions these days. Consider:
•
The increased availability of goods or
services that can be obtained on credit;
and
•
The proliferation of computer tech-
nology in our society that provides easy
access to the information needed to com-
mit many financial crimes, as well as a
means for committing them remotely.
The personal identifiers most often sought by crimi-
nals are those generally required to obtain goods and
services on credit. These are primarily Social Security
numbers, names and dates of birth.

26
I T  C A N  H A P P E N  T O  Y O U … N O  M A T T E R  W H O  Y O U  A R E
When you enter a bank, post office, grocery or cor-
ner five-and-dime store, no one knows you. You’re
a stranger whose ability to make transactions and pur-
chases is often tied to a number—a credit card or
bank card (if not cold hard cash). You are identified
by the plastic cards you carry—your driver’s license,
club cards, credit cards and passports…instead of
your recognizable face, reputation and family name.
Too many people think that they are too poor or in
too much debt to ever become a victim of identity
theft. Why would someone want to impersonate me? I don’t
have any money. I don’t own a home or a fancy car. I can
hardly afford to make the minimum payments on my credit
cards….
When an Ohio college student applied for her first
credit card upon starting school, the woman was sur-
prised when she got turned down. Someone had al-
ready opened four credit cards in her name and racked
up $50,000 in debt. That someone was her own fa-
ther.
Parents who’ve botched their own finances are in-
creasingly tempted to dip into their children’s credit.
As co-signers, all they need is a birth date and
Social Security number. Some parents put bills—
cable, TV, utilities—in their kids’ names.
The student knew her father was struggling finan-
cially after his divorce from her mother and the fail-
ure of his restaurant. And, typical of many victims of
identity fraud by family members, she didn’t want

C H A P T E R  2
27
to file a complaint against her father. So she persuaded
him to consolidate the $50,000 credit card debt and
pay it off by having his wages garnished.
Meanwhile, she had $30,000 in student loans of her
own. She worried about her future—her ability to
buy a car, get an apartment and meet a man who’d
want to be with someone with $80,000 debt.
People between the ages of 20 and 40 are most
vulnerable due to their relatively high usage of elec-
tronic payment channels.
A L L  I N  T H E  F A M I L Y
Family members are an attractive target for iden-
tity thieves. Spouses have extensive access to each
other’s documents and personal information, and fam-
ily members are frequently in each other’s homes un-
supervised. In-house thieves, however, rely on another
element: that they won’t get caught. These thieves hope
that their family ties will protect them from law-en-
forcement. They assume, often correctly, that their vic-
tims won’t press charges or avoid a confrontation
with others in the family.
In Morena Valley, California, Judi Woodward was
devastated to learn that her sister, Janet Goodpastor,
had stolen her identity and that of their Alzheimer’s-
afflicted mother and used them to open fake credit
card and utility accounts and forge checks. Woodward’s
credit was ruined and her mother paid the steepest
cost: She was evicted from her house, was unable

28
I T  C A N  H A P P E N  T O  Y O U … N O  M A T T E R  W H O  Y O U  A R E
to pass a credit check needed to get into a nearby
assisted-living home and had a warrant out for her
arrest over the bad checks written in her name.
In the U.S., about 6 percent of identity theft victims
who contacted the FTC in 2001 indicated that the
person who had stolen their identity was a family
member.
Although you’re more likely to have your identity sto-
len by an opportunistic stranger, it’s not out of the
question for a family member to impersonate you.
The hard part about being victimized by a family
member is prosecuting. Do you sue your sister, brother
or father for helping themselves to your good name
and credit?
When it comes to defining your family, you need to
be aware of people close to your family that might
be able to access critical information about you. It’s
not just about your family, either. Your home is full
of paperwork and documents that anyone can use to
retrieve the information for committing identity theft.
And they don’t have to be blood relatives.
Controlling access to your home includes controlling
who enters and leaves on a regular basis with your
permission. An unscrupulous character might get to
know you, get invited into your home or work in
your home for a given amount of time…then later
steal from you when you’re not looking. Think about:

C H A P T E R  2
29
•
housekeepers;
•
security patrollers;
•
gardeners;
•
repairmen (cable, phone, utilities, appli-
ances, computer, plumbing, etc.);
•
contractors;
•
decorators, landscapers;
•
caregivers, babysitters;
•
everyday deliverers (supermarket, drug-
store, food, etc.);
•
movers, installers;
•
large item deliverers (appliances, TVs,
furniture, etc.);
•
mailman, garbageman;
•
exterminator;
•
utility meter reader (gas, electricity, etc.);
•
pet groomer;
•
tutor, after-school teacher (music,
math, etc.);
•
athletic coach, personal trainer, mas-
sage therapist, etc.; and
•
friends, neighbors, children’s acquaintan-
ces, etc.
Limit the number of people who have easy assess
into your home. This means keeping keys and access
codes to your security alarm away from most. Keep
critical documents locked up in a desk drawer. Con-
sider purchasing a fireproof safe for storing this in-
formation.

30
I T  C A N  H A P P E N  T O  Y O U … N O  M A T T E R  W H O  Y O U  A R E
Protecting your children from dead-beat fathers
or drug-addicted mothers who have the potential to
steal from you and your children is a challenge.
Over the course of three years, Florida resident Kelli
Pasqualetti-Heller began to receive letters from col-
lections agencies demanding payment for utility, phone
and cable companies. A furniture company sent an
overdue bill. And the IRS demanded back taxes.
But the letters weren’t addressed to her—they were
addressed to her 11-year-old son who suffered from
cerebral palsy. After hiring a private investigator,
Pasqualetti-Heller learned that her son had had his iden-
tity stolen from his own father, who’d been using his
son’s Social Security number to make purchases. The
woman fought with the bill collectors to get the
charges removed, then went to the police. After two
years of calling, e-mailing and faxing, Pasqualetti-Heller
heard that her ex-husband was arrested and charged
with three felony counts of identity theft.
This case is proof that a thief can be in the
family…and target a minor child with no credit his-
tory at the start.
W H O ’ S  A  T A R G E T ?
Identity theft, unlike many types of crime, affects all
Americans, regardless of age, gender, nationality, race
or income level. Victims include everyone from res-
taurant workers, telephone repair technicians and po-
lice officers, to corporate and government executives,
celebrities and high-ranking military officers. What
victims do have in common is the difficult, time con-
suming and potentially expensive task of repairing

C H A P T E R  2
31
the damage that has been done to their credit, their
savings and their reputation. Be careful about calling
identity theft a “white-collar” crime. This is mislead-
ing because the profiles of the thieves are as diverse
as the people they victimize.
An identity thief can be a lowly store clerk, a neigh-
borhood teen with a fancy computer or your col-
league at work with too many bills to pay. But these
thieves also include organized criminal groups, street
gangs and convicted felons.
Because laws haven’t been passed quick enough to
address the growing severity of the crime, the prob-
ability of high financial gain versus low sentencing
exposure opens the door for more thieves. And, until
more uniform and severe laws emerge to catch, pros-
ecute and punish identity thieves, the incentives to
steal will outweigh the risks of being caught.
An identity thief can be sophisticated in his methods,
or low tech by simply dumpster diving to obtain
someone else’s personal information. An identity thief
may not even think about committing the crime until
he or she comes across a misplaced purse, a dropped
wallet or a stack of mail placed in the wrong mail-
box. If a potential thief has access to personal infor-
mation but doesn’t have the know-how to pull of a
scheme, he may sell the information to someone
who does know how to pull it off.

32
I T  C A N  H A P P E N  T O  Y O U … N O  M A T T E R  W H O  Y O U  A R E
With the proliferation of computers and increased
use of the Internet, many identity thieves have used
information obtained from company databases and
Web sites. A thief might access a public Web site
that contains information in the public domain that
can be used to create a false identity. He might flip
through employee files at work and get what he
needs to impersonate. She might pretend to be your
kids’ ballet instructor and take your personal infor-
mation—as well as your children’s—and use them to
establish credit and a new ID.
According to the Secret Service, the method that may
be most difficult to prevent is theft by a collusive
employee. Individuals or groups who wish to ob-
tain personal identifiers or account information for a
large-scale fraud ring will often pay or extort an em-
ployee who has access to this information through
their employment at workplaces such as a financial
institution, medical office or government agency.
When you think of all the people who have your per-
sonal information on file, it can be frightening. And
to think of all the people who can access that infor-
mation either directly or indirectly is doubly frighten-
ing. Strangers you meet in your daily transactions can
be your thieves. There’s no one target.
You’re the target of an identity thief.
ID thieves do not discriminate. Whether you’re young,
old, rich or poor (famous or John Doe) you are at

C H A P T E R  2
33
risk. Celebrities like Tiger Woods and Lara Flynn Boyle
have been victims. Dead people from the World Trade
Center attacks have been victims.
But there is one thing that can make you a greater
target for ID theft: your name. The more common
the name, the easier the target. According to the U.S.
Census Bureau:
•
The most common family names in-
clude: Smith, Johnson, Williams, Jones,
Brown, Davis, Miller, Wilson, Moore and
Taylor.
•
Most common male names: James, John,
Robert, Michael, William, David, Rich-
ard, Charles, Joseph and Thomas.
•
Most common female names: Mary,
Patricia, Linda, Barbara, Elizabeth, Jen-
nifer, Maria, Susan, Margaret and Dor-
othy.
Your location might elevate your risk as well, as the
largest number of ID theft complaints have typically
come from California, New York, Texas and Florida.
Y O U N G  A N D  O L D
As we’ve already seen in some cases, young children
can be victimized. College students are fat targets, too.
Young people whose parents have money problems
should consider running regular credit reports and

34
I T  C A N  H A P P E N  T O  Y O U … N O  M A T T E R  W H O  Y O U  A R E
request that the three major credit agencies notify
them when new accounts are opened in their name.
When you arrive on a college campus for the first
time, chances are you’ll get a dozen offers to open a
line of credit with a bank. But the deluge of credit
card offers coupled with students’ carelessness
exposes college students to identity theft.
In a study for Chubb Insurance Company, Impulse
Research Corp. surveyed 208 college students over
the Internet and learned that 49 percent of college
students receive card applications daily or weekly.
Some 86 percent of those surveyed said they receive
card applications a few times a month. Of those sur-
veyed, 30 percent said they trashed the applications
without destroying them. Chubb also learned that 75
percent of college students are approached by repre-
sentatives of card issuers who ask students to fill out
applications with personal information, including So-
cial Security numbers, in order to be considered for a
card. In some instances, the application takers are not
really employed by card companies, but are posing as
employees to obtain information.
Nearly 30 percent of students rarely, if ever, recon-
cile their credit card statements.
The problem for students is that many colleges use
Social Security numbers as a student’s identification
number, which is required to access grades, log on to

C H A P T E R  2
35
campus computers, gain access to dining halls and
other school activities, take exams and see your test
scores on a hallway posting.
Those same ID numbers are printed on student ID
cards. Adding to the odds against college students is
their carelessness when monitoring their accounts and
checking for fraudulent activity.
Some university orientation activities make it easy
for students’ personal data to fall into the wrong
hands. Various vendors use these events to push
credit card applications to new and returning stu-
dents, often with bonuses like free T-shirts and other
incentives.
A university might not be so good about screening
these vendors before they set themselves up and prey
on students. It’s possible that anyone can set up a
table and look like an authentic vendor from a repu-
table bank. So, by filling out an application, which, in
most cases, asks for your Social Security number, you
could be handing valuable information to an identity-
fraud operation.
At the other end of the spectrum, the elderly are
very easy targets for thieves. There have been many
cases in which elderly people have been victimized by
their caretakers. For example, a Louisiana woman used
the credit card of a 90-year-old New Orleans woman
under her care to illegally withdraw several thousand
dollars from ATMs. The thief was eventually booked
with identity theft, unauthorized use of a credit card

36
I T  C A N  H A P P E N  T O  Y O U … N O  M A T T E R  W H O  Y O U  A R E
and exploitation of the infirm. She had used the elder
woman’s Social Security number to obtain a personal-
identification number that allowed her to make ATM
withdrawals using the woman’s credit card.
In a case under federal indictment in the Eastern Dis-
trict of Michigan, United States v. Billings, the defen-
dants and others allegedly worked together to iden-
tify houses in the metropolitan Detroit area that were
owned free and clear by elderly people. They would
allegedly steal the identity of the true owner and then
strip the equity out of the houses without the owner’s
knowledge or consent. How did they do this? The
criminals re-financed the property, withdrawing eq-
uity and obtaining a mortgage in the owner’s name,
and then defaulted on the mortgage.
In a federal prosecution in the Eastern District of
North Carolina, United States v. Hooks, a man stole
mail from senior citizens throughout North Carolina,
used the biographical information contained in the
stolen mail to produce fake drivers’ licenses and
counterfeit checks, and then used the licenses and
checks to withdraw money out of their bank accounts.
To produce the licenses, the man had obtained an
official North Carolina Department of Motor Ve-
hicles license machine. (He later claimed that he pur-
chased the DMV machine on eBay.) In this case, which
the United States Secret Service investigated, the loss
resulting from the criminal’s conduct totaled
$177,472.63. He ultimately pleaded guilty to mail theft,
production of false identification documents, and use
of false identification, and was sentenced on to 63
months imprisonment.
And, in another case involving the elderly, United States
v. Robinson, the defendant took a job as a live-in com-

C H A P T E R  2
37
panion for an elderly woman. After the elderly
woman was hospitalized, the defendant obtained and
used credit cards in the elderly woman’s name, steal-
ing $47,051.35. The thief pled guilty to access device
fraud and production of false checks, and was sen-
tenced to 31 months imprisonment.
Older Americans will become an increasingly attrac-
tive target by criminal elements given that 70 per-
cent of our nation’s wealth is controlled by those 50
years of age and older.
Often, the level of diligence in monitoring personal
finances decreases among the elderly or, after discov-
ering the fraudulent activity, some are embarrassed
and unsure of the steps necessary to report the com-
promise.
Criminals do not steal the identities of the elderly so
they can pretend to be old and wise. They do it be-
cause senior citizens are more likely than most of us
to have significant assets—savings, investments,
paid-up mortgages, good credit and Federal entitle-
ment checks. Some senior citizens are easier and safer
to rob because they are less sure of themselves, more
trusting and less aware of simple precautions. They
may be less likely to review their monthly financial
statements. They may hesitate to take action if they
do find something wrong because they are afraid a
relative is responsible for robbing them, or because
they are afraid they will make their families feel they
can no longer be trusted to live independently.

38
I T  C A N  H A P P E N  T O  Y O U … N O  M A T T E R  W H O  Y O U  A R E
Remember: Identity theft is an “enabling” crime,
one that permits criminals to commit other crimes
more effectively. Those crimes may range from pass-
ing bad checks and defrauding credit card compa-
nies to horrific acts of terrorism.
A  M A N  I N  P H O E N I X
Preying on the alone and elderly is often a tactic of
telemarketers. When you’re old and lonely, you don’t
mind answering the phone to chatty marketers who’ll
pay attention to what you have to say. But when a
telemarketer mixes marketing with thievery, it’s par-
ticularly sad. That’s what happened in Phoenix, Ari-
zona, where a man purposely engaged in telemarketing
activities and targeting individuals who hoped for
something that would give them a better life.
The man’s scheme generally involved an amount of
money less than $500, which made the victim less
likely to pursue legal action. He would send corre-
spondence to these seniors bearing the words “Social
Security Administration” and the official SSA seal,
advising them they had been approved to receive an
additional SSA benefit check, but they would have to
pay a “processing fee” ranging from $9 to $99. In
some cases, he requested banking information in or-
der to process the fee, and after receiving that infor-
mation, he withdrew money directly from their check-
ing accounts.
From October 1994 to October 1998, this same man
mailed letters and made phone calls using the names
Rainbow International, Magic Numbers and Future Con-

C H A P T E R  2
39
cepts to tell seniors they were part of a group that
could participate in pooled lottery winnings upon
payment of a processing fee. When individuals mailed
checks to one of several mailboxes he maintained at
commercial mail receiving companies, he used their
signatures and created fictitious authorization forms
to gather information, and again withdrew money
from their checking accounts. In all, he stole more
than $1.3 million. After a federal investigation resulted
in a 14-count indictment, the man pleaded guilty to
mail fraud. The judge termed his activity “despicable,”
and sentenced him to 36 months in jail.
C H E W I N G  T H E  F I N G E R T I P S
Later, you’ll see how biometrics are becoming a tool
for preventing ID theft. Biometrics is a group of tech-
nologies that identifies an individual by a physical at-
tribute, such as the sound of his or her voice, eyes,
face or even DNA. The majority of biometric iden-
tification systems in effect today make use of fin-
gerprint recognition. So, if you’re trying to “erase”
your identity when confronted with a fingerprinting
device, what do you do? You start chewing off your
fingers. That’s what one ID thief tried.
In 2002, a Nigerian husband and wife team living in
the suburbs of Philadelphia were accused of stealing
hundreds of identities through their airport cleaning
business. They purchased merchandise with bogus
credit cards, and had those items delivered to about
50 empty houses.
They called themselves Adegboyega and Bolanle
Joshuasville—which were made-up names. The man’s
fingertip-chewing was intended to prevent authori-

40
I T  C A N  H A P P E N  T O  Y O U … N O  M A T T E R  W H O  Y O U  A R E
ties from finding out their true identities when they
faced a federal indictment for immigration violations.
Their real names: Olugbemiga Adegoke Olusajo and
his wife, Bolanle Elizabeth Onikosi.
Financial crime is so rampant in Nigeria that the U.S.
Secret Service has opened an office in Lagos to work
with Nigerian authorities to head off burgeoning e-
mail computer fraud. There has been a pervasive
West African influence in the U.S.’s rampant growth
of identity theft—and a disproportionate number of
ID thieves are from Nigeria.
Another Nigerian man also living in the suburbs of
Philadelphia took a job with the local Social Security
office and ripped off numbers to use in an identity
theft ring. After he took personal information from
SSA computers, the man helped others open or as-
sume credit card accounts. Of particular interest to
the thief: the maiden names of cardholders’ mothers.
Many credit card firms use those maiden names as
verification for telephone transactions. In Chapter 8,
you’ll learn how to avoid using the age-old mother’s
maiden name when asked for it. Just as Social Secu-
rity numbers have become too commonplace as codes
of access to personal information, a mother’s
maiden name has also become too commonplace
as codes of access to the same information.
T H I E V E S  A T  W O R K
The close relationships we make at work—and the
ones we don’t make—allow the workplace to be an-

C H A P T E R  2
41
other vulnerable spot for potential identity theft vic-
tims.
Employers are experiencing an increase in all types
of security breaches, including theft of employees’
personal information. An ex-employee of a major
insurance company recently downloaded 60,000
personnel files and tried to sell them on the Internet
for $50 each. He faces 45 years in prison.
Some employees will post personnel information
online because they are mad at their employer or a
specific coworker. Others sell the information or steal
it to get credit cards.
Employment information is vulnerable today as the
workplace expands to include remote locations.
People are working from their homes, cars, hotel
rooms and so on. They’re dialing into their desktops
remotely, using wireless connections and exposing their
computers to hackers and interceptions every day.
Information becomes increasingly easy to steal. This
expanding workplace makes it that much harder
for companies to protect information. This is espe-
cially true when electronic payroll and Human Re-
sources data can be assessed remotely.
Vendors can also be culprits. Employers that contract
out their payroll functions to a third party increase
the number of individuals who have access to per-
sonnel data. The good news is that vendors can imple-
ment privacy policies and procedures that would be

42
I T  C A N  H A P P E N  T O  Y O U … N O  M A T T E R  W H O  Y O U  A R E
too costly and onerous for employers. Consider some
situations:
•
An employee in South Carolina’s Bureau
for Child Support Enforcement was sen-
tenced to probation for using a
coworker’s identity to get utility service;
•
Employees who worked for First USA
Bank, MBNA America, Discover Card,
Chase Manhattan Bank, Household Fi-
nance Corp. and American Express were
charged by a federal grand jury with
crimes ranging from bank fraud to em-
bezzlement to credit card fraud that cost
these banks at least $665,000;
•
A temporary worker at St. Luke’s Hos-
pital in Allentown, Pennsylvania rang up
more than $3,000 in charges in another
woman’s name after the worker stole the
woman’s identity on a hospital com-
puter; and
•
Retirees and other former Department
of Human Services workers in the state
of Illinois were among the victims of an
identity theft scam involving an ex-DHS
employee who filched the names and
Social Security numbers of about 5,000
colleagues.
Bank employees who are involved in identify theft
typically steal directly from a customer’s account or
sell private financial information, such as a person’s
Social Security number, date of birth and credit card
account numbers. It doesn’t matter which side of the
table you are on—employee or customer—you are a
target nonetheless.

C H A P T E R  2
43
T H E  F I N A N C I A L L Y  W E A K
You don’t have to have a villa or drive a fancy car to
be a target. The great majority of identity theft vic-
tims are from the hard-working middle class—the
people who struggle to make ends meet, put their
children through good schools, keep insurance and
mortgages and bills paid up, stress over every dollar
spent on superfluous items, and dream of a two-
week vacation—even if it’s spent relaxing in the com-
forts of home.
With consumer debt at an all-time high, many people
carry large balances on their credit cards, which
makes it easier to overlook suspicious purchases.
If you’re not used to scrutinizing every nickel and
dime listed on your credit card statements—even if
you only pay the monthly minimum and don’t in-
tend to pay off your debt anytime soon—you need
to change your habits. Otherwise, you won’t notice
that $200 outfit or $600 car stereo system added to
your list.
C R E D I T  R E P A I R  S C A M S
For two years, North Philadelphia’s Darryl Brown
promised people he could get them a new car even if
they had bad or no credit. But he was using stolen
SSNs to obtain fraudulently automobile loans.
When federal prosecutors moved in, Brown quickly
surrendered and helped prosecutors snatch 11 asso-

44
I T  C A N  H A P P E N  T O  Y O U … N O  M A T T E R  W H O  Y O U  A R E
ciates in an identity-theft ring that trashed the credit
records of 59 people and defrauded 11 car dealers in
Pennsylvania and New Jersey of 80 vehicles worth
$2.8 million. Brown didn’t get off so easily: He was
sentenced to a 15-year no-parole prison term and
was ordered to pay $1.2 million restitution to seven
auto dealers, five insurance companies and six finan-
cial institutions that lost money on vehicles he helped
his clients buy but that were seriously damaged or
never recovered.
Be wary of credit repair outfits that guarantee to fix
your bad credit in a short while. With the growing
number of Americans going deeper and deeper into
consumer debt every year, credit repair scam com-
panies have cropped up at record rates.
You’ll find a lot of discussion about credit bureaus,
credit watch services and credit repair shops through-
out this book. These establishments are involved in
every part of ID theft—from perpetuating the prob-
lem to assisting in its solution. There are good and
bad aspects to these companies…and you need to be
able to use these companies’ services to your ad-
vantage while avoiding all the scams abound.
W A N N A B E  C E L E B S  A N D  A T H L E T E S
The list of potential ID theft targets is long. Anyone
can be victimized. Oprah Winfrey and Martha Stewart
lost theirs to the same busboy. Robert De Niro had
his swiped by a movie double. Tiger Woods had to

C H A P T E R  2
45
go to court to get his back. And we’re not talking
cars, wallets or golf clubs. We’re talking identities.
In a high-profile case, a high school dropout used
library computers, the Internet and cell phones to
collect personal information about more than half
of the world’s 400 richest people, using the list in
“Forbes” Magazine. Abraham Abdallah, a busboy
in a local restaurant in Brooklyn, New York, was
able to successfully obtain personal information such
as names, dates of birth, Social Security numbers,
phone numbers, and sometimes bank and broker-
age account information by using the Internet and
other sources. While working as a busboy, Abdallah
stole credit card numbers of various customers and
then used those credit cards to order and purchase
a variety of items over the Internet.
And that was just the beginning. He stole money and
products worth at least $100,000 but was aiming for
millions before he was caught. Warren Buffet, Oprah
Winfrey, Stephen Spielberg, Martha Stewart, Paul Allen,
Michael Bloomberg and Ted Turner were among his
victims—many of whom didn’t even know their ac-
counts had been compromised (because they’re so
rich and don’t control their money as closely as you
and me).
When thieves swiped $5,000 worth of personal items
from his luggage in early 2001, Anderson Cooper
got over it quickly. The son of heiress Gloria Vanderbilt
and now the co-anchor of CNN’s American Morn-
ing, Cooper was too busy hosting ABC’s The Mole 2

46
I T  C A N  H A P P E N  T O  Y O U … N O  M A T T E R  W H O  Y O U  A R E
to worry about losing clothing and a laptop com-
puter. (Note: If you left your laptop on the Boston
T, would you know what personal information was
on it—exactly?) What Cooper didn’t realize was that
the crooks had also taken at least two of his personal
checks, allowing them to create phony checks and
loot $25,000 from his bank account over a nine-
month period.
If you’re not on top of your finances and live a busy
life, you’re more likely to miss money draining from
your account over a long period of time.
Cooper finally noticed checks being drawn from an
account he rarely used. When he called his bank he
discovered that about 26 fake checks had been passed,
as well as dozens of fraudulent wire transfers of
money. And because Cooper did not report the losses
within three months, the bank repaid only about
$3,000.
This book will teach you how to look closely at your
finances and pick up on clues that could indicate a
breach in your personal identity. No one can afford
to lose the money, time and effort it takes to restore
a good name, credit and probably a few bucks.
A man who ran up $81,000 in credit card bills in the
name of an Atlanta Hawks basketball player also stole
from TV, movie and rap-music star Will Smith. In

C H A P T E R  2
47
another case, Ishman Walker led a million-dollar iden-
tity theft ring in Chicago. First he stole a Citibank ac-
count number in the names of Michael Jordan and
his wife, Juanita. Then he tried to find someone who
looked enough like Jordan to raid the former Bulls
star’s fortune.
He didn’t get that far. Walker was further accused of
draining the accounts of at least 30 other people of
more than $1 million. How did he do it? He bribed
workers in the secretary of state’s office and at
least four banks to obtain the IDs and financial infor-
mation for his scam.
If you have teenage children involved in after-school
sports or club teams, be wary of coaches who ask
for too much information. In upstate New York, a
man was caught using two 18-years-olds’ identi-
ties to open a utility account and obtain Direct TV.
He also held a baseball scouting camp for wannabe
professional players (who all believed the camp was
for major-league baseball tryouts), and then took
their money…and their identities.
Doctors also have to worry about thieves in the sys-
tem, as physician identities are accessible from
sources such as state medical boards’ Web sites, local
physician directories or even the Yellow Pages. Physi-
cian names, as well as copies of medical licenses and
office addresses, also can be stolen from hospital
personnel files. Criminals use the documents to ob-
tain Medicaid provider numbers, then inform the state

48
I T  C A N  H A P P E N  T O  Y O U … N O  M A T T E R  W H O  Y O U  A R E
Medicaid program that the physician has a new ad-
dress where payment should be sent.
Criminals also steal names, Social Security numbers,
or identification numbers of Medicaid and Medi-
care beneficiaries.
C O R P O R A T E  
S E C U R I T Y
To ultimately protect our identities, we have to rely
on the companies with whom we do business to pro-
tect the critical information they keep on us. A com-
pany that has thousands—or even millions—of cus-
tomers, has a lot to protect. One security breach could
expose all those identities. Most companies use pass-
words to safeguard your confidential information,
but when they are weak and insecure that informa-
tion can get stolen. And it can get stolen by someone
from within the company’s walls or outside.
In yet another scenario, a thief or organization can
pose as one of the top 1,000 companies in the world
by mirroring that corporation’s Web site, but slightly
altering its URL or becoming a new division with a
new shipping address.
Well-organized thieves have a network of delivery
locations, trucks, equipment and personnel to move
and hide anything they obtain. Once groups or indi-
viduals establish a proper association for credit and
billing, losses can be overwhelming to any company
unfortunate enough to be victimized.

C H A P T E R  2
49
Corporate identity theft is not the focus of this book,
but hopefully corporations will spruce up their anti-
ID theft security in conjunction with consumer aware-
ness about personal identity theft so that together, the
room to move clandestinely as someone else will get
smaller.
If you’re running a business, you’ll find that pro-
tecting your personal identity in the office is as im-
portant as protecting it in your personal life. The
lifestyle changes you make in general must include how
you work, deal with employees and expect your of-
fice to run effectively and safely. Chapter 9 includes
some advice for employers, but for the most part,
the changes you make to your personal life can easily
translate to everyday office practices as well.
When you deal with other companies as a customer,
you usually have to deal with passwords. In an ideal
world your password should be unique and secret,
something no one else can guess. But in reality most
passwords are easy to guess: your initials, last name,
pet’s name or PIN number. Moreover, too many write
down their passwords because they have access to
lots of computer systems at work—e-mail, account-
ing, the Internet—and they can’t remember them.
Later in this book we’ll look at how IDs work and
the ways to manage your passwords effectively. When
you understand the mechanics of ID theft, you come
to see the ways in which you can prevent it.
C O N C L U S I O N
Anyone is a target for ID theft. Now that you know
you can be the next victim, you’re probably wonder-
ing why this problem has gotten so bad so quickly?

50
I T  C A N  H A P P E N  T O  Y O U … N O  M A T T E R  W H O  Y O U  A R E
The simple answer: existing ID tools are easy to buy,
sell and replicate.
But the longer answer is complex and multifaceted.
In the upcoming chapters, you’ll get a full view of the
problem and come to understand the reasons behind
today’s fastest growing crime…and what you can do
about it.

C H A P T E R  3
51
CHAPTER
THE PROBLEMS
CAUSED BY
EXISTING ID TOOLS
3
In this chapter, we’ll consider the main mechanical
reason that ID theft is such a problem in the United
States: Fake IDs are easy to make.
Even though the U.S. has the most complex and ex-
tensive consumer credit system in the world, the tril-
lions of dollars rely on a handful of basic identifica-
tion documents that everyone shares. The “breeder
documents” basically consist of one federal ID (the
Social Security number), one state ID (the driver’s li-
cense) and one local ID (the birth certificate).
We’ll start with the ID system that poses the greatest
danger of theft and work downward.
S O C I A L  S E C U R I T Y  N U M B E R S
The Social Security number (SSN) was created by the
1936 Social Security Act as a nine-digit account num-
ber assigned to each American worker by the U.S.
government for the purpose of administering the
pension benefit programs known broadly as Social
Security. Even in the 1930s, Congress recognized the

52
T H E  P R O B L E M S  C A U S E D  B Y  E X I S T I N G  I D  T O O L S
dangers of widespread use of SSNs as universal iden-
tifiers.
At first, SSNs were intended to be used exclusively
as a means of tracking earnings and crediting worker
accounts. Over time, however, SSNs were permitted
to be used for purposes unrelated to the adminis-
tration of the Social Security system. For example, in
1961 Congress authorized the Internal Revenue Ser-
vice to use SSNs as taxpayer identification numbers.
Oversight agencies like the Government Accounting
Office (GAO) repeatedly recommended that the fed-
eral government use SSNs as a unique identifier to
reduce fraud and abuse in other federal benefits pro-
grams. The government was soon using the SSN as
an ID for a broad range of wholly unrelated pur-
poses—food stamps, Medicaid, Supplemental Secu-
rity Income and child support enforcement.
By the early 1970s, a major government report on
privacy outlined the risks posed by the use and mis-
use of the SSNs. The report, titled Records, Computers
and the Rights of Citizens described the growing use of
the SSN as a “Standard Universal Identifier.” The re-
port noted that private-sector use of SSNs was
promoting invasive profiling (and this was before
widespread use of electronic databases).
The report recommended several limitations on the
use of the SSN and suggested that legislation should
be adopted “prohibiting use of an SSN, or any num-
ber represented as an SSN for promotional or com-
mercial purposes.” No such law emerged.

C H A P T E R  3
53
By the 1990s, in an effort to learn and share financial
information about Americans, companies trading in
financial information were the largest private-sec-
tor users of SSNs. For example, the three largest credit
bureaus in the U.S.—Experian, Equifax and
TransUnion—maintain over 500 million files, with fi-
nancial information on almost 90 percent of the
American adult population. These files are organized
by individual SSNs. This information is freely sold
and traded, with very few legal limitations.
These users create the environment in which identity
theft based on SSN abuse thrives. The financial ser-
vice industry’s misplaced reliance on SSNs, lax veri-
fication procedures and aggressive marketing en-
able identity thieves to obtain your personal infor-
mation.
By the early 2000s, people were beginning to realize
that over-reliance on SSNs was causing—not pre-
venting—identity theft.
In May 2001 congressional testimony, Cory B.
Kravit—a student at the University of Florida—de-
scribed how his alma mater used SSNs:
Students are required to provide their Social
Security numbers for virtually everything rang-
ing from registering for classes to ordering a
Little Caesar’s pizza using one’s student debit
account. …the Social Security number of each
and every student is freely available to nu-
merous individuals within the university. This

54
T H E  P R O B L E M S  C A U S E D  B Y  E X I S T I N G  I D  T O O L S
list includes professors, teaching assistants,
dormitory desk clerks, Residence Assistants
(RA’s), registrar staff, library staff, Little
Caesar’s Pizza employees, bookstore employ-
ees, mail carriers and the general student body.
Bad results were already taking place. In 1998, the
University’s police department arrested a desk clerk
working at one undergraduate residence hall after he
stole the identities of 23 students. The clerk was
charged with mail theft and credit card fraud after
spending nearly $70,000 without the students’ knowl-
edge.
Misuse of SSNs is a crime—and it cuts across de-
mographic and geographic lines. But, until the early
2000s, many people in government and the person-
nel offices of big employers didn’t pay much mind
to SSN crime.
H O W  T O  R E A D  A  S S N
According to the SSA, the first three digits of every
Social Security number denote the area or ZIP code
in the state where the application was filed. Prior to
1973, SSNs were assigned by field offices and the
number reflected the state where the card was issued,
starting with the lower numbers in the East and in-
creasing geographically westward. Someone from
California shouldn’t have a SSN that starts with a “1”
or “2.”
The middle two digits may be most helpful in au-
thenticating a Social Security cardholder. These fol-
low the geographically based three-digit area num-
ber. According to the SSA, the two middle digits re-

C H A P T E R  3
55
flect the chronological order in which a number is
assigned within a given geographic area. The group
numbers are given first in odd-numbered pairs “01”
up to “09,” then they switch to even-numbered pairs
“10” up to “98.” Once used, the pair order reverses,
starting with even-numbered pairs “02” through “08”
before reverting to odd-numbered pairs of digits
from “11” to “99.” All the while the group numbers
are followed by another set of four-digit serial num-
bers.
It sounds complicated, but SSA publishes on its Web
site a monthly table that lists the highest area and group
numbers assigned in a given region. So, a 20-year-old
with low SSN middle digits that might match the
chronological assignment pattern for someone
much older who lives in the region should be fairly
easy to verify by a utility company, bank or creditor.
And for that the only technology needed would be
access to the Internet.
B I G  R I S K :  S S N S  O F  D E A D  P E O P L E
Perhaps the biggest pressure point for SSN abuse is
after a legitimate SSN owner dies. It often takes the
federal government several months to mark the death
in its databases—in the meantime, crooks can use the
dead person’s SSN for illegal purposes.
The SSA maintains a Death Master File (DMF),
consisting of 60 million names and SSNs of dead
people. Businesses and law enforcement agencies are
always anxious to get this information in the most
current form. So, the database is updated on several
schedules—quarterly and monthly; and it’s available

56
T H E  P R O B L E M S  C A U S E D  B Y  E X I S T I N G  I D  T O O L S
for sale by the National Technical Information Ser-
vice. Its records contain important personal identifi-
able information, including the name, Social Security
number, date of birth, date of death, state or country
of residence, ZIP code of last residence and ZIP
code of the dead person’s heirs.
There are limits to the DMF database. Its records
have over a 3 percent error rate, and provide infor-
mation chiefly on those who died after 1960. As the
NTIS Web site states, “The Social Security Adminis-
tration does not have a death record for all persons;
therefore, SSA does not guarantee the veracity of the
file. Thus, the absence of a particular person is not
proof this person is alive.”
In his November 2001 congressional testimony on
reforms to the DMF, Marc Rotenberg, Executive Di-
rector of the Electronic Privacy Information Center,
said:
It is remarkable that such a data goldmine is
made publicly accessible by SSA and is a so-
bering reminder of the urgent need to re-
strict access to sensitive personally identifi-
able information. Rather than focusing atten-
tion on how these records can be transmit-
ted more rapidly and accurate to commer-
cial and private users, Congress must first
consider placing limitations on the use and
access to such data.

C H A P T E R  3
57
A fair question emerges: Who benefits more from
the DMF—government agencies and credit
companies…or ID thieves?
Few banks, credit card companies or other commer-
cial firms subscribe to the DMF directly. Instead, they
get the information indirectly—through credit bureaus
like Experian, TransUnion and Equifax. This is an-
other point at which those three exert a lot of influ-
ence.
The credit reporting agencies make the data from the
DMF available only for subscribers to their propri-
etary fraud prevention products; in contrast, death
information reported directly to the credit reporting
agencies by credit issuers and family members was
made available to all their users—along with other
credit information on a customer’s credit history. This
information was generally provided within one to two
billing cycles.
W H A T  T H E  S S A  I S  D O I N G
In fiscal 2000, the Social Security Administration’s of-
fice of the Inspector General received 92,847 com-
plaints. Over half of these—46,840—were allegations
of SSN misuse, and another 43,456 were allegations
of program fraud, which often include implications
of SSN misuse.
By mid-summer 2002, the SSA had mailed 750,000
letters to the nation’s employers that said some of
their workers’ names and Social Security numbers
didn’t match the federal database. The number of
“no match” letters sent out that year was up dramati-

58
T H E  P R O B L E M S  C A U S E D  B Y  E X I S T I N G  I D  T O O L S
cally from the 110,000 sent out in 2001, accord-
ing to Social Security spokesman Mark Lassiter.
The SSA has no enforcement powers, and it cannot
share information with the Immigration and Natu-
ralization Service; but the IRS can. Under Section
6721 of the Internal Revenue Code, employers can be
fined $50 for each invalid Social Security number,
up to $250,000 a year.
In his July 2002 congressional testimony, James G.
Huse, Jr.—Inspector General of the Social Security
Administration—described the problem of SSN mis-
use:
The public display of SSNs—on identifica-
tion cards, motor vehicle records, court docu-
ments, and the like—must be curtailed im-
mediately. Those who use the SSN must share
the responsibility for ensuring its integrity.
While we cannot return the SSN to its simple
status of a half-century ago, we can ensure
that identity thieves and other criminals can-
not walk into a municipal court house and
walk out again with the means of commit-
ting state-facilitated identity theft. The cost to
the victims of identity theft, and to all of us,
is too great. And the potential for these num-
bers to be used to commit acts of violence
and terrorism is unthinkable.
And in an earlier testimony on the same topic a year
earlier, Huse had suggested a more specific solution
to the risks posed by SSN misuse:

C H A P T E R  3
59
With certain legislated exceptions, no private
citizen, no business interest and no ministerial
government agency should be able to sell,
display, purchase or obtain any individual’s
SSN, nor should they be able to use any
individual’s SSN to obtain other personal in-
formation about the individual.
D R I V E R ’ S  
L I C E N S E S
While the Social Security number is the cornerstone
of ID theft, a driver’s license is the most practical
tool of the crooked trade.
In the U.S., driver’s licenses are issued by individual
states, so regulating them is logistically more difficult
than regulating SSNs. In April 2002 congressional tes-
timony, Betty Serian—Vice Chair of the American
Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators—de-
scribed the ID theft problems that driver’s licenses
pose:
the driver’s license has become the most re-
quested form of ID in the U.S. and Canada.
For example, financial institutions require it
to open an account, retail outlets ask for it
when you want to pay by check, and the air-
lines demand it before you board a plane. In
a recent (April 2002) poll conducted by Pub-
lic Opinion Strategies, 83 percent of the
American public noted that they used their
driver’s license for purposes other than driv-
ing.
The U.S. has more than 200 different, valid forms of
driver’s licenses and ID cards in circulation. In addi-
tion, each of the 50 states and D.C. have different

60
T H E  P R O B L E M S  C A U S E D  B Y  E X I S T I N G  I D  T O O L S
practices for issuing licenses. Although the cur-
rent system allows for reciprocity among the states,
it lacks uniformity. Individuals looking to under-
mine the system can shop around for licenses in
those states that have the weakest security and back-
ground checks.
The lack of standard security features on a driver’s
license allows ID thieves to exploit the system. While
all states use a variety of security techniques, it is diffi-
cult for law enforcement and for those issuing a new
license to verify the validity of a license from another
state—not to mention the identity of the person hold-
ing the license.
The American Association of Motor Vehicle
Adminstrators (AAMVA) has been investigating,
implementing and operating information systems since
the late 1980s. Through its technology subsidiary,
AAMVAnet, the association manages and operates the
Commercial Driver’s License Information System
(CDLIS), which is designed as a clearinghouse for
commercial drivers. CDLIS was designed to limit any
given commercial driver to one and only one com-
mercial driver’s license and it has worked well for this
purpose.
In the mid-1990s, AAMVA began exploring the pos-
sibility of having a clearinghouse of all drivers within
the U.S. in order to better control the problem driver
population.
The AAMVA recommends that driver’s licenses should

C H A P T E R  3
61
have common identification features, so that de-
partments of motor vehicles (DMVs) will be able to
recognize fraudulent cards more quickly and easily.
The AAMVA has also asked that driver’s license da-
tabases be linked state to state. Law enforcement
officials would be able to access personal identifica-
tion such as name and address and would also have
access to the license holder’s driver history.
The Security Industry Association’s (SIA) Homeland
Security Advisory Council has also recommended that
Congress enact legislation to set national standards.
Among the baseline standards, the SIA suggests:
•
uniform appearances such as types of
ink, paper, size and shape;
•
data to be included on the card’s data-
base, including a photograph, address,
date of birth and a digitally-imprinted
thumb print;
•
incorporated technology such as holo-
grams, microchips, magnetic stripes,
barcodes, proximity cards and readers;
•
production requirements such as mate-
rial specifications; and
•
protocols and conditions for identifica-
tion issuance such as background
checks, or the establishment of a two-
day waiting period.
Driver’s licenses use photographs, height, age, weight
and address to verify that the cardholder is actually
who he claims to be. But biometrics, such as finger-

62
T H E  P R O B L E M S  C A U S E D  B Y  E X I S T I N G  I D  T O O L S
prints and digital signatures, can add additional
layers of security that traditional identification docu-
ments cannot.
Security technology providers propose that mag-
netic stripes, barcodes or electronic “smart” chips
be integrated in driver’s licenses to hold identifica-
tion information. Since these technologies locate an
individual’s data on the license itself—instead of at a
central DMV computer system—they make ID theft
more difficult.
From the DMVs’ perspective, moving away from cen-
tral databases and toward smart cards is similar to
the move in corporate America from mainframe com-
puters to networked stations. The decentralized sys-
tem is just as powerful (if not more so) and much
less susceptible to crashes and other malfunctions.
H O W  C R O O K S  G E T  F A K E  L I C E N S E S
ID thieves can get usable driver’s licenses illegally in
various ways:
•
Purchase a counterfeit license;
•
Obtain (most often by theft) and alter-
ing an existing license;
•
Obtain a valid license by presenting
fraudulent breeder documents and em-
ploying other devices usually provided
by middlemen; or
•
Exploit loopholes that permit undocu-
mented residents to obtain a valid driver’s

C H A P T E R  3
63
license legally.
These are all tactics for getting or altering legiti-
mate licenses. Beyond these tactics, there are thou-
sands of ways to obtain simple fake licenses. Web
sites offering “novelty IDs” abound on the Internet,
often with foreign locations, such as the Czech Re-
public or Australia. To any savvy computer user,
many sites sell driver’s license templates—some for
all 50 states—for as low as $75.
Fake driver’s licenses were supposed to go away
once states began issuing new secure driver’s li-
censes and IDs that feature digitized photos, signa-
tures, holograms and bar codes. But crooks are
making authentic-looking counterfeits and most store
clerks don’t check closely enough for security fea-
tures.
Fake IDs used to support stolen credit cards or kite
stolen checks can be made on a computer and based
on the new secure format. No more slicing lamina-
tion with razor blades, altering birth dates and gluing
grainy pictures to a stolen ID.
Fakes can differ from the real thing in tint, print size,
holograms and sharpness of the image. But all are
features the average cashier probably will not
check if there is a line behind the crook.
Police from Washington state to Florida have seized
rooms of computer equipment, stolen IDs, stolen

64
T H E  P R O B L E M S  C A U S E D  B Y  E X I S T I N G  I D  T O O L S
checks and records.
The officers confiscate the usual equipment of any
home-based business: desktop and laptop comput-
ers, printers, fax machines, scanners, digital cameras,
graphics and bookkeeping software, photo quality
paper. The unusual finds are the media of ID theft:
stolen checkbooks, sheets of blank checks and sev-
eral credit cards.
Newer ID cards also come with other security fea-
tures—invisible markings that show up under black
light…or barcodes that convey driver data. Police and
businesses eventually will be able to scan the bar codes
instead of bothering with the front.
Prices are higher for everyone. In Washington state,
before new-format licenses were launched in 2000,
the fees for driver’s licenses increased from $14 for
four years to $25 for five years. The fee for a state ID
card rose to $15 from $4.
W H A T  S T A T E S  A R E  D O I N G
While the federal Drivers Privacy Protection Act
prevents DMVs from selling personal information
to commercial entities, the information is often shared
with other government agencies and—eventually,
sometimes—with private sector firms.
But most states are trying to shore up the security.
Among license administrators, North Carolina has the
reputation for the loosest identity document standards.
Supposedly, some 388,000 people hold North Caro-

C H A P T E R  3
65
lina licenses emblazoned with the Social Security
number 999-99-9999. DMV clerks there enter that
number if applicants don’t provide another one. In
the early 2000s, North Carolina’s license security
issues were so bad that Florida—generally consid-
ered the second-most lax state in the U.S.—denied
reciprocity to North Carolina license holders.
In the summer of 2002, New Jersey’s DMV an-
nounced reforms, from heightened security at motor
vehicle offices to better-trained employees to the de-
sign of more tamper-resistant driver’s licenses.
But the agency’s existing security problems, which of-
ficials outlined along with proposed improvements,
illustrated the enormous challenge suddenly facing
agencies that many states have overlooked and
underfunded for decades.
New Jersey was one of the last states without a
digitized photograph on its license; in fact, as re-
cently as late 2002, New Jersey drivers could opt to
have no photograph at all. In short, New Jersey
licenses were easy to forge.
Security at motor vehicle offices around New Jersey
ranged from spotty to minimal, giving criminals rela-
tively easy access to driver’s license production equip-
ment, title certificates and other documents that were
“the key components in crimes such as identity theft
and insurance fraud,” according to a report released
by DMV officials. A state police assessment had found
“numerous security failures, [including] easy access to

66
T H E  P R O B L E M S  C A U S E D  B Y  E X I S T I N G  I D  T O O L S
valuable documents through open and unlocked
doors as well as non-secure storage areas.”
The 2002 reforms were meant to change all of that.
Detailed background checks of agency employees
by the state police had led to some firings and many
more voluntary resignations. During that summer, 27
workers were fired for suspected fraud and other
transgressions.
Among other steps the New Jersey DMV was tak-
ing:
•
Requiring all license applicants to supply
more than one form of identification.
•
Planning the purchase of ultraviolet lights
and illuminated magnifiers for each of-
fice to help in the detection of counter-
feit documents.
•
Seeking new or increased fees to pay for
upgraded security.
In September 2002, for the second time that year,
thieves broke into a driver’s license office in Naples,
Florida. They only got a half-used roll of film. In
February, the crooks had been more successful, mak-
ing off with 5,500 blank cards that could be made
into high-quality fake licenses.
The break-ins seemed part of a larger scheme. About
the same time as the second break-in, thieves had bro-
ken into a state office a couple hours to the north of
Naples and stolen a computer that included graphics
used in Florida driver’s licenses. And, within a few
days of that theft, a license camera had been stolen
from a state office near Miami.

C H A P T E R  3
67
Throughout Florida, low-end fake licenses sell for
$50 to $100; but high-end fakes, like ones made
with stolen state equipment, could sell for as much
as $1,000.
During the summer of 2002, hundreds of Colorado
residents were advised to watch their credit after bur-
glars made off with driver’s licenses and personal in-
formation in two separate burglaries at state DMV
offices. The break-ins, which took place a week apart,
occurred at DMV offices in suburban locations out-
side of Denver. Investigators suspected that the crimes
had been committed by the same people.
In the first break-in, the thieves escaped undetected
with nearly 300 expired driver’s licenses, which had
been turned in for renewals, and $40,000 worth of
equipment, including a machine that records finger-
prints and signatures and prints licenses.
In the second break-in, the thieves stole about 420
expired licenses—as well as a smaller amount of com-
puter equipment and forms that license applicants filled
out verifying their personal information.
In the weeks after the break-ins, the Colorado DMV
installed enhanced security systems at its busiest of-
fices; and department officials began phasing in a cen-
tralized program for licensing. Under that program,
isolated motor vehicles offices would stop printing
licenses on site; information would be sent to a cen-
tralized printing facility and licenses mailed to appli-
cants’ homes. Also, the DMV distributed new stamp-

68
T H E  P R O B L E M S  C A U S E D  B Y  E X I S T I N G  I D  T O O L S
ing tools that allowed clerks to punch the word
“void” into old licenses.
In October—about two months after the suburban
break-ins—Deputy Colorado Attorney General Don
Quick announced that his office had indicted a sus-
pect. Glenn Allen Wilhite faced nine felony counts of
burglary, theft, theft by receiving, forgery and con-
spiracy in the burglaries of the DMV offices.
Most of the stolen equipment and expired IDs had
been recovered in a search of Wilhite’s Denver home.
According to the indictment, Wilhite had broken into
the two DMV offices and used the stolen items to
make counterfeit driver’s licenses. He then sold the
fake IDs to other crooks who used them to forge
checks and for other illicit purposes.
“ B R E E D E R ”  
D O C U M E N T S
All states require applicants to provide proof of iden-
tity but the AAMVA estimates that as many as 200
forms are accepted as this proof. Some of these so-
called “breeder documents” are easy to fake.
Most states distinguish between primary IDs—in
which they have a high degree of confidence—and
secondary IDs. Common primary IDs include:
•
a U.S. birth certificate;
•
a current license from another state;
•
a valid U.S. passport;
•
military identification;
•
an INS-issued “green card” that confers
permanent residency status; and

C H A P T E R  3
69
•
an I-94 form that indicates a visa holder’s
period of stay.
Secondary ID sources cover a wide range of docu-
ments, including:
•
a Social Security card;
•
a credit card with signature;
•
an employer identification card;
•
a foreign driver’s license; and
•
a baptismal certificate or family Bible
record.
Most of the secondary IDs can be faked fairly easily,
so they are usually accepted only as support of at
least one primary ID. That’s why ID thieves concen-
trate on developing high-quality documents from the
primary list. Birth certificates are, in most cases, the
easiest of those to fake.
Birth certificate fraud usually occurs in one of three
forms:
•
a counterfeit certificate is created;
•
an original certificate itself is altered; or
•
a duplicate certificate is obtained by an
imposter.
The main security problem posed by birth certifi-
cates is that so many agencies issue them. In addi-
tion to state registrars in the U.S., there are about
7,000 local registrars issuing certified copies of
birth certificates.

70
T H E  P R O B L E M S  C A U S E D  B Y  E X I S T I N G  I D  T O O L S
Requests for certified copies of birth certificates are
handled either in person or by mail, the latter offering
more opportunity for fraud. Someone seeking a new
identity can read a newspaper’s obituary section, get
the name and birth date of someone of similar age
and request a certified copy of that person’s birth
certificate.
State and local registrars are required by law to make
birth and death records public. This has typically
meant providing access to the physical records at gov-
ernment offices. However, throughout the 1990s,
many local government agencies started posting pub-
lic records online. This meant the records could be
obtained by anyone with an Internet connection.
Most states’ vital record offices use unique paper and
markings, seals and other features to deter alteration
or counterfeiting of birth certificates. But these con-
trols have not been put in place by many of the 7,000-
odd local registrars. And, as of 2003, there was no
mandated standard form for certified copies of birth
certificates and no mandated national standard for
issuance of birth certificates. The result: A confusing
variety of vital records.
The U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform has
recommended a series of actions to reduce fraudu-
lent access to birth certificates, including:
•
Regulating requests for birth certificates
through standardized application forms;
•
Using a standard design and paper stock
for certified copies of birth certificates;

C H A P T E R  3
71
•
Making certified copies of birth certifi-
cates issued by states or state-controlled
vital records offices the only forms ac-
cepted by federal agencies (not certifi-
cates issued by local registrars);
•
Encouraging states to computerize birth
records repositories; and
•
Creating a computerized system to match
interstate and intrastate birth and death
records.
The August 2002 arrest of a former clerk at the Texas
Department of Health illustrates why these reforms
are important.
Texas law enforcement officials charged Ana Laura
Vasquez—a customer service representative at the
state’s Bureau of Vital Statistics—with tampering with
government records, abuse of official capacity and
forgery of a government instrument. They claimed
that Vasquez manipulated a state computer data-
base to produce at least 74 fake birth certificates that
sold for as much as $6,000 each.
Investigators alleged that Vasquez was part of a criminal
ring that sold certificates in Austin, Laredo, Corpus
Christi and other cities in central and south Texas.
According to the charges, Vasquez used office com-
puters to pull up authentic birth certificates and alter
them.
The computers in the Department of Health’s cus-
tomer service area were assigned to specific clerks
but were not protected by passwords—so all clerks

72
T H E  P R O B L E M S  C A U S E D  B Y  E X I S T I N G  I D  T O O L S
had access to all terminals. A video camera recorded
Vasquez moving from one clerk’s terminal to an-
other, making her fake birth certificates in a way
that would be difficult for computer system admin-
istrators to detect.
According to the investigators, Vasquez worked with
at least one accomplice (a man married to her cousin).
The accomplice would request birth certificates from
various Departments of Health offices, giving Vasquez
an excuse for generating her altered documents.
Vasquez was ultimately undone not by her own forg-
eries—but by someone else’s shoddy work. One of
her customers was a man who assembled various fake
documents so that his daughter could get a Texas
driver’s license. The clerk reviewing the documents
thought that the daughter’s Social Security card looked
fake; the clerk told the man and his daughter that
their documents would have to be reviewed by a su-
pervisor.
After the man left, the clerk tried to verify the Social
Security card but couldn’t get a timely response. So,
instead, she checked with the state Bureau of Vital
Statistics and got a response that conflicted with the
rest of the daughter’s personal information. An audit
of the Bureau of Vital Statistics system using the birth
record number pulled up information for another
woman. And the certificate number pointed back to
Vasquez’s office.
After Vasquez was arrested, the Health Department
said that it had increased security to assure that birth

C H A P T E R  3
73
certificates wouldn’t be so easy to alter. But its
spokeswoman declined to provide details.
N A T I O N A L  I D  C A R D
The reforms suggested by groups like the Social
Security Administration, the American Motor Ve-
hicle Administrators Association and various local
law enforcement agencies seem to lead to a com-
mon solution to these various ID problems: A na-
tional identification card, separate from a Social
Security card or driver’s license.
Proponents of a national ID card—Oracle Corp. CEO
Lawrence Ellison is an outspoken one—use the 9/11
terrorist attacks to argue for standardized IDs that
would contain data ranging from complete medical
histories to shopping preferences.
The proponents argue that the national ID should be
a so-called “smart card.” Smart cards are rapidly be-
coming popular in Europe, Latin America, Asia and
Africa—regions plagued by rampant ID theft and
high fraud losses. The smart card addresses this prob-
lem with an embedded computer chip, which gives it
multi-use capability (it can be coded for telephone,
ATM and other electronic uses) while simultaneously
improving protection against identity theft and card
counterfeiting. It can do this by containing encoded
biometric data.
Immediately after 9/11, a Pew Research Center poll
found that 70 percent of those surveyed favored such

74
T H E  P R O B L E M S  C A U S E D  B Y  E X I S T I N G  I D  T O O L S
a card. But this wasn’t only reaction to the terrorist
attacks. Gallup Polls taken in 1983, 1993 and 1995
had also shown that a majority of Americans favored
a national ID. When demographic subcategories were
indicated, immigrants favored the card at a higher
rate than native-born Americans.
Efforts to create a national ID—usually by combin-
ing state driver’s licenses systems into one national
database—are not new. When Congress passed the
Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Respon-
sibility Act of 1996, a provision was included requir-
ing driver’s licenses to contain a Social Security num-
ber that could be read visually or electronically. By
requiring the use of the SSN, the federal government
was instituting the Social Security number as a na-
tional identification number. After much outrage from
civil libertarians, the SSN/National ID provision was
repealed in 1999.
But 9/11 has tilted opinion more heavily in favor of
some form of national ID.
Alan Dershowitz, a Harvard Law School professor
and one of America’s most outspoken civil libertar-
ians, wrote a much-quoted column in The New York
Times saying that anonymity is not a freedom guar-
anteed by the Constitution. He argued that fears of
government intrusion could be allayed by clearly de-
lineating the criteria under which a national identity
card could be requested.
But the mere hint of national ID cards remains a big
problem for some civil libertarians. For example,
Edmund Mierzwinski of the U.S. Public Interest Re-
search Group has said:

C H A P T E R  3
75
While we are sensitive to the critical need for
federal and state governments to take action
to respond and prevent future outbreaks of
terrorism, we do not believe that national ID
and driver’s-license policy solutions proposed
as a result of 9/11 will help stop identity theft.
Mierzwinski and his liberal organization found a
strange bedfellow in Lori Waters, executive director
of the conservative Eagle Forum. In September 2002
congressional testimony, Waters said:
Driver’s license standardization is the national
ID wolf in sheep’s clothing. No member of
Congress has introduced legislation entitled,
“The National ID Card Act of 2002.” The
House did the right thing by including spe-
cific language in the Homeland Security Act
of 2002 to ensure that nothing in the bill
could be construed to authorize a national
identification system or card. However, the
fact is that a national ID system will more
likely happen through a bureaucratic
backdoor, an appropriations rider, confer-
ence report language or a bill with a suppos-
edly different but noble cause.
Waters claimed that the Driver’s License Moderniza-
tion Act of 2002 was one such bill. It essentially would
turn a driver’s license into a smart card, connecting
the various aspects of anyone’s life. It required driver’s
licenses to contain a computer chip capable of con-
taining all the text written on the card, encoded bio-
metric data and—in some cases—data from non-
governmental sources. Most strikingly, it established
the framework for a national ID: a unique identifier
through biometrics and database linkage.

76
T H E  P R O B L E M S  C A U S E D  B Y  E X I S T I N G  I D  T O O L S
Once government and private industry databases
are interoperable through a unique identifier,
access to and uses of sensitive personal information
would expand, insists Waters. Law enforcement, tax
collectors and other government agencies would
want access to the data. Landlords, insurers, credit
agencies, mortgage brokers, direct mailers, private
investigators, civil litigants and a long list of other
private parties would likely require the new smart
card ID—just as they have with the SSN.
Some proponents of a national ID openly admit that
this broader use would follow. In AAMVA’s Customer
Focus White Paper on the topic, the group’s member
DMV administrators are mentioned as only one of
almost 20 “user communities” of a proposed na-
tional ID card. Other users include law enforcement,
government agencies at the federal, state and local
level, restaurants and bars, employers, insurance pro-
viders, the health care industry, airlines, building and
facility security, storeowners, schools, the retail indus-
try generally and even the gaming industry. And, the
national ID would be used for functions beyond
simply establishing identity. For example, AAMVA
suggests that many of these users would be able to
gather and record demographic information to cre-
ate mailing and marketing lists, purchase histories, etc.,
or use the ID for personal banking and securing online
transactions.
The most compelling argument against the idea gets
back to the basics of identity theft. What happens,
under a national ID system, when your card is stolen?
Will it be any easier to remedy ID theft? Enhancing
the value of these documents will only make it more

C H A P T E R  3
77
lucrative to sell IDs (or even whole databases of in-
formation) under the table.
What would happen if an ID card had your name on
it, but someone else’s biometric identifier? If the sys-
tem depends on a thumbprint, how do you reclaim
your identity once the digital version of your thumb-
print has been spread across the Internet? An identifi-
cation system is only as “smart” as the information
that establishes identity in the first place. Standardiz-
ing state driver’s licenses, suggest ID theft experts,
would cement false identities onto national ID cards.
Most ID theft experts worry that smart crooks are
just as crafty as smart cards. There are always ways
to beat the system.
One German magazine tested several different types
of biometrics, including facial recognition, fingerprint
devices and iris scans, and was able to circumvent all
of them. The fingerprint scanner was outsmarted by
some adhesive film (similar to scotch tape) and resin;
the iris scan was fooled by a photo image of one
person’s iris held in front of another’s person’s eye.
Using ordinary kitchen supplies, a Japanese re-
searcher was able to fool a fingerprint detector about
80 percent of the time. And, back in the U.S., several
researchers defeated smart card technology using a
camera flashgun and microscope to extract secret in-
formation widely used in smart cards.

78
T H E  P R O B L E M S  C A U S E D  B Y  E X I S T I N G  I D  T O O L S
C O N C L U S I O N
SSNs and state driver’s licenses are chaotically ad-
ministered and easy to fake. Nationalizing the Ameri-
can ID system gives many people Orwellian jitters.
And smart card technology can be bested by smarter
crooks. So, what’s the answer to the ID card ques-
tion?
Like so many answers: Common sense and some in-
cremental reforms.
Congress should work with state governments, in-
cluding state legislatures, to provide DMV employ-
ees with necessary tools and training on renewal and
issuance of state driver’s licenses and to assist with
anti-fraud programs. For example:
•
Any errors in replacement requests for
driver’s licenses and state ID cards, such
as misspelling of the applicant’s name or
street name, should be considered a sig-
nificant reason to flag an application for
further evaluation.
•
All DMV employees that deal with the
issuance and renewal of identifying docu-
ments should receive comprehensive and
ongoing training.
•
Requests for duplicate or replacement
driver’s licenses or ID cards should only
be presented in person, not by phone or
the Internet.
•
A testing program should be employed
to identify fraud and abuse within the
DMV’s systems and to verify that pro-
cedures are being followed.

C H A P T E R  3
79
States could greatly improve the security of driver’s
licenses by adopting common sense procedures,
such as:
•
Improving the identification verification
process by establishing designated licens-
ing offices where employees would be
trained to spot fraudulent documents and
be equipped with the computer equip-
ment necessary to check databases main-
tained by the SSA and INS. Non-per-
manent resident immigrants and visa
holders would be required to use one
of these offices.
•
Eliminating some types of documenta-
tion that can be easily forged or abused,
such as the I-94 visa form and the IRS
taxpayer identification number.
•
Stopping the common practice of issu-
ing licenses to foreign nationals on a same-
day basis, which makes it extremely dif-
ficult to properly check identity and resi-
dency documents.
•
Tying license expirations to those indi-
cated on visas and foreign passports in-
stead of automatically granting the typi-
cal four-to-six year expiration period.
•
Restricting the number of duplicated li-
censes issued to one individual to replace
stolen or lost originals. 
•
Requiring that photo identification be
shown at every stage of the licensing pro-
cess and refusing to permit photographs
that obscure individuals’ faces.

80
T H E  P R O B L E M S  C A U S E D  B Y  E X I S T I N G  I D  T O O L S
•
Increasing the penalties for obtaining
a license through fraudulent means.
What can you do to secure your SSN and driver’s
license? Keep your Social Security card out of your
wallet or purse and in a safe place at home. Keep
your SSN in your head—and only give it to compa-
nies that really need it. This will be reiterated through-
out this book.
You have to keep your driver’s license on your
person…and you probably need a state-issued photo
ID even if you don’t drive. The best advice here: Try
not to lose it.

C H A P T E R  4
8 1
CHAPTER
THE MECHANICS OF
ID THEFT
4
So, we’ve covered what identity theft is. And who’s
most likely to commit it. And how the nature of many
identification systems enables the thieves. In this chap-
ter, we consider the question of precisely how identity
thieves commit their crimes.
Because ID systems are so varied, there are many ways
for crooks to commit identity theft. Low-tech thieves
can dig up personal financial information by going
through commercial and residential trash. More
ambitious—or less patient—thieves can steal mail from
mailboxes. Others look for low-risk opportunities
to pick up an inattentive person’s wallet or purse.
Identity thieves tend to be more creative than dar-
ing. Few want to face the risks of stealing informa-
tion at knife-point. They’d much prefer to take a job
as a janitor in an office building or bribe a letter
carrier to hunt for credit card bills or other informa-
tion.

82
T H E  M E C H A N I C S  O F  I D  T H E F T
And then there’s the Internet. With the proliferation
of computers and increased use of the World Wide
Web, identity thieves have used information obtained
from company databases and Web sites. In some
cases, the information obtained is in the public do-
main; in others, it is proprietary—and is gotten by
means of a computer intrusion.
In this chapter, we’ll consider the most common
mechanics of ID theft.
S T E A L I N G  
C H E C K S
Mechanically, the easiest way to steal someone’s iden-
tity is to get his or her personal checks. Even if the
check is all a crook has, it can be enough.
In the summer of 2002, an Arkansas man stole sev-
eral people’s identities by using information on per-
sonal checks he took from a small business’s cash
box. Local law enforcement authorities were con-
cerned because he was able to make so much finan-
cial mayhem with nothing more than the checks.
The cash box was stolen from Quality Door & Screen
in North Little Rock in April. About two months
later, different state revenue offices issued three sepa-
rate identification cards bearing the same picture. The
thief forged forms of identification—including out-
of-state driver’s licenses and birth certificates—and
used those to get Arkansas state IDs. The names and
addresses on the IDs matched those of people whose
checks had been in the cash box. And the crook
got them without having Social Security numbers or
other critical information.

C H A P T E R  4
83
Next, he used the state ID cards to make small de-
posits into bank accounts belonging to the three cen-
tral Arkansas men whose checks had been in the cash
box. Finally, over several days, he withdrew every-
thing from the accounts. In total, he made away with
more than $10,000.
North Little Rock police were left with a picture…but
no name or other information…of the ID thief.
That same summer, an Oregon woman accused of
using stolen checks and fake identities to purchase at
least $150,000 in merchandise from Portland-area re-
tailers was arrested. Catherine Gail Hoy-Nelson was
caught driving a $35,000 Mitsubishi Eclipse convert-
ible that had been reported stolen because it was pur-
chased with a bad check and a stolen identity. A
printout of a local police department’s Internet Web
page—with Hoy-Nelson’s picture featured in a most-
wanted section—was in the car.
In the days after her arrest, police recovered about
$25,000 in merchandise purchased with stolen checks
from retailers such as Home Depot and Leather Ex-
press.
Police had been looking for Hoy-Nelson for more
than a year. They’d tracked her at different times to
various Portland-area addresses…but had not been
able to locate her. Her modus operandi had been to prowl
wealthy neighborhoods, looking for packages of
new checks to steal from unlocked mailboxes. After
she got the checks, she’d create an identity for herself
around them.

8 4
T H E  M E C H A N I C S  O F  I D  T H E F T
But Hoy-Nelson didn’t operate entirely alone; local
police said that she’d worked with various people to
sell the ill-gotten merchandise or trade it for drugs.
S T E A L  T H E  W H O L E  M A I L B O X
Since local law enforcement—and even many indi-
viduals—have gotten wise about protecting checks in
unsecured personal mailboxes, some crooks have
gotten more aggressive about what they steal.
In late August 2002, thieves took a U.S. Postal Service
mailbox in San Diego—making it the fourth stolen in
three months. All of the mailboxes were removed by
being unbolted from the ground; all were eventu-
ally found, empty. The crooks seemed to be working
methodically. The mailbox heists took place about
every 30 days, in different parts of San Diego County.
And there was no doubt what the crooks were look-
ing for. A retired schoolteacher who’d lost mail in
one of the boxes reported ID theft to local police.
Someone had altered checks included with two of
her bills and cashed them—taking $1,300 from her
checking account. Separately, someone had applied
for a credit card in her husband’s name.
In September 2002—a continent away from San Di-
ego—a crew of thieves broke open mailboxes at
post offices in several suburban communities south
of Tampa, Florida. The selected post offices were in
neighborhoods considered safe, middle-class (not
wealthy) communities with many retirees.
The crooks seemed to have prepared for their heists
and cased the post offices in advance. Their modus
operandi was to wait until dark, then approach collec-

C H A P T E R  4
85
tion boxes outside of the targeted post offices. They’d
used heavy hand-tools (apparently custom-built for
the work) to pry open the back doors of the collec-
tion boxes and steal all of the mail inside. A witness
to one of the thefts said the crooks were a group of
four, apparently three men and a woman. They
worked very quickly and seemed to be well-re-
hearsed.
The crooks also seemed to be careful to keep their
schedule unpredictable. Two of the mailbox heists
took place a few days apart; the others more than a
week apart. The local police said this made it unlikely
that the thieves were mischievous teenagers or des-
perate junkies. One officer said the crew was “care-
ful” and “definitely not stupid.” The irregular sched-
ule made it harder for police to anticipate their moves.
Investigators with the local sheriff’s office said that,
though the crooks took everything from the mail-
boxes, the careful preparations pointed to ID theft as
the motive. The crooks were probably looking for
mortgage and credit card payments—which would
include account information and checks.
C R E D I T  C A R D  S K I M M I N G
Skimming occurs when the data on the magnetic
strip on the back of a credit or ATM card is cap-
tured by swiping the card through a device that re-
sembles, in most cases, a pager or small cell phone.
The information from the magnetic strip is stored in
the device until its memory fills up or until it is down-
loaded to a computer or transferred onto the mag-
netic strip of blank cards. (The blank cards that have
the copied data are called cloned cards.)

8 6
T H E  M E C H A N I C S  O F  I D  T H E F T
The restaurant industry is particularly vulnerable to
skimming because it is one of the few retail sectors
where, for a few moments, customers are separated
from their credit cards and often can’t see their serv-
ers processing payment authorizations. Because most
skimming devices are small enough to fit unseen in an
adult’s hand, an unscrupulous waiter, bartender or
cashier can easily swipe a card without being seen.
Skimming first caught the attention of law enforce-
ment agencies in the mid-1990s, when e-commerce
and other types of electronic transactions started to
become popular. In the classic model, crooks skim
credit cards at restaurants or other retail stores and
then use to the card information to make online pur-
chases—usually within 24 hours of the skim.
Credit card companies don’t like talking about how
much money is stolen through skimming; appar-
ently, they believe that discussing the phenomenon
will only encourage more of it. But informed sources
in the industry estimate that the major card compa-
nies lose as much as $300 million a year in the U.S.
due to skimming.
The crooks that specialize in skimming usually work
with restaurant or retail employees who consider
themselves underpaid. The crooks offer $20 to $50
per swiped card. The employees take the devices with
them—as we mentioned, the things can be easily mis-
taken for a pager or cell phone—and swipe as many
cards as time and circumstances allow.

C H A P T E R  4
87
Smart crooks will circulate through a metropolitan
area, not spending more than a day or so skimming
in any single location. In fact, according to one Florida
law enforcement official, the most efficient crooks
will spend two or three times as many hours finding
promising locations and corruptible waiters or bar-
tenders as they will actually skimming.
Experts say that 70 percent of all skimming takes
place in restaurants or bars. But that doesn’t mean
all skimming takes place there.
In July 2002, Benjamin Driscoll—a resident of Delray
Beach, Florida (north of Miami) discovered a skim-
ming scheme at a local Bank of America branch.
When Driscoll swiped his ATM card and entered his
PIN at one of the branch’s cash machines, a message
appeared on the screen stating that his transaction
could not be processed.
Driscoll swiped his card again but grew suspicious
and tugged on the machine. A skimming device, which
had been attached with Velcro over the ATM’s
normal card slot, came off into his hands.
A spokesman for Bank of America admitted that
Driscoll’s experience was not unique…that a number
of aggressive ID thieves attach skimming devices to
ATMs. In most cases, the spokesman said, the thieves
will also attach professional-looking signs to the ma-
chines saying there is something wrong with the ATM
and instructing people to use the alternate swipe.

88
T H E  M E C H A N I C S  O F  I D  T H E F T
The main drawback to skimming—from the crook’s
perspective—is that it’s a short-lived scheme. Skim-
mers usually have to make all of their purchases and
transactions before the true card owner gets his or
her next monthly statement. Sometimes the crook can
find out when the statements are mailed; but, more
often, they don’t want to risk discovery by asking.
In short, the card skimmer—and most ID thieves, no
matter what their modus operandi—run so-called bust-
out schemes. In purest form of these schemes, the
crooks use credit card terminals obtained by a shell
or front business to apply charges to stolen credit
cards. The crooks run the cards or numbers through
the terminals but do not provide any goods or ser-
vices. The credit card company credits the account of
the front business. Before the next statement from
the stolen card reaches its rightful owner and the bo-
gus charges can be reversed, the funds are moved out
of the front business account.
In a slight variation on this scheme, the crook will
use the stolen cards (or card information) to buy
things from legitimate businesses—and flee with the
goods before the next statement arrives.
Some seasoned ID thieves move from city to city,
skimming card information, charging up goods and
either busting out or moving on.

C H A P T E R  4
8 9
I N S I D E R S  S T E A L I N G  I D E N T I T I E S
Skimming often relies on the cooperation of cor-
ruptible employees. But it’s a relatively simple and
often anonymous proposition.
More complex ID thefts involve more detailed co-
operation between employees and thieves. At a meet-
ing of Florida law enforcement officials in Novem-
ber 2002, lawyers with the state attorney’s office in-
troduced a veteran ID thief for some dramatic testi-
mony. Wearing a plastic mask that reminded some of
the Hannibal Lecter character from the film Silence of
the Lambs, the speaker offered details on how he’d
been able to steal between $15 million and $20 mil-
lion using other people’s names.
He claimed that he could purchase a Florida driver’s
license for as little as $100 and, in a few minutes of
telephone work, he could get someone’s Social Secu-
rity number—all with the help of “people on the in-
side.” In all, he’d corrupted more than 50 people
working in the offices of state and federal agencies in
various Florida cities; and he’d been able to do it all
by focusing on clerical and administrative employees.
Not managers or professionals.
He said greedy people were happy to sell him other
people’s personal identification. He would pay as much
as $1,000 for a complete package—that included a
name, birth date, address, account details and SSN.
He pointed out that the most effective ID thieves
prefer not to steal credit cards, because owners miss
them quickly and report their loss. It is easier, he said,
to corrupt a bank worker, a driver’s-license examiner
or someone from a credit-reporting service.

90
T H E  M E C H A N I C S  O F  I D  T H E F T
ID thieves often use techniques similar to drug deal-
ers. A group of middlemen will contact corruptible
employees; these middlemen function as indepen-
dent contractors with a penchant for secrecy.
The crooks often contact employees on the recom-
mendation of a mutual acquaintance, keep commu-
nications limited to a cell phone and stay in one place
for a short time. They pay cash for credit card num-
bers, bank account information, blank document
forms and—most importantly—Social Security num-
bers.
In May 2002, Ford Motor Credit Company (which
writes mortgages, as well as car loans) sent out a se-
ries of letters notifying some 13,000 borrowers that
their credit information may have been stolen. For
more than a year, a crew of sophisticated ID thieves
had been breaking into the files at credit bureau
Experian, using a Ford Motor Credit password and
lender account information.
Experian blamed the breach on the Ford account in-
formation. For its part, Ford spokespeople said they
didn’t know how the break-ins happened—and they
couldn’t rule out employee involvement. Rich Van
Leeuwen, a Ford Motor Credit executive, said:
A lot of these attacks happen because of in-
siders that have particular knowledge of how
the application works, or get help from some-
body from the inside without even knowing
that they’re helping the attack happen.

C H A P T E R  4
9 1
The ID thieves accessing the Ford Motor Credit data
were looking for more than just credit card numbers.
The credit information that Ford kept in the Experian
system included complete identities—SSNs, birth
dates, family names, bank information—that crooks
could use to establish complete financial clones of
the borrowers. In law enforcement circles, this more
complete reproduction is called true identity theft.
And it can go on for years without being stopped.
About the same time as the Ford Motor Credit de-
bacle, a Philadelphia-based ID theft scheme that used
a corrupted insider was coming to light.
More than 40 people who banked with the Philadel-
phia Federal Credit Union started finding out that their
credit histories had been stolen. The ID theft had en-
abled local crooks to operate a huge bust-out scheme;
they bought more than 60 new or late-model cars
worth almost $2 million from Philadelphia-area deal-
ers, using the Credit Union customers’ credit. The
crooks sold or moved the cars; and they never made
any payments.
But the ID heist had been too dramatic to go unno-
ticed. Because the crooks had used so many IDs sto-
len from one financial institution, federal banking au-
thorities were able to trace the dirty deals back to a
single source. The Feds’ detective work led them to a
Philadelphia Federal Credit Union employee—a part-
time clerk named Marpessa McNeil.
McNeil hardly seemed like a hardened criminal. She
was a recent college graduate (with a degree in

92
T H E  M E C H A N I C S  O F  I D  T H E F T
criminal justice, no less) in her mid-20s, who’d been
working for the Credit Union for several years to
strong performance reviews. But she’d been influ-
enced by a hard character.
Darryl Brown, who had a checkered history of fi-
nancial missteps, misdemeanors and malfeasance, had
paid McNeil $10,000 for getting the detailed credit
reports of 44 Credit Union members. He had coor-
dinated the automobile bust-out scheme.
Brown, McNeil and several others were found guilty
of various crimes including identity theft and grand
larceny.
The victims of the scheme seemed more upset with
McNeil—whom they’d trusted—than the con artist
Brown. Credit Union members and executives peti-
tioned the federal judge hearing the case to make an
example of McNeil. And he did.
U.S. District Judge John R. Padova sentenced McNeil
to 30 months in prison and ordered her to pay back
$674,661. The sentence exceeded standard guidelines;
but Padova defended his decision because of “the
severe non-economic harm” the Credit Union mem-
bers had suffered in piecing back together their dam-
aged credit.
Some ID thieves don’t like to rely on bribed insiders
for credit information. They are more patient—and
systematic. And they take customer service jobs
themselves to get access to the information.

C H A P T E R  4
93
In August 2002, Kansas law enforcement agents
charged a former customer service manager at sev-
eral local companies with stealing identities from
people who paid their bills with credit cards. Christo-
pher Paul Ware was charged with five counts of iden-
tity theft.
Local detectives said Ware took customer-service
jobs at Verizon Wireless, Capital One, Chrysler Fi-
nance and Household Payroll Services, all in the Kan-
sas City area. He kept a private log of names, Social
Security numbers, mothers’ maiden names and other
information when customers called him to pay their
bills. He might have gotten away with the thefts—but
he stayed in the Kansas City area too long.
Local police tracked Ware down only after he’d used
two fraudulent credit cards and a false credit applica-
tion to buy a car. They arrested him at his office in the
suburban town of Overland Park—and found more
than a dozen files of customer identity information
in a bag he carried.
W I - F I  A N D  O T H E R  W E B  R I S K S
Identity theft is a disturbing combination of old
schemes and abuse of emerging technologies.
One example of such abuse of new technologies is
called wardriving—randomly searching for open sig-
nals to acquire free wireless Internet service.
Proponents of the practice envision a utopian
Internet world where everybody can walk outside
and log on without paying a provider. But the signals
can also be used to gain access to private information

94
T H E  M E C H A N I C S  O F  I D  T H E F T
in the computers of the companies that pay for the
service. No passwords or secret codes have to be
cracked using this method.
Entering computer systems without official permis-
sion is a state and federal crime. Penalties depend on
the amount of damage that results. But it remains a
popular activity among the hacker community. Some
wardrivers invade computer networks for fun; oth-
ers do it for identity theft, password acquisition or
just plain old snooping.
A wardriver can use ordinary equipment—such as a
simple laptop computer, a commonly-available an-
tenna and the Windows 2000 operating system. The
only difficult part is getting the right software; but
even that is done easily enough on the Internet. One
popular program, called netstumbler, recognizes signal
access points in a small geographic area.
Online ID theft exposures don’t require anarchistic
hackers.
Some thieves gain access to your personal informa-
tion via old e-mail—that you thought you’d deleted.
E-mail services often make backup copies of the e-
mail so as to recover from a catastrophic failure of a
primary server. From time to time, e-mail users are
surprised to discover that e-mail they thought they
had long since deleted has been retained in backup
files and has been released by accident or has be-
come discoverable in a legal proceeding or is acces-
sible under appropriate warrants.

C H A P T E R  4
95
Other thieves gain access to personal information
through another serious consumer Internet risk that
arises from access-controlled services requiring
user authentication. The most common method of
authentication is to associate a password with a user
identifier (ID). These passwords are often fixed and
reused repeatedly. Users are notorious for the poor
choices of passwords and their unwillingness to
change them regularly. Passwords can often be
guessed (birthdate, pet’s name, spouse’s name, the
current year, anniversary date, Social Security num-
ber, telephone number, address).
Password files at the service hosts are usually one-
way encrypted but if a hacker can get a copy of the
encrypted password file it’s possible to run a “re-
verse dictionary attack” to try to find the pass-
word. In a reverse dictionary attack, all the words
in the dictionary are encrypted and then compared
with each of the encrypted passwords taken from
the target computer. A match exposes the pass-
word. Such tools are commonly available.
Good password practices dictate at the least that re-
usable passwords be changed regularly, contain more
than just alphabetic characters, be six to 10 characters
long and not contain common words found in the
dictionary. See Chapter 8 for more about passwords.
Information about consumer use of Web services
can be collected in each user’s personal computer by
Web service providers in small caches of informa-
tion called “cookies.” The Web service providers can

9 6
T H E  M E C H A N I C S  O F  I D  T H E F T
use this information to tailor services provided to
individual users. Consumers are at risk if companies
that collect this data make use of it in ways that con-
sumers do not expect or would not approve. It is this
concern that led to requirements for companies to
report their privacy protection practices to consum-
ers on a regular basis.
Not all Web sites are what they seem. Some may ap-
pear to offer products or services but may in fact
simply be “fronts” for purposes of capturing per-
sonal information, credit card numbers and the like.
This is outright fraud.
Finally, software can be put into your computer by
someone with physical access to it that will provide a
record of virtually everything you do with your ma-
chine. Similar software might be ingested over the
Internet as an attachment to an e-mail message or
possibly as a consequence of loading a Web page and
executing “applets.” Such “Trojan horse” software
can expose all of your personal computer’s data and
activity to view.
S L O P P Y  O N L I N E  S H O P P I N G  H A B I T S
People who use the Internet today willingly give up a
lot of information about themselves.
In this age of gathering marketing data, informa-
tion and cross-referencing databases, once you pur-
chase something online and they have a good pro-
file of you, that information can be propagated to a
lot of other agencies or places and sold.

C H A P T E R  4
9 7
Your credit card information is stored at that com-
pany. And security of your information is only as good
as the security of the company that’s storing your in-
formation. If they’ve broken into it and your infor-
mation is sold or stolen, you’ve got no control. Once
it’s gone, it’s gone.
If you buy something online, the company that sold
you that something may have the right—even the ob-
ligation—to give the information to other entities—
including the federal government, for one. And, if
there’s a financial transaction involved, the online com-
pany may have obligations to give the information to
affiliates and reporting services. And they may want
to give the information to marketers.
(Of course, this isn’t a phenomenon that’s limited to
the Internet. Often, when you buy things in bricks-
and-mortar stores, there’s more information-shar-
ing going on than you ever realize.)
Not all online information sharing is bad. Some goes
to positive use: Companies take information of your
purchases and create a profile and then develop cus-
tomized pitches to your needs and wants. Many
people like those campaigns.
On the other hand, when it’s shared and sliced and
diced by people you don’t know and you don’t un-
derstand how they’re going to use it, it’s very discom-
forting.
The thing to remember is that Internet security is
oriented toward convenience, not protecting the in-
formation.

9 8
T H E  M E C H A N I C S  O F  I D  T H E F T
In his May 2001 congressional testimony, Bruce
Townsend, Special Agent in Charge of Financial
Crimes Division, United States Secret Service, said:
Information collection has become a com-
mon byproduct of the newly emerging e-
commerce. Internet purchases, credit card
sales and other forms of electronic transac-
tions are being captured, stored and analyzed
by entrepreneurs intent on increasing their
market share. The result is a growing busi-
ness sector for promoting the buying and
selling of personal information.
With the advent of the Internet, companies have been
created for the sole purpose of data mining, data
warehousing and brokering of this information.
These companies collect a wealth of information
about consumers, including information as confiden-
tial as their medical histories.
The Internet provides the anonymity that criminals
desire. In the past, fraud schemes required false
identification documents, and necessitated a “face
to face” exchange of information and identity veri-
fication. Now with just a laptop and a modem,
criminals are capable of perpetrating a variety of
financial crimes without identity documents through
the use of stolen personal information.
In an investigation conducted in April 2001, Secret
Service Agents from the Lexington, Kentucky, Resi-
dent Office, along with their local law enforcement

C H A P T E R  4
9 9
partners from the Richmond, Kentucky, Police De-
partment, arrested a suspect who was operating an
online auction selling counterfeit sports memora-
bilia. During this investigation, it was learned that the
suspect had fraudulently opened a number of credit
card accounts utilizing the personal information of
individuals who had participated in his auction on the
Internet.
F A K E  I R S  F O R M S
In 2001 and 2002, a scheme appeared throughout the
U.S. that used fictitious bank correspondence and
bogus IRS forms to mislead taxpayers into disclosing
their personal and banking data. The information was
then used to steal the taxpayers’ identities and bank
account balances.
In the scam, the taxpayer receives a letter, purport-
edly from his or her bank, stating that the bank is
updating its records to exempt the taxpayer from
reporting interest or having tax withheld on interest
paid on the taxpayer’s bank accounts or other finan-
cial dealings. According to the letter, anyone who does
not file an enclosed form is subject to 31 percent
withholding on the interest paid.
The bank correspondence encloses a form allegedly
from the IRS and seeks detailed financial and per-
sonal data. Recipients are urged to fax the completed
forms within seven days. Once they get the informa-
tion, the scheme’s promoters use the information to
impersonate the taxpayer and gain access to his
or her finances.

100
T H E  M E C H A N I C S  O F  I D  T H E F T
One such form is labeled W-9095, Application Form
for Certificate Status/Ownership for Withholding Tax.
This form requests personal information frequently
used to prove identity, including passport numbers
and mothers’ maiden names. It also asks for data such
as bank account numbers, passwords and PIN num-
bers needed for access to the accounts.
This form is meant to mimic the genuine Form W-9.
However, the only personal information that a genu-
ine W-9 requests is the taxpayer’s name, address
and Social Security number or employer identifica-
tion number.
Other fictitious forms include Form W-8BEN. In
contrast to the legitimate W-8BEN, the fictitious one
has been altered to ask for personal information much
like the W-9095. Also used is a form labeled W-8888.
The requested information in the fake form goes far
beyond what anything anyone would wisely want to
volunteer to strangers: a passport number, mother’s
maiden name, account numbers and names, dates they
were opened and date of the last transaction.
Legitimate IRS forms generally have an IRS process-
ing center address on them as well as the IRS phone
number. Beyond that, the IRS doesn’t ask for things
like your bank passwords or insist that you fax things
in to them.

C H A P T E R  4
101
Any such request should be a red flag.
M E D I C A L  I D  T H E F T
Taking advantage of e-commerce and insufficient
safeguards on patient and physician information in
hospitals and clinics, crooks have come up with so-
phisticated schemes to steal physician identities and
walk off with millions of dollars.
In California, an ID theft crew allegedly defrauded
the state’s Medicaid program of $3.9 million by using
physicians’ stolen identities to order bogus tests—and
then billing both Medicare and Medicaid for the tests.
Identity theft is a particular problem for Medi-Cal,
California’s Medicaid program. Medicare is harder to
defraud because the insurance forms go out to the
recipients. But Medicaid doesn’t send out notices of
what claims are being submitted, so there’s no paper
trail to track down criminals.
Physician identities are accessible from sources such
as a state medical board’s Web site, local physician
directories or the Yellow Pages.
Physician names, as well as copies of medical licenses
and office addresses, also can be stolen from hospital
personnel files. The criminals submit the documents
to the state health department to obtain Medicaid
provider numbers and then tell the state Medicaid
program that the physician has a new address and
request payment at that address. If the physician

102
T H E  M E C H A N I C S  O F  I D  T H E F T
doesn’t have a Medicaid provider number, crooks
will use the stolen identities to file for one.
Another tactic involves stealing the names, Social Se-
curity numbers or identification numbers of Medic-
aid and Medicare beneficiaries. Both patient informa-
tion and physician information are necessary to bill
the programs.
Once armed with the physician’s name and provider
numbers, as well as stolen patient information, crimi-
nals can submit bogus claims to Medicaid or
Medicare.
The reimbursement checks are either mailed to the
clinics, labs or post office box addresses, or directly
deposited to bank accounts opened under the physi-
cians’ stolen identities. The crooks then forge the phy-
sicians’ signatures on the checks that the state sends
them.
This type of fraud can go on for years, until the phy-
sician gets a call from the Internal Revenue Service,
asking why she didn’t pay taxes on $400,000 of in-
come received from Medicaid. Neither Medicaid nor
the physician knew what was going on.
In early August 2002, a claims entry operator for Wis-
consin Physicians Service was charged with identity
theft after he allegedly supplied personal information
of WPS clients to a Milwaukee man who used it to
apply for credit cards.
Mario L. Mason, who worked for WPS subsidiary
Tricare health insurance, allegedly took names and
personal data from claims he processed for Tricare

C H A P T E R  4
103
and gave them to Milwaukee resident Marques J.
Kincaid, who used the information to fill out credit
card applications on the Internet.
Mason and Kincaid were each charged with identity
theft. According to a criminal complaint, they had
become acquainted while serving time in the Dane
County Jail several months earlier. Kincaid used the
name and personal information of an Arlington,
Texas, man to obtain a credit card that he used to
obtain cash advances of more than $8,000.
Why Tricare didn’t run a background check on Ma-
son—the employee who had access to so much per-
sonal financial information—remained an unan-
swered question.
Federal law enforcement agencies are particularly
aware of medical ID theft issues. The Department
of Health and Human Services, cooperating with
the FBI, uses a sophisticated software data mining
tool to analyze all claims submitted by medical pro-
viders and pharmacies and compare them against
member enrollment data and other information.
Unusual billing practices are targeted for an in-depth
audit or investigation.
Such schemes include: submitting altered medical
bills; billing for services never received; doctor-
shopping to obtain multiple prescriptions for con-
trolled substances; and stealing a physician’s pre-

104
T H E  M E C H A N I C S  O F  I D  T H E F T
scriptions pad and submitting forged prescriptions
for controlled substances to pharmacists.
The software data mining tool helped the FBI build a
case against Richard J. Farina and his business, Penn-
sylvania-based Inner Health Lifestyle Center.
Farina and Inner Health each pled guilty to two fed-
eral felony counts of health care fraud for submitting
fraudulent bills to the local Blue Cross and its subsid-
iary, Keystone Health Plan East. The bills claimed that
Farina had provided patients with chiropractic ser-
vices, when they actually had received weight loss and
exercise treatments.
The data mining software tool determined that Fa-
rina and his business had submitted claims that
alleged he had rendered in excess of 49 hours of
care to patients on a given day.
Following their federal indictment and subsequent plea
agreement, Farina and Inner Health were ordered to
pay $109,000 restitution to the local Blue Cross. Inner
Health was ordered to stop doing business; Farina
was sentenced to six months home confinement,
five years probation and forced to surrender his New
Jersey and Pennsylvania chiropractic licenses for 10
years.
Other medical ID theft takes a simpler—and more
vulgar—form than complex insurance scams. For

C H A P T E R  4
105
example: In September 2002, the wife of a Califor-
nia optometrist was facing criminal charges of steal-
ing credit card numbers from her husband’s patient
files and using them to order merchandise on the
Internet.
Kim Yasuda, who did office work for her husband,
had access to credit card numbers in the files of his
patients. Authorities said she used credit card num-
bers belonging to three patients of her husband, Dr.
Jerry Yasuda. She was charged with three counts of
identity theft, two counts of grand theft and one count
of computer fraud.
Visalia police reports said Kim Yasuda ordered mer-
chandise in her victims’ names over the Internet, then
had the packages delivered to the home of a neigh-
bor who traveled a lot. If the neighbor wasn’t home
when a package arrived, she would pick it up.
The items the woman ordered showed a depress-
ingly banal taste in ill-gotten goods. They included
women’s and children’s clothes, Disney videos, items
from Amazon.com and items from www.statelinetack.com,
an Internet site selling horse-riding apparel.
C O N C L U S I O N
The mechanical details of ID theft change with cir-
cumstances, technology advances and the perverse
creativity of crooks. But, in this chapter, we’ve dealt
with the basic building blocks of most ID theft
schemes:
•
Improper and illegal use of checks and
credit cards;

106
T H E  M E C H A N I C S  O F  I D  T H E F T
•
Inattentiveness of the victims;
•
Trusted or insider status of someone in-
volved in the scheme;
•
Quick use of the ill-gotten ID infor-
mation;
•
Smart ID thieves move around a lot;
•
Bold ID thieves will contact banks and
credit card companies to alter account
information;
•
ID thieves are aggressive about using
technology;
•
Internet and online merchants create ex-
posure by emphasizing convenience;
•
All merchants may share your informa-
tion more than you realize; and
•
Medical information is an overlooked
exposure.

C H A P T E R  5
107
CHAPTER
ILLEGAL
IMMIGRATION,
TERRORISM, DRUGS
AND OTHER CRIMES
5
Identity theft has long been a side effect of other,
more ambitious crimes. Dapper con men may use
fake IDs; but so do violent gangbangers, sleazy drug
dealers and hungry immigrants desperate for work.
In calendar year 2000, the Social Security Administra-
tion (SSA) issued approximately 1.2 million SSNs
to non-citizens. While SSNs issued to non-citizens
represent only about 20 percent of the total, the vol-
ume is significant.
In 2002, the Census Bureau estimated that 8.7 million
people resided in the United States illegally. The Im-
migration and Naturalization Service (INS) has esti-
mated that approximately 40 percent of illegal immi-
grants are visa overstayers while 60 percent entered
illegally. Although most illegal immigrants simply want
better lives for their families and themselves, their pres-
ence has spawned widespread document and identity
fraud throughout the U.S.
The immense demand for documents “proving” the
right to work in the United States has led to the ex-

108
I L L E G A L  I M M I G R A T I O N ,  T E R R O R I S M ,  D R U G S  A N D  O T H E R  C R I M E S
ploitation of loopholes in laws and regulations at
every level of government.
In 1986, the U.S. Congress passed the Immigration
Reform and Control Act (IRCA), a key element of
which was sanctions against employers who hired il-
legal aliens. IRCA had the unintended consequence
of accelerating the proliferation of counterfeit, stolen
and illegally obtained Social Security cards and driver’s
licenses.
Undocumented immigrants and those with visas that
don’t permit employment have devised multiple ways
to obtain a Social Security card fraudulently—they can:
•
invent a SSN;
•
steal or borrow a Social Security card;
•
buy a counterfeit Social Security card;
•
obtain a valid Social Security card by us-
ing false evidentiary documents, such as
counterfeit passports and INS papers;
•
obtain a valid Social Security card by us-
ing a fraudulently acquired U.S. birth cer-
tificate; or
•
fraudulently obtain a valid replacement
Social Security card by stealing a person’s
identity.
If illegal aliens invent SSNs, steal or borrow authentic
cards or buy counterfeit ones, the SSA will not catch
on without the aid of employers. But few employers
seem inclined to cooperate.
The SSA’s Employee Verification Service (EVS) is a
mechanism for employers to match an individual’s

C H A P T E R  5
109
name and SSN with SSA records. There were 6.5
million U.S. employers in fiscal year 2000. Only 6,000
employers were registered users, and of those, only
211 used EVS. Employers complain that the feed-
back is not timely.
However a number of employers find the system to
be too helpful, exposing the fact that their employ-
ees are in the country illegally or holding visas that
do not permit them to work.
SSA statistics show three industries (agriculture, food
and beverage and services) account for almost one-
half of all wage items in SSA’s Earnings Suspense File
(ESF). The ESF is the Agency’s record of annual wage
reports submitted by employers for which employee
names and SSNs fail to match the SSA’s records. Of
these industries, agriculture is the largest contributor,
representing about 17 percent of all ESF items.
SSA has noted that about 55 percent of the items in
the ESF have: 1) no name; 2) no name and no SSN;
or 3) an unissued SSN. The remainder of the items in
the ESF generally relates to a mismatch between
the name and SSN.
I L L E G A L  
I M M I G R A T I O N
The federal prosecution of Ousmane Sow and
Aboubakar Doumbia for Social Security fraud illus-
trates how easily Social Security cards are obtained by
fraud and what a large role this fraud plays in illegal
immigration.

110
I L L E G A L  I M M I G R A T I O N ,  T E R R O R I S M ,  D R U G S  A N D  O T H E R  C R I M E S
Sow and Doumbia were caught at Reagan National
Airport in transit from New York to Miami. They
were traveling on tickets paid for with stolen credit
cards and were found to be carrying a dozen foreign
passports and two dozen stolen immigration forms.
Both men were charged with immigration fraud and
pled guilty prior to trial. Interestingly, both had fraudu-
lent Virginia identification cards even though they lived
in New York.
One of the two men agreed to cooperate with the
government and revealed the purpose of their trip to
Miami. He informed investigators that he and his ac-
complice were part of a West African criminal syn-
dicate (he used the term crew) based in New York
City. This syndicate specialized in the fraudulent pro-
curement of Social Security cards and, to a lesser ex-
tent, the fraudulent procurement of Virginia driver’s
licenses and identification cards. According to the co-
operating defendant, members of the syndicate re-
peatedly traveled from New York to major cities in
the United States on tickets paid for with stolen credit
cards. The purpose of the trips was to apply for So-
cial Security cards by fraud at the SSA offices in each
city. At each office, the members of the syndicate
would apply for a card using a passport and an INS
form.
The members of the syndicate altered the passports
by substituting their own photographs so that they
could apply in person for a Social Security card in the
name of one of the syndicate clients (to whom the
passport actually belonged). They further placed doc-
tored INS forms in the clients’ passports to make it
appear that they, the applicants, were lawfully in the
United States and had the right to work. In fact, their

C H A P T E R  5
111
clients were illegal immigrants in New York and New
Jersey who paid the syndicate between $700 and
$1,500 for a Social Security card.
According to the cooperating defendant, members
of the syndicate had traveled to all of the major
cities in the United States, often more than once,
and obtained well over 1,000 fraudulent Social Se-
curity cards.
In July 2002, Social Security Administration Deputy
Commissioner James B. Lockhart III told a U.S. Sen-
ate subcommittee that a new electronic immigra-
tion verification process was starting that month.
The lack of such a system had been a major criticism
after 9/11, when officials initially thought terrorists
had legally obtained Social Security numbers. The SSA
could not verify visa status or other immigration docu-
ments for all non-citizens because no system was avail-
able to do so quickly.
The SSA was also implementing a system that assigned
Social Security numbers to new immigrants when the
State Department approves an immigrant visa at a
foreign service post and the INS authorizes entry. The
SSA wanted to make the numbers “less accessible to
those with criminal intent as well as prevent individu-
als from using false or stolen birth records or immi-
gration documents to obtain” them.
The federal prosecution of a Virginia notary public
named Jennifer Wrenn illustrates how criminals pro-

112
I L L E G A L  I M M I G R A T I O N ,  T E R R O R I S M ,  D R U G S  A N D  O T H E R  C R I M E S
duce false or fictitious driver’s licenses for illegal
immigrants.
Wrenn had offices in Falls Church and Manassas Park,
Virginia, from which she ostensibly conducted the
activities of her real estate business, Jenni Wrenn Re-
alty. An investigation by the Virginia DMV, the INS
and the IRS revealed, however, that the true work at
both offices was the sale of fraudulent forms to im-
migrants seeking to obtain Virginia driver’s licenses
and identification cards.
Immigrants were coming to Wrenn through a net-
work of paid drivers and middlemen with whom
Wrenn worked. For a fee of between $500 and $1,000,
these drivers and middlemen would bring immigrants
from New Jersey, Connecticut, New York and other
states to Wrenn offices. Once there, Wrenn and her
staff would complete fraudulent forms for the im-
migrants. These fraudulent forms bore all the neces-
sary signatures and affirmations—and falsely stated
that the applicants were residents of Virginia. At the
height of her business, Wrenn was providing fraudu-
lent forms to over 1,000 immigrants a month.
Wrenn was arrested in February 2001, and subsequently
convicted at trial of seven counts of conspiracy, iden-
tification document fraud, encouraging illegal immi-
gration and money laundering. In addition, the gov-
ernment arrested and prosecuted a dozen other indi-
viduals who worked with her or for her on charges
of identification document fraud. These individu-
als included a lawyer, notaries, drivers and other
middlemen.

C H A P T E R  5
113
T E R R O R I S M
Seven of the 9/11 hijackers used illegally obtained
identification to sneak past airport security. The
freedom with which these terrorists moved has been
a considerable embarrassment to the U.S. government,
with most of the criticism directed at the INS.
But the attacks of 9/11 also exposed cracks in the
security system at the Social Security Administration.
The relative ease with which the ID thieves-turned-
terrorists manipulated the system called for tighter
screenings and other security precautions.
When federal law enforcement agencies asked the SSA
for assistance shortly after the attacks, time-consum-
ing efforts ate up valuable hours as agents worked to
obtain necessary authorization to see the files of sus-
pects. Although the requests were expedited, it re-
vealed a weakness in a system that prohibited the
automatic disclosure of certain information to the
Department of Justice or FBI in connection with a
terrorist investigation.
September 11th, 2001 focused government attention
on the need to tighten security at the SSA and stream-
line cooperation among federal agencies to detect
fraud and ferret it out.
Terrorists steal credit cards, passports and Social Se-
curity numbers, and use them to pay for their opera-
tions and create false identities, Dennis Lormel, chief
of the FBI’s financial crimes unit, told a Senate sub-
committee in July 2002.

114
I L L E G A L  I M M I G R A T I O N ,  T E R R O R I S M ,  D R U G S  A N D  O T H E R  C R I M E S
Lormel said 14 pending FBI terrorism investigations
involved some form of identity theft.
“The methods used to finance terrorism range from
the highly sophisticated to the most basic,” Lormel
said. He said an al-Qaida terrorist cell that was bro-
ken up in Madrid, Spain, used stolen credit cards in
sales scams and for small purchases that did not re-
quire other identification. The group also used fake
passports to open bank accounts, which were used
to send money to and from countries such as Paki-
stan and Afghanistan.
Lormel told the senators that blank passports were
stolen in Brussels, Belgium and were “finding their
way into terrorist circles.”
The 9/11 hijackers were able to open 35 U.S. bank
accounts without having legitimate SSNs and
opened some of the accounts with fabricated SSNs
that were never checked or questioned by bank offi-
cials. The banks involved approved several account
applications in which the hijackers simply filled in
random numbers in spaces reserved for applicants’
SSNs.
With no scrutiny from the financial institutions or gov-
ernment regulators, the hijackers were able to move
hundreds of thousands of dollars from the Middle
East into the United States through a maze of bank
accounts, beginning more than a year before their
attacks.

C H A P T E R  5
115
The hijackers relied most heavily on 14 accounts at
Atlanta-based SunTrust Banks, moving $325,000
through accounts opened in Florida and taken out in
the names of several of the hijackers.
Lormel went on to describe the steps that the FBI
was taking to prevent other terrorists from having
such success with ID theft within the U.S.:
One involves targeting fraud schemes being
committed by loosely organized groups to
conduct criminal activity with a nexus to ter-
rorist financing. The FBI has identified a num-
ber of such groups made up of members
of varying ethnic backgrounds [that] are en-
gaged in widespread fraud activity. Members
of these groups may not themselves be ter-
rorists, but proceeds from their criminal fraud
schemes have directly or indirectly been used
to fund terrorist activity and/or terrorist
groups.
Another initiative has been the development
of a multi-phase data mining project that
seeks to identify potential terrorist-related in-
dividuals through Social Security number
misusage analysis.
According to Lormel, the threat is made more seri-
ous by the fact that terrorists have become experts
at identity theft and SSN fraud to enable them to
obtain cover employment and access to secure loca-
tions. There is virtually no means of obtaining identi-
fication that has not at some level been exploited by
these groups, he said.

116
I L L E G A L  I M M I G R A T I O N ,  T E R R O R I S M ,  D R U G S  A N D  O T H E R  C R I M E S
The data mining that Lormel mentioned has become
a central part of the U.S. government’s efforts to
thwart ID thieves with terrorist connections. In earlier
congressional testimony, Michael Chertoff—an As-
sistant U.S. Attorney General in charge of criminal
prosecutions—had described the Justice Department’s
data mining activities. His description of data mining
is a good one:
We are using computers to analyze informa-
tion obtained in the course of criminal inves-
tigations, to uncover patterns of behavior that,
before the advent of such efficient technol-
ogy, would have eluded us. Through what
has come to be called “data mining” and
predictive technology, we seek to identify
other potential terrorists and terrorism financ-
ing networks. In our search for terrorists and
terrorist cells, we are employing technology
that was previously utilized primarily by the
business community.
On May 2, 2002, the U.S. Attorney General announced
a nationwide sweep of identity theft cases, in which
73 federal criminal prosecutions were brought against
135 individuals in 24 districts. In addition, to strengthen
federal ID theft laws, the Attorney General announced
that the Justice Department would seek legislation to
enhance criminal penalties in identity theft-related cases.
Seven of the 9/11 hijackers—none of whom actually
lived in the Commonwealth—had obtained Virginia
driver’s licenses by submitting false proof of Virginia
residency.
In August 2002, law enforcement officials announced
that a man whose name was used to wire money to

C H A P T E R  5
117
accused 9/11 conspirator Zacarias Moussaoui a year
earlier was an American who appeared to have been
a victim of identity theft.
Moussaoui’s indictment charged that an accomplice,
using the name Ahad Sabet, had wired $14,000 to
Moussaoui in the United States, where he was pursu-
ing flight training lessons. The allegation was one of
the few connections in the indictment between
Moussaoui and associates of the 9/11 hijackers.
The real Ahad Sabet apparently didn’t know that his
missing passport had made its way into the hands
of terrorists until early 2002, when FBI agents con-
tacted him in connection with the case against
Moussaoui.
Moussaoui claimed the government had no case
against him since its own evidence showed that Sabet
and Ramzi bin al-Shibh—an alleged conspirator in
the 9/11 attacks—were not the same person. But this
argument raised questions about Moussaoui’s under-
standing of criminal procedure (if not about his
intelligence, generally). From the beginning, the
government’s claim had been that bin al-Shibh used
Sabet as an alias to wire money to Moussaoui. An
alias gathered through ID theft would fit the terror-
ists’ needs nicely.
When investigators searched Moussaoui’s possessions
after the 9/11 attacks, they found a notebook listing
bin al-Shibh’s German phone number and the name
“Ahad Sabet,” according to the indictment. Crucial to
the government’s case was an explanation of how
bin al-Shibh was able to obtain Sabet’s identification
papers while Sabet was living and working as a phy-
sician in the U.S.

118
I L L E G A L  I M M I G R A T I O N ,  T E R R O R I S M ,  D R U G S  A N D  O T H E R  C R I M E S
Sabet’s mother provided that answer: Her son’s pass-
port had been stolen years earlier during a rock-
climbing vacation to Spain.
This explanation meshed with other information that
government officials had about the 9/11 hijackers.
Terrorist ringleader Mohammed Atta and bin al-Shibh
(who remained at large two years after the attacks)
had a history of meeting in Spain. Investigators in
that country said both men flew to Spain in July 2001,
on separate flights, apparently to review their plans
for the 9/11 attacks.
According to Ahad Sabet’s family, during his vacation
to Spain, two or three young men approached his
rented car as he sought directions—and then grabbed
his backpack from the back seat and ran. Sabat’s U.S.
passport was inside the backpack.
Ahad Sabet’s parents had come to the United States
from Iran in the 1960s, according to family sources,
and settled in the St. Louis area. Ahad Sabet was
born there in 1972. His age and appearance was a
perfect fit for a Yemeni terrorist looking for an Ameri-
can identity to steal.
Other al-Qaida operatives detained by the U.S. gov-
ernment after the 9/11 attacks had extensive ties to
American ID theft crews:
•
Redouane Dahmani, a suspected al-
Qaida associate of Algerian birth, pur-
chased a new identity—including an

C H A P T E R  5
119
SSN—soon after he arrived in the U.S.
He then filed a false asylum applica-
tion under his own identity, using the INS
documents that resulted in a “legitimate”
SSN. Dahmani, who was living in the
Phoenix area, was arrested in 2002 and
charged by federal prosecutors with con-
spiracy regarding his asylum request.
Local state prosecutors also charged him
with forgery, perjury and identity theft.
The local prosecutors accused him of
attempting to acquire an Arizona driver’s
license using the name Abdel Halim
Lalami and a French passport that was
forged or contained false information.
•
Sofiane Laimeche, another suspected al-
Qaida associate, was smuggled into the
United States on an Algerian ship through
the port of Philadelphia, and—within five
days—had made his way to Phoenix and
purchased a new identity, including a
SSN. He used the fake name, SSN and
Immigration and Naturalization Service
alien registration number when he filled
out federal and state paperwork for a
job in 1997. After his illegal entrance to
the United States and false ID claims,
Laimeche obtained a valid work visa.
Laimeche was eventually charged with
five counts of Social Security fraud and
two counts of making false statements
to the government.
In June 2002 testimony before the House Judiciary
Committee, James G. Huse—Inspector General of

120
I L L E G A L  I M M I G R A T I O N ,  T E R R O R I S M ,  D R U G S  A N D  O T H E R  C R I M E S
the Social Security Administration—described the ID
theft tools used by the al-Qaida terrorists:
We may never know with absolute certainty
how many of the 19 hijackers of September
11th used improperly obtained SSNs, or how
they obtained them. Following the Septem-
ber 11th attacks, the Office of the Inspector
General (OIG) immediately received from
the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) the
names and other personal identifiers (as they
then knew them) of the 19 terrorist hijackers
who died in these attacks. Those names and
identifiers were matched against SSA’s indi-
ces. We associated SSNs with 12 of the 19
names. Of the SSNs associated with these 12
names, five appeared to be counterfeit (SSNs
that were never issued by SSA). In addition,
one was associated with a child, leaving six
names associated with SSNs that were issued
by SSA. Further, four of these six names were
associated with multiple SSNs.
Unfortunately, until 9/11, SSA had limited success en-
couraging the INS to move quickly on either of these
planned initiatives, as the projects did not appear to
be as high a priority to INS as they were to SSA.
Huse has blamed the cracks in SSN security on bu-
reaucratic turf battles between the certain parts of
the SSA and the INS.
D R U G S
In July 2002, a two-month investigation that zeroed
in on two suspected methamphetamine labs in the
Livermore, California, area led to the arrest of at least
six people on drug and ID theft charges.

C H A P T E R  5
121
Detectives had been told by informants that a man
was producing methamphetamine at a ranch on the
eastern outskirts of Livermore—a fairly remote sec-
tion of the county. The same informants also men-
tioned a rival operation at a second ranch not far
from the first. The detectives watched the proper-
ties for several weeks.
Once they’d established a reasonable case, Alameda
County Sheriff’s Office investigators raided both
ranches on the same day. Armed with search war-
rants, the detectives seized guns, methamphetamine
and some familiar evidence of ID theft: driver’s li-
censes, credit cards and other personal documents
belonging to residents of some of the county’s
wealthier neighborhoods.
The second ranch had more ID theft evidence. In a
trailer parked on that property, investigators found a
cache of fake California driver’s licenses and fraudu-
lently obtained credit cards and hundreds of personal
checks and Social Security cards. They also discov-
ered receipts logging more than $14,400 in credit card
purchases from several area home improvement
stores. Apparently, the thief was reselling the home
improvement supplies below retail prices and trading
them for drugs.
The Sheriff’s prime suspect for the ID thefts was a
30-year-old woman named Paige Kay Wolfenberger.
She was arrested on nine felony counts of identity
theft, possession of a forged driver’s license and be-
ing a convicted felon in possession of a firearm. (She
was on probation from a 1999 drug conviction.) They

122
I L L E G A L  I M M I G R A T I O N ,  T E R R O R I S M ,  D R U G S  A N D  O T H E R  C R I M E S
arrested several other people on charges related to
the drug labs.
Several months later, in September, Wolfenberger
pleaded no contest to two felony counts of identity
theft. She accepted a 16-month prison term as part
of a deal that dismissed the seven other felony counts.
ID theft has long been associated with illegal drug
use. But, starting in the early 2000s, police and pros-
ecutors around the U.S. started noticing a refinement
in the criminal use of ID theft. Criminals would steal
someone’s identity for the sole purpose of giving
police false information upon arrest—and minimiz-
ing or avoiding subsequent prosecution.
The trend was illustrated in a case that involved more
than a dozen police officers scouring a downtown
Las Vegas neighborhood in October 2002, in search
of a woman using the name Tiffany May.
The woman, a prostitute who’d been working Las
Vegas’s seedier neighborhoods for years, was sus-
pected of taking a baby girl without the permission
of the baby’s mother. The facts turned out to be com-
plicated. The baby’s mother had left the baby with
her grandmother. The grandmother—an acquaintance
of the woman claiming to be Tiffany May—had left
the baby with “Tiffany May.” Later, the baby’s mother
became upset when she couldn’t find either her baby
or the woman claiming to be Tiffany May.
Las Vegas police circulated a missing child flier with a
mug shot and physical description of the prostitute;
above the mug shot was the name Tiffany May. The
police recovered the child fairly quickly—the woman

C H A P T E R  5
123
claiming to be Tiffany May had left the baby girl in
the care of an elderly couple who had no idea who
the child’s mother really was.
The woman claiming to be Tiffany May wasn’t; and
the police suspected as much. The real Tiffany May
turned out to be a much different person—a law
abiding citizen who lived in a quiet Las Vegas neigh-
borhood with her mother. She wasn’t pleased to learn
that a hooker and possible kidnapper had been using
her name.
The real Tiffany May had lost her Social Security card
and a Clark County Health District photo ID card
about 18 months earlier.
Las Vegas police were familiar with the fake Tiffany
May from years of regular prostitution arrests; they
just weren’t sure about her real name (though they
had several aliases). She’d been using the name Tiffany
May for more than a year.
In a less convoluted case, police and court officers in
Sandoval County, New Mexico, thought they had their
man when they arrested and convicted him for a
DWI…twice. And they thought their man was named
Bryce Roland.
In October 1996, a Sandoval County sheriff’s deputy
stopped and charged a man with drunken driving
and not having a driver’s license. The man told the
deputy his name was Bryce Roland and offered a
birth date and SSN that checked out. The man posted

124
I L L E G A L  I M M I G R A T I O N ,  T E R R O R I S M ,  D R U G S  A N D  O T H E R  C R I M E S
bond, made all his court appearances and pleaded
guilty to the charges. He was sentenced to and served
two days in jail.
In November 1999, the District Attorney’s Office
received a call from Bryce Roland near Milwaukee
asking that the DWI conviction be set aside—because
he was not the man pulled over in Sandoval County.
The DWI conviction was taken off Roland’s record.
Then, in February 2000, local police stopped a man
on suspicion of DWI who gave his name as Bryce
Roland and had the correct birth date and Social Se-
curity number. The man pleaded guilty to a first of-
fense DWI in municipal court, made his appearances,
spent one night in jail, paid his fines and completed
the MADD Victim’s Impact Panel.
Less than a year later, the real Bryce Roland called the
District Attorney’s Office again and told the staff law-
yers that his license was being revoked for a DWI he
did not commit. He asked that the second DWI con-
viction also be stricken from his record. Then, he
called the Wisconsin Social Security Administration
about any further fraud.
Roland told Wisconsin investigators that he had only
been to New Mexico once, passing through on his
way to California. But his Social Security card and
birth certificate had been stolen in Milwaukee in 1994.
And the real Bryce Roland knew that someone had
obtained credit in New Mexico using his Social Secu-
rity number.

C H A P T E R  5
125
Social Security investigators discovered that, in 1998,
someone in New Mexico had been issued a duplicate
Social Security card using Roland’s number.
Within a few months of the second phone call from
the real Bryce Roland, Arizona officials announced
the indictment of Edward J. Wolsiffer, indicted on
17 counts of forgery and one count each of fraud,
theft of identity and concealing identity. He was
also indicted on two DWI charges that he was previ-
ously convicted of under the stolen name.
When Wisconsin investigators ran Roland’s name
through the Social Security and criminal databases,
Wolsiffer’s name also came up.
Sandoval County records showed that a Wolsiffer had
been arrested on a traffic stop in 1998 and was due
to be extradited to Indiana as a habitual traffic of-
fender. Wolsiffer did not give police Roland’s ID in-
formation that time, as he had in 1996 and would
again in 2000.
C O N C L U S I O N
Identity theft is often an enabling crime—one that
occurs in conjunction with other crimes. When it comes
to these other crimes, illegal immigration, terrorism and
drug use (or distribution) are the most common. From
a law enforcement and public policy perspective, these
other crimes can result in some good. They can draw
more attention—and more financial resources—to the
fight against ID theft.

126
I L L E G A L  I M M I G R A T I O N ,  T E R R O R I S M ,  D R U G S  A N D  O T H E R  C R I M E S

C H A P T E R  6
127
CHAPTER
LAWS AND
AGENCIES THAT
PROTECT YOU…OR
DON’T
6
In October 1998, Congress passed the Identity Theft
and Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998 (Identity
Theft Act) to address the problem of identity theft.
Specifically, the Act amended federal law to make it a
federal crime when anyone:
…knowingly transfers or uses, without law-
ful authority, a means of identification of an-
other person with the intent to commit, or
to aid or abet, any unlawful activity that con-
stitutes a violation of federal law, or that con-
stitutes a felony under any applicable state or
local law.
The Identity Theft Act accomplished four things:
1)
It identified people whose credit had
been compromised as true victims. His-
torically, with financial crimes such as
bank fraud or credit card fraud, the vic-
tim identified by statute was the person,
business or financial institution that lost
the money. Often, the victims of identity
theft—whose credit was destroyed—
were not recognized as victims.

128
L A W S  A N D  A G E N C I E S  T H A T  P R O T E C T  Y O U … O R  D O N ’ T
2)
It established the Federal Trade Com-
mission (FTC) as the one central point
of contact for people to report all in-
stances of identity theft. This collection
of data on all ID theft cases allows for
the identification of systemic weaknesses
and the ability of law enforcement to
retrieve investigative data from one cen-
tral location.
3)
It provided increased sentencing po-
tential and enhanced asset forfeiture pro-
visions. These enhancements help to reach
prosecutorial thresholds and allow for
the return of funds to victims.
4)
It closed some loopholes in federal law
by making it illegal to steal another
person’s personal identification infor-
mation with the intent to commit a vio-
lation. Previously, only the production or
possession of false identity documents
was prohibited.
In April 1999, representatives from 10 federal law
enforcement agencies, five banking regulatory agen-
cies, the U.S. Sentencing Commission, the National
Association of Attorneys General and the New York
State Attorney General’s Office met with the FTC to
share their thoughts on what the FTC’s complaint
database and a related consumer education booklet
should contain.
In November 1999, the FTC opened the consumer
hotline and began adding complaints to the resulting
ID Theft Clearinghouse. Law enforcement orga-
nizations nationwide who were members of the Con-

C H A P T E R  6
129
sumer Sentinel Network (the FTC’s universal fraud
complaint database) gained access to the Clearing-
house via a secure Web site in July of 2000.
The Clearinghouse provides a comprehensive picture
of the nature, prevalence and trends of identity
theft. In 2000, the first full year of operation, the FTC
entered more than 31,000 consumer complaints into
the database; in 2001, that number grew to more than
86,000. In 2002, it was nearly 200,000.
Since the inception of the Clearinghouse, 46 sepa-
rate federal agencies and 300 and six different state
and local agencies have signed up for access to the
database. Among the agencies represented are over
half the state Attorneys General as well as law en-
forcement from a number of major cities—includ-
ing Baltimore, Dallas, Los Angeles, Miami, San Fran-
cisco and Philadelphia.
According to Howard Beales, Director of the FTC’s
Bureau of Consumer Protection:
The Clearinghouse is essentially a tool for
criminal investigators and prosecutors.
The U.S. Postal Inspection Services, the United
States Secret Service, the SSA, the Depart-
ment of Justice and the IACP [International
Association of Chiefs of Police], along with
many other agencies, are outstanding part-
ners in this effort, consistently communicat-
ing the availability and advantages of the
Clearinghouse to their colleagues…
Recognizing that investigating identity theft
often presents unique challenges, the FTC in

130
L A W S  A N D  A G E N C I E S  T H A T  P R O T E C T  Y O U … O R  D O N ’ T
conjunction with the Secret Service, DOJ and
IACP planned and directed training seminars
for state and local law enforcement around
the country.
One critical point, though: The FTC doesn’t have in-
vestigative or other direct law enforcement powers.
Violations of the Identity Theft Act are investigated
by federal agencies such as the U.S. Secret Service,
the FBI and the U.S. Postal Inspection Service, and
prosecuted by the Department of Justice and local
law enforcement agencies like police, sheriffs and state
troopers.
In his May 2001 congressional testimony, Bruce
Townsend—the Special Agent in charge of the Se-
cret Service’s Financial Crimes Division—described
the ways that it works with various law enforcement
agencies on ID theft cases:
Our investigative program focuses on three
areas of criminal schemes within our core
expertise. First, the Secret Service emphasizes
the investigation of counterfeit instruments.
By counterfeit instruments, I am referring to
counterfeit currency, counterfeit checks—both
commercial and government—counterfeit
credit cards, counterfeit stocks or bonds, and
virtually any negotiable instrument that can
be counterfeited. Many counterfeiting
schemes would not be possible without the
compromise of the financial identities of in-
nocent victims.
Second, the Secret Service targets organized
criminal groups that are engaged in finan-
cial crimes. Again we see many of these

C H A P T E R  6
131
groups, most notably the Nigerian and Asian
organized criminal groups, prolific in their
use of stolen financial and personal infor-
mation to further their financial crime activ-
ity.
Finally, we focus our resources on commu-
nity impact cases. The Secret Service works
in concert with the state, county and local
police departments to ensure our resources
are being targeted to those criminal areas that
are of a high concern to the local citizenry.
Further, we work very closely with both fed-
eral and local prosecutors to ensure that our
investigations are relevant, topical and pros-
ecutable under existing guidelines.
J U R I S D I C T I O N A L  
C H A L L E N G E S
Cooperation among law enforcement agencies can
be a tricky issue; often, turf battles erupt over which
agency should lead an investigation in a given place.
Cooperation is especially important in ID theft cases
because ID thieves routinely operate in a multi-ju-
risdictional environment. In other words, they may
steal personal information in one state and then use
it in another. Or they may use the Internet to buy
items—further blurring the location of the crime.
This has created problems for local law enforcement
who generally respond first to criminal activities. By

132
L A W S  A N D  A G E N C I E S  T H A T  P R O T E C T  Y O U … O R  D O N ’ T
working closely with other federal, state and local law
enforcement, as well as international police agencies,
the Feds—especially the Secret Service, FTC and
FBI—have been able to provide a comprehensive
network of intelligence sharing, resource sharing
and technical expertise that bridges jurisdictional
boundaries.
Anecdotes tell the story. For example, a grand jury
in Florida reported that some of the state’s law en-
forcement agencies were reluctant to take identity
theft complaints and don’t generate reports in some
cases.
Funding, too, is a roadblock to enforcement. A deputy
district attorney in Los Angeles County, Calif., told
the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) that there
were not enough prosecutors to handle the county’s
identity theft cases.
The GAO heard similar complaints from a supervi-
sor in the Consumer Fraud Division of the Cook
County (Ill.) State’s Attorney’s Office, the second largest
prosecutor’s office in the nation. The supervisor said
more money was needed to train local police agen-
cies on how to handle cases involving multiple vic-
tims and voluminous documents.
A chief deputy attorney in Philadelphia said that “given
competing priorities and other factors, there is little
incentive” for police departments in Pennsylvania to
spend money on identity theft probes.

C H A P T E R  6
133
W H A T  L A W  O F F I C E R S  S A Y
In his May 2001 congressional testimony, Joseph
Cassilly—the State Attorney for Harford County,
Maryland—described the jurisdiction problem:
One of the major problems of state law en-
forcement has nothing to do with technol-
ogy but is basic jurisdiction and cost effi-
ciency. The majority of frauds and thefts
are under $100,000 and usually involve par-
ties resident in different states. The federal
authorities have little interest in cases under
$1 million—so most of the caseload will
naturally fall to the states. But will a prosecu-
tor be willing or have the resources to extra-
dite on a $5,000 theft case?
So, the local police department is the first responder
to the victims once they become aware that their per-
sonal information is being used unlawfully. Then, when
evidence points to a multiple-state crime…or the in-
volvement of the U.S. Postal Service…the local cops
will hand the case to the Feds.
On the other hand, credit card issuers and other fi-
nancial institutions usually contact local Secret Service
field offices to report possible criminal activities.
The partnership approach to law enforcement is
exemplified by financial crimes task forces located
throughout the country. These task forces pool per-
sonnel and technical resources to maximize the ex-
pertise of each participating law enforcement agency.

134
L A W S  A N D  A G E N C I E S  T H A T  P R O T E C T  Y O U … O R  D O N ’ T
The Feds also work with private-sector groups (es-
pecially in the banking and financial services indus-
tries) on preventive and investigative programs.
In the early 2000s, the main cooperative law enforce-
ment entity was the Identity Theft Subcommittee
of the Attorney General’s White Collar Crime Coun-
cil. This group, which is made up of federal and state
law enforcement, regulatory and professional agen-
cies, meets regularly to discuss and coordinate investi-
gative and prosecutorial strategies as well as consumer
education programs.
In his July 2002 congressional testimony, Dennis M.
Lormel—Chief of the FBI’s Terrorist Financial Re-
view Group—described the FBI’s approach to in-
vestigating and prosecuting ID theft:
[T]he FBI, along with other federal law en-
forcement agencies, investigates and pros-
ecutes individuals who use the identities of
others to carry out violations of federal crimi-
nal law. These violations include bank fraud,
credit card fraud, wire fraud, mail fraud,
money laundering, bankruptcy fraud, com-
puter crimes and fugitive cases. These crimes
carried out using a stolen identity make the
investigation of the offenses much more com-
plicated. The use of a stolen identity enhances
the chances of success in the commission of
almost all financial crimes. The stolen identity
provides a cloak of anonymity for the sub-
ject while the groundwork is laid to carry out
the crime. This includes the rental of mail

C H A P T E R  6
135
drops, post office boxes, apartments, office
space, vehicles and storage lockers as well as
the activation of pagers, cellular telephones
and various utility services.
Lormel also made a point that many law enforce-
ment types admit more quietly—but many victims
of ID theft see as a problem:
The Federal Bureau of Investigation does not
view identity theft as a separate and distinct
crime problem. Rather, it sees identity theft
as a component of many types of crimes
that we investigate.
The FBI would rather battle things like terrorism and
drug import—and deal with ID theft as a by-prod-
uct of those. However, it’s helpful to remember that
the Secret Service considers ID theft a higher priority
in its own right.
Richard J. Varn—Chief Information Officer for the
State of Iowa—offered some remedies to common
jurisdictional problems in his April 2002 congressional
testimony:
There is a crying need for coordination at
each level of government and between lev-
els of government on identity security on tech-
nical standards and systems and in policy
making. It is not yet clear what the best op-
tions or mix of options are for this coordi-
nation. Some possible choices include:

136
L A W S  A N D  A G E N C I E S  T H A T  P R O T E C T  Y O U … O R  D O N ’ T
•
Interstate compacts;
•
Intergovernmental agreements;
•
Standards development through
recognized standards bodies;
•
Coordination of information
technology system architecture,
development and operation;
•
Federal funding for enhanced
life document systems and
driver’s license issuing processes,
systems and cards;
•
Legislative and executive coor-
dination of the funding, devel-
opment, enhancement and
implementation of identity se-
curity programs and systems
within and among each level of
government;
•
Establishment of a single point
of contact and coordination
for various federal initiatives; and
•
Creation of formal or informal
federal, state and local groups to
coordinate technical and policy
activities and exchange informa-
tion.
T H E  M A Y  2 0 0 2  I D  T H E F T  S W E E P
In May 2002, U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft
announced the completion of a national “sweep” of

C H A P T E R  6
137
ID theft prosecutions. The sweep involved 73 crimi-
nal prosecutions against 135 individuals in 24 districts
over a couple of days.
Justice Department officials noted that the sweep was
the first part of a two-pronged strategy by federal
law enforcement to combat identity theft. The sec-
ond prong involved efforts to strengthen existing fed-
eral identity theft criminal statutes.
The sweep was a good example of cooperation be-
tween the Feds and law enforcement agencies at the
state and local levels.
One case under investigation by the FBI in conjunc-
tion with the U.S. Postal Inspection Service involved a
man who’d obtained personal information—names
and birth dates—of attorneys in the Boston area from
the Martindale-Hubbell directory of attorneys.
Using this information, he and a co-conspirator vis-
ited the Massachusetts Bureau of Vital Records—
which had an open records policy—and were able to
obtain copies of birth certificates of their victims.
Using that information, they were able to contact the
Social Security Administration and obtain SSNs for
most of the attorneys. Once they had the SSNs, the
thieves ordered credit reports and looked and de-
termined the attorneys’ creditworthiness and existing
accounts. Their first theft was to call one of the
attorney’s banks and order a wire transfer of $96,000.
Half of the money went to a casino and the rest went
into the crook’s personal accounts.

138
L A W S  A N D  A G E N C I E S  T H A T  P R O T E C T  Y O U … O R  D O N ’ T
This was a stupid first move. Once the bilked attor-
ney realized the money was missing, he notified his
bank—and the bank notified the Office of the Comp-
troller of the Currency and the FBI. The FBI got the
necessary warrants and the wire transfers were easy
for the bank to trace.
In the meantime, the crooks were still using the stolen
IDs. They added themselves as authorized users to
the credit card accounts of several attorneys and or-
dered emergency replacement cards from others. By
the time the FBI and Massachusetts police arrested
the two, they had at least 12 different license or iden-
tification cards from three states and at least four or
five credit cards, all in the names of the attorneys
whose identities they’d stolen.
With stories like this one circulating in post-9/11
America, politicians in Washington D.C. realized that
the 1998 Identity Theft Act wasn’t a strong enough
protection.
California Senator Dianne Feinstein led the drafting
of the Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act
of 2002, which allowed harsher charging and sen-
tencing when identity theft occurs in connection with
these other serious crimes.
The sentencing enhancements would increase penal-
ties for the most serious forms of identity theft and
strengthen prosecutors’ ability to bring these cases. In
particular, the proposed legislation would define a
new crime of “aggravated identity theft” that in-

C H A P T E R  6
139
cludes the most damaging forms of identity theft,
and which would carry greater penalties. Enhanced
five-year consecutive penalties would result if a ter-
rorist or terrorist-related offense is involved.
The proposed law also streamlined proof require-
ments by including the possession of identifying in-
formation with intent to commit identity theft as an
element of the crime. These provisions, together with
the enhanced sentences for aggravated identity theft,
made ID theft cases easier to investigate and to pros-
ecute successfully.
T H E  P A T R I O T  A C T
Feinstein’s Enhancement Act wasn’t the only new law
designed to help federal prosecutors clamp down on
ID thieves. An even more potent—though more con-
troversial—tool was the USA Patriot Act of 2001.
This law, enacted in the weeks after the 9/11 attacks,
made significant changes to how the Feds could in-
vestigate and prosecute a variety of suspects—including
suspected ID thieves.
Most of the controversies surrounding the Patriot
Act had to do with its effects on constitutional pri-
vacy rights. The parts of the Act designed to com-
bat ID theft were more technical…and less contro-
versial.
New rules related to opening bank accounts were
announced during the summer of 2002 and were
designed to thwart terrorist funding—but could also

140
L A W S  A N D  A G E N C I E S  T H A T  P R O T E C T  Y O U … O R  D O N ’ T
help fight identity theft and other forms of fraud.
The rules required financial institutions (including
banks and trust companies, savings associations,
credit unions, securities brokers and dealers, mutual
funds and futures merchants or brokers) to imple-
ment “reasonable procedures” for:
1)
verifying the identity of any person
seeking to open an account, to the extent
reasonable and practicable;
2)
maintaining records of the information
used to verify the person’s identity; and
3)
determining whether the person appears
on any list of known or suspected ter-
rorists or terrorist organizations.
The U.S. Treasury Department and the Social Security
Administration agreed to develop and implement a
system by which banks and other financial institutions
could access a database to verify the authenticity of
SSNs provided by people opening accounts.
The financial institutions subject to the proposed rules
would also be required to establish programs speci-
fying procedures for obtaining identifying informa-
tion from customers seeking to open new accounts.
A joint agency statement issued by the Treasury De-
partment and the SSA said:
This identifying information would be essen-
tially the same information currently obtained
by most financial institutions and for indi-
vidual customers generally, including the
customer’s name, address, date of birth and
an identification number (for U.S. persons, a

C H A P T E R  6
141
Social Security number and for non-U.S. per-
sons, a similar number from a government-
issued document). Customers with signature
authority over business accounts would fur-
nish substantially similar information.
The proposed rules raised concerns mostly from credit
card issuers. They complained the new rules would
create problems especially for online applications.
C A L I ’ S  A N T I - I D  T H E F T  L A W
About the same time that the Feds were announcing
new banking rules derived from the USA Patriot Act,
California was putting a new law into effect that pro-
hibited the public posting or display of an individual’s
SSN—including printing the number on any card re-
quired to access products or services.
This state law got a lot of media attention as both a
privacy protection and a blow to easy ID theft.
The California law also stated that no one could be
required to transmit his or her Social Security number
over the Internet, unless the connection were secure
or the SSN encrypted. And institutions were not al-
lowed to print an individual’s SSN on any mailed
materials, unless required by state or federal law.
The law did not prohibit the collection, use or circu-
lation of SSNs for internal verification or administra-
tive purposes. But, if a California resident sent a writ-
ten request to a bank or other institution requesting
that his or her SSN not be used, the request had to be
honored within 30 days of receipt—without any ad-
ditional fee. And financial institutions could not deny
services to any individual who opted out.

142
L A W S  A N D  A G E N C I E S  T H A T  P R O T E C T  Y O U … O R  D O N ’ T
Although the law only applied to California, people
in the banking industry admitted it would have a
national effect. An executive with an Ohio-based
financial services company that had branches in most
of the U.S. said it would be much easier to apply the
California rule nationally than to segment customer
data by state.
While some banks had already stopped using SSNs
by 2002, others used encryption techniques to ob-
scure the numbers. These encryption techniques fall
into two basic categories: Some use algorithms to
alter SSNs; others hide the first five digits of SSNs
on all documents.
No sooner did the California rule go into effect than
politicians there considered expanding it. One new
proposal would allow customers to tell financial in-
stitutions not to share or sell their personal financial
information—either to corporate affiliates or to third
parties. This option, as we’ve already seen in previous
chapters, is known as the opt-out.
In limited circumstances, where the third party was
not a financial institution, customers would have to
give explicit permission for data-sharing ahead
of time.
Other states were also sharpening their laws against
ID theft:
•
In Georgia, businesses could be fined up
to $10,000 for the improper disposal of
materials that contain personal informa-

C H A P T E R  6
143
tion about customers. The new law also
applies to information that is spoken, vi-
sual or electronic.
•
In October 2002, a New York law made
stealing a person’s identity and possess-
ing personal information a felony for the
first time. The law allowed prison sen-
tences of up to seven years for those
convicted of using ID theft to steal more
than $500. One interesting point: the law
included references to security technolo-
gies not yet in general use—such as voice
prints or retina scans.
•
In November 2002, Virginia Attorney
General Jerry Kilgore said he would rec-
ommend that the state’s General Assem-
bly strengthen penalties against ID theft.
Kilgore also urged local police to pursue
the crime more aggressively.
So, the strengthening of ID theft laws at the state
level makes for a kind of balance…since local law
enforcement is on the front lines of the problem.
L A W S  T H A T  H E L P  I D  T H I E V E S
Hovering in the background of the federal and local
efforts to strengthen the laws against ID theft is an
issue that seems ridiculous—some laws actually en-
able ID theft.
In the fall of 2002, ID theft became a hot-button
issue in King George County, Virginia. About two
dozen King George residents complained to county
officials after learning their SSNs were online in com-
puterized versions of some court records, including

144
L A W S  A N D  A G E N C I E S  T H A T  P R O T E C T  Y O U … O R  D O N ’ T
mortgage-related documents.  The personal infor-
mation appeared on land records uploaded to the
county Web site as part of the jurisdiction’s efforts to
bring all of its files up to date electronically.
The local bosses cited a 1998 Virginia law that man-
dated that clerks charge a $3 technology fee for the
purposes of updating their databases when records
were filed—although, whether the information was
put online remained up to the clerk of the court.
The King George County executive pointed out that,
if a resident filed a complaint, his or her sensitive data
would be removed from the site. And documents
that were scanned and uploaded online would, in the
future, exclude any sensitive information.
The executive pointed out that marriage license
records also contained personal information, includ-
ing dates of birth and maiden names of mothers.
This information was a matter of public record and
could be viewed by anyone who visited the county
courthouse.
Other Virginia counties took steps to protect identi-
ties. A clerk in one nearby county pointed out that her
office only made information online available to com-
panies or agencies that had established their bona
fides—and paid for the service.
In another nearby county, the records manager said
that his office also controlled access by offering a sub-
scription service to professional firms. He noted

C H A P T E R  6
145
that the subscription model actually made the system
more secure, because he could monitor who was
looking at which documents.
During the summer of 2002, Florida real estate ap-
praisers protested a state law would make some
500,000 SSNs public—putting the owners at risk for
identity theft. The appraisers claimed that, starting that
fall, they would have to release the Social Security
numbers of Floridians who had homesteaded prop-
erty to any business that requested them.
Specifically, the law held that state and county agen-
cies must give SSNs to “reasonable businesses” with
a “legitimate business purpose” for the numbers,
such as research or verifying information.
The law required the businesses to submit a written
request and to explain why they wanted the num-
bers; those requests would be kept on file with state
officials.
In 2000, Florida property appraisers had started col-
lecting SSNs for homestead exemption—a state
program that allows real estate owners to keep their
property, regardless of court judgments, tax liens or
other encumbrances. The numbers were used for iden-
tification to prevent tax fraud, and they had been kept
confidential under state law.
The new law was explained at various times as a se-
curity measure and as a consumer advocacy measure;
in fact, its origins traced back to lobbyists for direct

146
L A W S  A N D  A G E N C I E S  T H A T  P R O T E C T  Y O U … O R  D O N ’ T
marketing companies. But various politicians in
Florida’s capital—as well as the leader of the state’s
property appraisers association—insisted that the law
did not apply to property appraisers’ use of SSNs on
homestead exemption forms.
In late 2002, a series of surveys of residents in Wash-
ington state reflected growing concern about that
state’s laws granting broad public access to gov-
ernment records. The laws—which had tradition-
ally been defended as signs of clean government and
no corruption—also posed a threat to ID security.
The main survey showed that the more concerned
someone is about identity theft and invasion of pri-
vacy, the less that person will support access to
government records by the media. The results were
mixed: Nine out of 10 adult Washington residents
said they favored open government; but three-quar-
ters were concerned about misuse of information by
the press and identity thieves.
The survey was conducted to mark the 30th anniver-
sary of Washington’s aggressive Public Disclosure
Act; it was sponsored in part by the Washington Coa-
lition for Open Government, an organization dedi-
cated to defending the people’s right to access.
Finally, and most disturbingly, some states cut straight
to the point and sell personal information to pri-
vate companies.

C H A P T E R  6
147
California, despite its privacy laws, has sold its
state birth index—containing personal information
on about 24.6 million people—to an online Web com-
pany.
Pennsylvania’s Corporation Bureau sells loan-related
public records that include SSNs of citizens. Specifi-
cally, the state’s Corporation Bureau sells and makes
available to the public Uniform Commercial Code
financing statements that contain sensitive personal
information.
The so-called “UCC” filings often list debtors’ SSNs,
addresses and even driver’s license data. The Bureau
generated about $100,000 a year through the late 1990s
and early 2000s by selling the records to companies—
most often direct marketers in the commercial loan
business.
In 2002, when the sale caused some controversy, state
officials said they were powerless to change their pro-
cedures. They cited a state law that required the Bu-
reau to accept filing of a nationally-recognized UCC
form that included a blank for SSNs. The law pre-
cluded the Bureau from altering the form, which was
a public record.
C O N C L U S I O N
If ID theft could be stamped out by passing a strong
law, things would be much easier. But ID theft—and
ID thieves—is complex. In many cases, the crooks
exploit turf battles between government bureaucra-

148
L A W S  A N D  A G E N C I E S  T H A T  P R O T E C T  Y O U … O R  D O N ’ T
cies. In a few cases, they take advantage of badly-
drawn laws that actually help with ID theft.
The ID Theft Clearinghouse managed by the Federal
Trade Commission is a tool designed to coordinate
law enforcement efforts in the U.S. And the Secret
Service is the federal agency that makes the strongest
priority of battling ID theft.
But, in the end, local law enforcement—police and
district (or state’s) attorney—end up dealing with most
ID theft cases. If you’ve been a victim of ID theft,
it’s those local agencies that will most likely help.

C H A P T E R  7
149
CHAPTER
BANKS AND
CREDIT BUREAUS
7
In 1999, Congress passed the Gramm-Leach-Bliley
Act (the GLB Act), legislation that allowed banks, in-
surance companies, credit bureaus and securities firms
to affiliate under a single corporate structure. The
purpose of this change? To allow financial services
companies to “more readily anticipate and meet their
customers’ financial needs.”
At least that’s what the head of the Financial Services
Roundtable told Congress in March 2001.
The GLB Act also reformed the system of federal
regulation and requires greater coordination among
the various agencies. This coordination is a challenge.
In all, there are almost 200 different financial services
regulators—including the various state banking, in-
surance and securities regulators and all of the federal
banking, thrift and securities agencies.
As integrated financial services companies have
increased the scope of their business activities—mix-
ing banking, investments, insurance and consumer lend-
ing—they have become more directly involved in es-
tablishment and use of personal financial identities. In

150
B A N K S  A N D  C R E D I T  B U R E A U S
fact, they’ve marketed these identities. As recently
as the 1990s, most Americans were only vaguely aware
of their credit ratings or “FICO scores.” In the early
2000s, financial institutions have marketed these credit
profiles like soap or soft drinks. One example: In
2002 and 2003, radio and television ads for new cars
started referencing “credit tiers” when describing avail-
able financing packages.
As a result, financial identities—credit scores—have
become commodities, with market values. And, as
any economist will tell you, commodities are sig-
nificant in two ways. First, their value is defined by
marketplace conditions that are usually beyond any
single owner’s control; second, they are vulnerable
to theft, piracy and manipulation.
These are the economic trends that have enabled
identity theft.
What do the fast-integrating financial services com-
panies think about ID theft? In his March 2001 con-
gressional testimony, Steve Bartlett—President of the
Financial Services Roundtable—put the problem in
context:
It is estimated that the financial services in-
dustry loses more than $100 billion a year in
fraud, which includes $85 billion to $120 bil-
lion in insurance fraud, $24 billion of which
comes from property/casualty fraud; $13
billion in check fraud; $3 billion in identity
fraud; and $600 million in credit card fraud.

C H A P T E R  7
151
So, the financial services companies think that insur-
ance fraud is their biggest problem. But ID theft is,
by most accounts, the fastest growing form of fi-
nancial fraud; and, as we’ve seen throughout this
book, ID theft often operates in conjunction with
other kinds of fraud—including insurance fraud.
C R E D I T  
B U R E A U S
When most Americans hear the term “financial ser-
vices,” they think of faceless corporate giants that buy
lots of ads during the Super Bowl. Beyond that, they
have a vague notion of companies that combine
banking, insurance, stock brokerage and various other
money-related activities.
One of the key “various other” activities is the set-
ting and tracking of individual consumer’s credit
ratings.
Throughout this book (and any discussion of ID theft)
you’ve heard references to the “big three” U.S. credit
bureaus—Equifax, Experian and TransUnion. These
companies—along with a fourth, slightly different
credit rating company called Fair, Isaac & Co.—con-
trol the U.S. consumer credit rating industry. Their
importance to the financial services industry is
large…and growing. And their role in the growth of
ID theft is worth some consideration.
Like most credit bureaus, the big three keep files that
include personal information like SSNs and account
information of individual consumers. But their cli-

152
B A N K S  A N D  C R E D I T  B U R E A U S
ents are not the people whose information they keep;
their clients are the banks and consumer finance
companies who decide whether…and on what
terms…to lend money to those individuals.
Many people make the mistake of assuming that credit
bureaus exist to serve individual consumers—and get
frustrated with the lack of responsiveness and cus-
tomer service that the credit bureaus have tradition-
ally offered. (If you have a problem with a credit
report, it’s virtually impossible to contact anyone at
Equifax, Experian or TransUnion directly. The best
you can usually manage is to leave a telephone mes-
sage or fax a letter to a generic recipient.)
If you remember that you’re not the credit bureau’s
primary customer, you may understand the cool re-
ception the credit bureaus give you.
The problem with this approach to the handling of
credit information is that it accepts a higher level of
inefficiency than most consumers would like. In this
way, the credit industry is something like the health
insurance industry—in both cases, the primary cus-
tomers (lenders, in the case of credit bureaus; em-
ployers, in the case of health insurance) are not the
end-users of the services being sold. So, it’s logical
that the services treat the end-users roughly.
An economist looking at these industries would likely
conclude that the unusual structure of primary cus-
tomer/end user is not intended for efficiency—if ef-
ficiency means the timely and accurate delivery of ser-

C H A P T E R  7
153
vices to the greatest number of users. No, the unusual
structure is likely intended for some other purpose.
Cost control would be a good guess.
In health insurance, the cost controls provided by
the traditional (at least in the U.S.) employer-pro-
vided model are gradually eroding. Despite the bad
impression that some people have of it, the man-
aged care model of health coverage is moving more
control of that marketplace to end-users.
Is there any equivalent movement in the credit rating
industry?
The Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) is an attempt
by the U.S. government to restore some balance
and accountability to the credit rating industry. Ac-
cording to the Federal Trade Commission:
The FCRA is designed to promote accuracy,
fairness and privacy of information in the
files of every “consumer reporting agency”
(CRA). Most CRAs are credit bureaus that
gather and sell information about you—such
as if you pay your bills on time or have filed
bankruptcy—to creditors, employers, land-
lords and other businesses.
You must be told if information in your file
has been used against you. Anyone who uses
information from a CRA to take action
against you—such as denying an application
for credit, insurance or employment—must
tell you, and give you the name, address and

154
B A N K S  A N D  C R E D I T  B U R E A U S
phone number of the CRA that provided
the consumer report.
You can find out what is in your file. At your request,
a CRA must give you the information in your file,
and a list of everyone who has requested it recently.
There is no charge for the report if a person has taken
action against you because of information supplied
by the CRA, if you request the report within 60 days
of receiving notice of the action. You also are en-
titled to one free report every 12 months upon re-
quest if you certify that:
1)
you are unemployed and plan to seek
employment within 60 days;
2)
you are on welfare; or
3)
your report is inaccurate due to ID theft
or other fraud.
Otherwise, a CRA may charge you for a copy of
your credit report.
You can dispute inaccurate information with the
CRA. If you tell a CRA that your file contains inaccu-
rate information, the CRA must investigate the
items—usually within 30 days—by presenting to its
information source all relevant evidence you submit
(unless your dispute is deemed frivolous by the CRA).
After that, the FCRA sets the rules for how correc-
tions are made:
•
The source must review your evidence
and report its findings to the CRA. The
source also must advise other CRAs to
which it has provided the data of any
error. The CRA must give you a written

C H A P T E R  7
155
report of the investigation and a copy
of your report if the investigation re-
sults in any change.
•
Inaccurate information must be cor-
rected or deleted. A CRA must remove
or correct inaccurate or unverified infor-
mation from its files, usually within 30
days after you dispute it. However, the
CRA is not required to remove accurate
data from your file unless it is outdated
or cannot be verified.
•
If the CRA’s investigation does not re-
solve the dispute, you may add a brief
statement to your file. The CRA must
normally include a summary of your
statement in future reports. If an item is
deleted or a dispute statement is filed,
you may ask that anyone who has re-
cently received your report be notified
of the change.
•
You can dispute inaccurate items with the
source of the information. If you tell
anyone—such as a creditor who reports
to a CRA—that you dispute an item, they
may not then report the information to
a CRA without including a notice of your
dispute.
Outdated information may not be reported. In most
cases, a CRA may not report negative information
that is more than seven years old; 10 years for bank-
ruptcies.
Access to your file is limited. A CRA may provide
information about you only to people with a need

156
B A N K S  A N D  C R E D I T  B U R E A U S
recognized by the FCRA—usually to consider an ap-
plication with a creditor, insurer, employer, landlord
or other business.
Your consent is required for reports that are pro-
vided to employers or reports that contain medical
information. A CRA may not give out information
about you to your employer, or prospective em-
ployer, without your written consent. A CRA may
not report medical information about you to credi-
tors, insurers or employers without your permission.
You may choose to exclude your name from CRA lists
for unsolicited credit and insurance offers. Credi-
tors and insurers may use file information as the
basis for sending you unsolicited offers of credit or
insurance.
Such offers must include a toll-free phone number
for you to call if you want your name and address
removed from future lists. If you call, you must be
kept off the lists for two years. If you request,
complete and return the CRA form provided for
this purpose, you must be taken off the lists indefi-
nitely.
You may seek damages from violators. If a CRA, a
user or (in some cases) a provider of CRA data vio-
lates the FCRA, you may sue them in state or federal
court.

C H A P T E R  7
157
C R E D I T  B U R E A U S  R E S P O N D
The FCRA has been on the books for more than
decade—and it’s been updated and modified on a
regular basis to reflect changes in the credit and finan-
cial services industries. But no amount of regulation—
however well intended—has the same effect as a
change in market conditions.
For years, the industry refused to sell scores to con-
sumers, saying officially that they would be mis-
construed. (But, in fact, they didn’t want to shift
their focus away from their paying customers—banks
and lenders.)
The consolidation among banks and other financial
institutions that followed the GLB Act in the early
2000s has brought attention to the critical role that
credit bureaus (CRAs, in the jargon of the law) play
in financial services. As a result, the CRAs have started
to adjust their businesses to serve end-users more
directly.
Starting in late 2002, the companies that sell credit
information to lenders began various campaigns to
convince consumers to buy their services.
In early 2003, Experian (which began its corporate
life as part of the conglomerate TRW—and the rea-
son that some people refer to their credit rating as
their “TRW”) began providing consumers with their
scores on a monthly basis, so they could monitor
changes. Experian also launched an “optimizer” ser-

158
B A N K S  A N D  C R E D I T  B U R E A U S
vice that would tell consumers the specific ways they
could boost their individual credit ratings.
In the fall of 2002, Equifax, Inc.—the oldest and,
generally considered, the largest credit bureau—and
ChoicePoint Inc., an affiliated writer of scoring for-
mulas, began selling consumers’ insurance scores.
Equifax also sold credit reports and credit scores to
individuals.
TransUnion—by most accounts, the smallest of the
big three credit bureaus—followed the other two
bureaus and announced that it would sell individual
credit reports combined with credit scores produced
by Fair, Isaac & Co. for $12.95—or in a $38.85 pack-
age that let consumers review their data four times in
a year.
Frankly, the CRAs hope to tap into anxieties of
people who worry about ID theft. Of course, they
explain their efforts differently. In the press releases
and for public consumption, the CRAs talk a lot about
how “consumer education” is the best tool for com-
bating ID theft.
But some consumer advocates are skeptical. John and
Mary Elizabeth Stevens are two such vocal consumer
advocates. They’ve written:
Identity theft is only possible with the full co-
operation of three major participants: the
impostor, the creditor and the credit bureau.
All are co-conspirators and equally guilty of
identity theft. …The perpetuation of identity
theft has created a new product line for the

C H A P T E R  7
159
credit bureaus, which now sell services alert-
ing cardholders to significant changes on their
credit reports.
Not surprisingly, the credit bureaus take great offense
to the notion that they are complicit in the boom in
ID theft during the late 1990s and early 2000s. But
their complicity may not have been direct…or inten-
tional.
The fact is that the credit bureaus have the computer
files of personal financial information that every ID
thief seeks. And all of the major ID theft cases that
have come to light in the U.S. during the 1990s and
2000s have involved—to some degree and, in some
cases, indirectly—information taken from credit
bureau files.
Again, assuming the perspective of a disinterested
economist, the inefficiencies created by the CRAs’
primary customer/end user split and their general re-
striction of access to information contributed to a
marketplace that didn’t respond quickly to manipula-
tion and abuse. When a market—especially a market
in information—is managed to be inefficient, it’s ripe
for thieving.
F A I R ,  I S A A C  &  C O .
While the big three credit bureaus take most of the
scrutiny from consumer advocates and laws like the
FCRA, one company has had a huge influence over
the credit industry but a lower regulatory and pub-
lic profile—until the early 2000s.

160
B A N K S  A N D  C R E D I T  B U R E A U S
California-based Fair, Isaac & Co.—which goes by
the abbreviation FICO—writes algorithms and other
mathematical formulas that convert the data in credit
reports into widely-used credit scores. The company’s
formulas are used nearly everywhere in the U.S.; so,
FICO has had an influence over the American finan-
cial services industry that’s much larger than its rela-
tively small corporate size. (“FICO score” has largely
replaced the previously-mentioned “TRW” as short-
hand for personal credit rating.)
FICO has traditionally been careful to point out that
it is not a credit bureau. It doesn’t keep files on
individual consumers. Therefore, it is unlikely to be
complicit in any specific ID theft.
But FICO has participated in the trend toward mar-
keting its credit services to consumers. In November
2002, it launched a $69.95 credit-monitoring ser-
vice called Score Power. And it began selling its scores
in a $39.95 package that included credit reports from
the big three credit bureaus as part of  the “consumer
credit empowerment services” available at its Web
site.
Subscribers would receive four Score Power reports
for monitoring changes to their FICO score and their
Equifax credit report. Score Power also provides Fair,
Isaac’s score analysis that “provides insight into the
same information lenders use, in order to help con-
sumers improve their true credit potential over time.”

C H A P T E R  7
161
Why would a consumer pay for a credit-monitoring
service from a company that doesn’t keep consumer
information itself? Because FICO markets itself as
the brains behind the credit decisions that lenders
and finance companies make. And, in a highly publi-
cized deal that took place in 2002, it acquired HNC
Software—which specialized in thwarting credit card
fraud.
Ultimately, FICO—like the CRAs—may not care whether
consumers use their services. The consumer services
may be little more than a public relations effort to
thwart further regulatory and political hassles.
Like the credit bureaus, FICO’s real customers are
lenders and corporations that pay for computer
programs that help them sort through the customer
data stored at the big three credit bureaus. About three-
quarters of the company’s revenues come from roy-
alties on computer programs. For example: It of-
fers credit card companies better ways to highlight
riskier accounts before they become delinquent. Re-
peated cash advances and large-balance transfers are
red flags suggesting overextended credit.
The thread that holds most of FICO’s programs to-
gether is the SSN. In most cases, it’s the mechanism
for searching across several databases. And this use
of SSNs creates exactly the sort of information
bottle-neck that makes ID theft so devastating.

162
B A N K S  A N D  C R E D I T  B U R E A U S
C R A S  C I R C L E  T H E I R  W A G O N S
Beginning in late 2001, a group of bills were pro-
posed in Washington D.C. and various state capitols
that would limit the ability of credit bureaus and gov-
ernment agencies to sell their information to private-
sector marketing firms. The main mechanism for en-
forcing these limits would be a restriction on sharing
SSNs. These bills were generally promoted as protec-
tions of privacy and against ID theft.
The credit bureaus didn’t agree. And they sent lobby-
ists to fight the privacy bills wherever they could.
Associated Credit Bureaus (ACB) is an international
trade association representing 500 consumer infor-
mation companies that provide “fraud prevention and
risk management products, credit and mortgage re-
ports, tenant and employment screening services, check
fraud and verification services and collection services.”
In November 2001 congressional testimony, the ACB’s
Stuart K. Pratt said:
The key to ensuring that both the govern-
ment and the private sector can fully authen-
ticate identifying information on applications
of all types is through a robust system of
authentication and verification technolo-
gies. At the core of these technologies is the
availability of validated consumer identifica-
tion information for cross-matching pur-
poses.
Our members’ systems are a good example
of how the private sector is already integrat-
ing a range of information sources today.

C H A P T E R  7
163
Key in this integration is the freedom to de-
velop fraud prevention products for a range
of industries.
Unfortunately, for example, the current FTC
rules…seriously impinge on the use of es-
sential consumer identifying information for
non-Fair Credit Reporting Act purposes.
In fact, the rule may foreclose on any oppor-
tunity to use credit header for other types of
security screening efforts, such as scanning
airline passenger manifests.
The “essential consumer identifying information” in-
cluded SSNs. Sharing these had a lot more to do with
marketing consumer data to direct mail companies
than preventing terrorist from boarding airplanes.
And sharing SSNs with direct mail companies creates
a real exposure to ID theft.
The Individual Reference Services Group (IRSG)
is a group of the leading information industry com-
panies—including major credit bureaus—that provide
services to help identify, verify identity of or locate
individuals. It’s the main lobbying front for the credit
industry. In May 2001 congressional testimony, the
IRSG’s Ronald Plesser made the industry’s case:
The members of the IRSG are committed
to the responsible acquisition and use of per-
sonally identifiable information in business-
to-business transactions. We do not oppose
a prohibition of the public display of Social
Security numbers to the public. We share the
Committee’s concern about the potential
misuse of SSNs for identity theft and other
harmful purposes.

164
B A N K S  A N D  C R E D I T  B U R E A U S
We do oppose legislation that would pro-
hibit the purchase and sale of SSNs for le-
gitimate business purposes.
In the fight against identity theft, where veri-
fying an individual’s identity is crucial, indi-
vidual reference service products are abso-
lutely essential. Banks, credit card companies
and other types of credit institutions…are all
becoming increasingly plagued by fraudsters
who use an existing person’s identity to ille-
gally obtain products, services and money.
The best, and perhaps only, means of pre-
venting this type of fraud is to crosscheck
through the use of personal identifying data,
often provided by individual reference ser-
vices.
D O E S  S E L F - R E G U L A T I O N  W O R K ?
In July 2001 congressional testimony, John A. Ford—
the Chief Privacy Officer at Equifax, Inc.—defended
his company’s commercial use of SSNs:
[T]he personally identifiable information in
our consumer-reporting database is entirely
separate and distinct from information con-
tained in our marketing databases. In fact, the
databases are managed by totally separate
Equifax companies.
Naturally, marketers must have name and
address information in order to communi-
cate their offers directly to consumers. It is
important to note, however, that the infor-
mation included within the Equifax market-

C H A P T E R  7
165
ing databases is not organized so as to be
readily and easily retrievable by personal iden-
tifiers (i.e., name and address).
It is very important to emphasize that per-
sonal information obtained for marketing
purposes is not used for risk assessment pur-
poses. Marketing data is not used to make
decisions about whether an individual obtains
or retains a job, insurance or a government
license or benefit. Instead, the information is
used merely for the purpose of efficiently
shaping the kinds of offers an individual re-
ceives.
[O]ur customers are prohibited from using
our marketing databases for individual look-
up purposes. We have always contractually
prohibited our customers from using our da-
tabase for this purpose. Furthermore, we
have designed our system so that we have no
delivery mechanism for a customer to query
the database based on a name; therefore, no
individual look up is offered or feasible.
Further, Equifax provides consumers with
meaningful and practicable privacy protec-
tions through our compliance with a variety
of self-regulatory programs providing con-
sumer rights and redress.
Legitimate business access to relevant con-
sumer information is critical to achieving a
number of societal benefits: thwarting iden-
tity theft, locating estate heirs, witnesses, child
support delinquents, debtors, missing chil-
dren, organ donors, etc.

166
B A N K S  A N D  C R E D I T  B U R E A U S
Consumer advocates scoff at the tactic of defend-
ing the sale of personal financial information
behind missing children and organ donors.
In the era of financial services consolidation, the ties
between credit bureaus and direct marketing compa-
nies are getting closer. In fact, some credit bureaus are
becoming direct marketers. For example: Equifax pro-
vides consumer information to banks and lenders
making credit decisions. These activities are regulated
under the Fair Credit Reporting Act and dozens of
state statutes. But Equifax Direct Marketing Solu-
tions—a corporate sibling acquired in the 1990s—
maintains “the largest marketing database of lifestyle
and compiled data in the world.” And Equifax makes
this information available to anyone who will pay
for it.
Does this mean Equifax is selling personal financial
information like SSNs? Yes, in some cases.
Not everyone agrees that private-sector companies
should be free to sell personal information that in-
cludes SSNs—even if the buyers have “legitimate
business purposes.” In May 2001 congressional testi-
mony, Marc Rotenberg—Executive Director of the
Electronic Privacy Information Center—made the
case against the credit bureaus’ sale of personal infor-
mation:
Several years ago, significant public concern
was raised about information brokers that
routinely buy and sell detailed personal in-
formation, including Social Security num-
bers. The Individual Reference Services
Group was established to improve practices

C H A P T E R  7
167
in the industry. We do not believe these prin-
ciples provide sufficient safeguards for con-
sumers.
IRSG companies gather and sell Social Secu-
rity numbers. Social Security numbers are
collected from a variety of public and non-
public sources. Public documents such as
bankruptcy filings and other types of court
records often contain Social Security num-
bers of the parties to a proceeding. Non-
public documents such as credit headers, the
identifying information at the top of credit
reports (including names, addresses, ages and
SSNs), are also culled for information.
Rotenberg also pointed out that, in 1997, the IRSG
had worked with the FTC—but without any public
input—to develop a set of self-regulatory principles.
These self-regulatory principles allowed for the sale
of SSNs without the knowledge or permission of
the people to whom the numbers refer.
Under the IRSG principles, companies can freely sell
and distribute SSNs gathered from public records.
The IRSG Principles treat SSNs differently if they
come from non-public sources—such as other credit
bureaus. However, the guidelines for the sale of SSNs
from non-public sources are completely subjective
and largely ignore the privacy interests of the people
involved.
The IRSG principles create a multi-tier system for the
sale of information gathered from non-public sources.
The first tier for the sale of SSNs applies to “quali-
fied subscribers”; complete SSNs can be sold to those
deemed to fall into this category. But there’s no defi-

168
B A N K S  A N D  C R E D I T  B U R E A U S
nition of what makes someone a “qualified sub-
scriber.” Moreover, the conditions that qualified sub-
scribers must meet under the IRSG principles rely
entirely on the determination of the data seller and
the data purchaser on what is an “appropriate” use
of such information. The person whose SSN is be-
ing sold has no input into whether the use is “appro-
priate.”
Rotenberg went on to describe IRSG self-regulation:
Oversight of IRSG companies is generally
weak. Yearly assessments required by the
IRSG Principles, are conducted by “reason-
ably qualified independent professional” ser-
vices. The assessment criteria, in many places,
simply ask whether IRSG companies have
some process in place, rather than evaluating
whether such a process is effective. The as-
sessment criteria do not seek to evaluate
whether such qualifications are stringent
enough or even if they are evenly applied
among different IRSG companies. In addi-
tion, none of the results of assessments are
publicly displayed.
Rotenberg’s group suggested that Congress enact leg-
islation that would:
•
limit the use of the SSN to those cir-
cumstances where use is explicitly autho-
rized by law;
•
prohibit the sale and limit the display
of the SSN by government agencies;
•
prevent companies from compelling
consumers to disclose their SSN as a con-

C H A P T E R  7
169
dition of service or sale unless there is a
statutory basis for the request;
•
penalize the fraudulent use of another
person’s SSN but not the use of an SSN
that is not associated with an actual indi-
vidual. This would permit, for example,
a person to provide a number such as
“123-00-6789” where there is no intent
to commit fraud; and
•
encourage the development of alter-
native, less intrusive means of iden-
tification.
P R I V A C Y  
N O T I C E S
We started this chapter by discussing the Gramm-
Leach-Bliley Act of 1999 and its effect on consolida-
tion in the financial services industry. But the GLB
Act also included a number of consumer-protection
measures which—if used correctly—can be of real
help in combatting ID theft.
The GLB Act requires organizations that gather per-
sonal information from customers to mail notices
each year explaining how the groups use the infor-
mation. It applies to a wide variety of operations,
including obvious ones like banks and credit card is-
suers. But it also applies to less-obvious ones—insur-
ers, automobile dealerships that arrange financing or
leasing and financial advisers and consumer counsel-
ing agencies.
Each must report to its clients—whether it sells the
information or gives it to other organizations—and

170
B A N K S  A N D  C R E D I T  B U R E A U S
explain how consumers can opt out of having at
least some of their information distributed. These
written notices must clearly describe the institution’s
practices and policies about collecting and sharing
“nonpublic personal information.” For example, a
typical disclosure might explain that your bank shares
information about your account balance, payment
history and credit card purchases with non-financial
companies, such as retailers, direct marketers and pub-
lishers.
A critical provision of the law gives consumers the
right to block an institution’s disclosure of pri-
vate information to companies not affiliated with that
institution. Under the rules, even people who are not
technically customers of a financial institution—such
as former customers or people who applied for but
didn’t obtain a loan or credit card—will have the right
to opt out of information sharing with outside com-
panies.
Note that only some of the information releases can
be blocked.
C O N C L U S I O N
In the interest of keeping commerce moving and al-
lowing institutions to know who they do business with,
the GLB allows them to share certain information.
This includes information about customer accounts
to organizations that promote the company and its
products. It includes information provided in response
to a court order. It also includes payment histories
on loans and credit cards provided to credit bureaus.
Finally, it includes transaction records—including

C H A P T E R  7
171
loan payments, credit card purchases and checking
and savings account statements—to organizations that
provide its data processing and mailing services.
The rules were issued jointly by the FDIC, the Office
of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Re-
serve Board and the Office of Thrift Supervision.
The National Credit Union Administration, the FTC
and the Securities and Exchange Commission have
comparable rules for the institutions and companies
they regulate that provide financial products or ser-
vices. Under the FTC’s rule, for example, credit bu-
reaus are limited in their ability to sell non-public
personal information to third parties such as direct
mail and telemarketing companies.
More detailed information about the mailings and
what to do about them is available on the FTC Web
site at www.ftc.gov. A copy of the FTC’s sample opt-
out letter that consumers can send to credit bureaus
to prevent some distribution of their data is included
there.
The ability to opt out of marketing mailings—like
the ability to opt out of direct marketing phone calls,
also administered by the FTC—is an essential part of
fighting ID theft.
Until regulations restrict the credit bureaus’ and other
financial institutions’ active marketing of personal in-
formation, opting out is the best option you have.

172
B A N K S  A N D  C R E D I T  B U R E A U S

C H A P T E R  8
173
CHAPTER
PREVENTION
8
Due to the nature of identity theft (how easy it is to
commit when no one is looking), preventing identity
theft starts with the consumer. Even when law en-
forcement agencies catch up to addressing the prob-
lem, it will still be up to you to prevent the majority
of the crimes.
Because ID thieves are opportunistic, some basic
preventive measures can do a lot to dissuade. Pre-
vention starts with deterrence, much like using an
alarm or The Club on your car. Either of these anti-
theft devices can be surpassed, but real deterrence
comes from making your car a little tougher to
steal…so that the thief will move on to the next one.
The world is too large, transactions are too quick and
easy to make, and the volume of information passed
back and forth is too dense for anyone to prevent all
ID theft. Accept ID theft as a negative by-product
of our modern technology—like spam, computer

174
P R E V E N T I O N
viruses and other nuisances that get traded when you
swap security for convenience.
There are two other big burdens you must come to
accept:
1)
It’s up to you to safeguard your personal
information; and
2)
It’s up to you to report any illegal activity
to the proper authorities and agencies.
Unfortunately, no one is going to call you
the minute someone starts opening ac-
counts or making large purchases in your
name.
No one is going to save your reputation and credit
history when it runs amok and requires time, money
and energy to repair it. No one can afford to have
the “It can’t happen to me” mentality. We’ve seen how
anyone’s identity can get stolen and grossly misused.
In this chapter, we’ll outline the only way to avoid the
hassle of losing your identity: prevention.
None of these preventive tactics guarantees that you
won’t become a victim of identity theft. But they will
lower your overall risk—especially when used together.
The more locks you have on your doors, the less of a
chance a burglar will come into your home and steal
from you. Likewise, when it comes to ID theft, the
goal is to lessen the number of opportunities a po-
tential thief has to impersonate you.

C H A P T E R  8
175
Y O U R  S O C I A L  S E C U R I T Y  C A R D
We’ve already seen how vital it is to protect your
Social Security card. Are you still schlepping it
around in your wallet or purse? It’s time to take an
inventory of your Social Security numbers lying
around and eliminate all chances for its disclosure.
Remove it from your wallet (if it’s still in there) and
keep it in a safe place at home, such as a fireproof
box where you keep other important documents.
Don’t write your number on a slip of paper to be
kept in your wallet, either. If you haven’t done so by
now, memorize your Social Security number and
avoid all extra recordings of it.
As many jurisdictions and counties go online and
attempt to post public records online, you must
worry about records that contain your SSN.
Records have always been available for the public to
view on microfilm rolls at the courthouse, but some
new laws make those records even more accessible
online. Title companies can research deeds from their
office computers; and homeowners can look into a
lien or judgment without going to the courthouse.
Public access to electronic records will continue to
broaden. It’s up to you to know what public records
contain information about you, and whether those
documents can get into anyone’s hands. Many coun-
ties are not diligent in separating public from con-
fidential documents in their computer databases. Until

176
P R E V E N T I O N
courts adopt policies that comply with the rules, there’s
no telling what will end up on the Internet.
If you’ve ever bought or sold a piece of property,
served in the military or been involved in a court
judgment, a valuable piece of your identity could
soon find its way onto the Internet: Your Social Se-
curity number. Voter registration cards and mar-
riage certificates can also contain such information.
You can’t prevent local courts from posting infor-
mation. But you can check these postings online for
any references to you. And—since most courts honor
requests to edit or obscure personal details—you can
ask them to cut out your detailed information. (This
cutting is sometimes called redicting.)
Never provide your SSN, or any other personal in-
formation for that matter, when it’s not necessary.
Product manufacturers don’t need to know your oc-
cupation. The health club does not need your SSN.
Only the government or a lender should be asking
for Social Security numbers. Never have your Social
Security number printed on your checks—you can
write it in if necessary
California state law now says Social Security num-
bers may not be openly displayed on things like
health forms, bank account records or anything sent
in the mail. Other states are following this lead.

C H A P T E R  8
177
Many people have been duped by swindlers who
pretend to be from the IRS. When someone claims
to work for the Internal Revenue Service and starts
firing sensitive questions at you, do a little homework
before answering. Be wary of first-time calls or
surprise visits from someone you’ve never heard from
before. If the IRS needs to conduct business with
you (e.g., you’ve underpaid in taxes), you should re-
ceive a letter from the IRS before hearing directly
from an agent.
In some cases, IRS criminal investigators may show
up without prior warning, or they may try contacting
you without having sent a letter first, but you can as-
certain their legitimacy by asking for the employee’s
name, badge number and supervisor’s name. If
they’re legitimate, they shouldn’t mind your calling their
office to verify their identity. And, they won’t be ask-
ing for your SSN—they’ll already have it.
Best way to handle an alleged IRS agent: Pass the
trouble on to a tax adviser, such as a lawyer, ac-
countant or “enrolled agent,” a tax professional
licensed to represent you at the IRS. If you’re still not
satisfied by the investigator’s credentials, or have
some reasonable basis for your suspicions, call
(800) 366-4484. Or write to: Treasury Inspector Gen-
eral for Tax Administration, PO Box 589, Ben Franklin
Station, Washington D.C. 20044-0589. TIGTA says
the information you provide is kept confidential,
and you may remain anonymous.

178
P R E V E N T I O N
D E T E C T I N G  S S N  M I S U S E
Currently, federal law places no restrictions on the use
of the SSN by the private sector. People may be asked
for an SSN for such things as renting a video, getting
medical services, joining a gym and applying for public
utilities. If you refuse to give it, you might not be able
to get the product or service.
One way that you can find out whether someone is
misusing your number is to check your earnings
records. About three months before your birthday,
anyone 25 or older and not already receiving Social
Security benefits, automatically receives a Social Secu-
rity statement each year. The statement lists earnings
posted to your Social Security record as well as pro-
viding an estimate of benefits and other Social Secu-
rity facts about the program. If there is a mistake in
the earnings posted, you are asked to contact the SSA
so your record can be corrected. The SSA investi-
gates, corrects the earnings record and if appropri-
ate, it refers any suspected misuse of an SSN to the
appropriate authorities.
Order your Social Security Earnings and Benefits
Statement once a year to check for fraud. You can
order the statement by calling (800) 772-1213.
The SSA may learn about misused SSNs in a variety
of other ways—including alerts from their computer
systems while matching federal and state data, pro-
cessing wages, claims or post entitlement actions,
reports from individuals contacting its field offices
or teleservice centers and inquiries from the IRS con-

C H A P T E R  8
179
cerning two or more individuals with the same SSN
on their income tax returns.
If your Social Security number has been used fraudu-
lently, call the SSA’s Fraud Hotline, (800) 269-0271. In
extreme cases of fraud, it may be possible for you to
get a new number.
O T H E R  I T E M S  I N  Y O U R  W A L L E T
What else is in your wallet? If you were to lose your
wallet today, there’s probably a lot to worry about.
Place the contents of your wallet on a photocopy
machine. Copy both sides of each license, credit card,
etc. This way you will know what you had in your
wallet should it get lost or stolen. You will have all of
the account numbers and phone numbers to call and
cancel. Keep the photocopy in a safe place. Other-
wise, you may give someone your entire identity in
one neat package.
Along with leaving out your SSN, dump bank ac-
count numbers, personal identification numbers
(PINs), passports and birth certificates. Leave those
in a fireproof box at home—never in your wallet.
Don’t carry more blank checks than you need in your
wallet, either. If your SSN is on your driver’s license,
ask your state for a new number and license (if pos-
sible).

180
P R E V E N T I O N
Quick Tips
•
Never leave your purse or wallet unat-
tended in public or in open view in your
car.
•
Keep checks in a secure place and de-
stroy them when you close a checking
account.
•
Never give credit card, bank or Social
Security information over the telephone.
•
Minimize exposure of your Social Secu-
rity number.
•
Safeguard your credit, debit and ATM
card receipts and shred them before dis-
posing of them.
•
Check your utility and subscription
bills to make sure the charges are yours.
•
Memorize your passwords and personal
identification numbers and don’t keep
them near your credit cards.
•
Keep a list of, or copy, all credit and iden-
tification cards you carry so you can
quickly call the issuers to inform them
about missing or stolen cards.
•
A form to stop credit and insurance of-
fers from being sent to you is available
at www.ag.state.mi.us/cp/cp_form02.pdf
•
A form to remove your name from tele-
phone and mailing lists is available at
www.dmaconsumers.org/privacy.html.

C H A P T E R  8
181
H A N D L I N G  C R E D I T  C A R D S
Cancel any credit cards you don’t really need or use;
open credit is a prime target. Keep good back-up
information about your accounts, just in case your
wallet is lost or stolen. Consider using a service to
handle replacement of cards, provide fraud liability
protection and deliver expert advice on protecting
yourself and your credit following a loss
or theft (more on this later). If you ever need to give
personal information out over the phone, ensure the
person on the other end of the line is well-known
and trusted. You should have initiated the call. Avoid
providing personal information when using a check
or plastic for purchases at a cash register.
Before offering a company any personal data, ask
how it will be used and whether any of it will be
shared with third parties. If you’re unsure who’s
called you, ask for their number—so you can call
them back at the company’s office. A law passed in
1999 permits financial institutions to sell or aggre-
gate your data unless you expressly ask them not to
do so—usually by choosing the “opt-out” selection
on your print or online forms. After opting out, fol-
low up to make sure the company honors your re-
quest.
Shred credit card applications you receive in the mail
along with bank statements, 401(k), stock and mutual
fund statements and any other financial documents.

182
P R E V E N T I O N
Review your credit card bills and your checking ac-
count statements as soon as they arrive, to ensure that
no fraudulent activity is taking place. If a statement
does not arrive, that could be a sign that someone has
changed your billing address for fraudulent purposes.
Retain all duplicates of your receipts when making
a purchase and retain receipts from ATM withdraw-
als. Do not put your credit card account number on
checks used to pay your monthly bills. The credit card
agency can always trace your check through your
name/address information from your check.
When applying for a credit card, check the return
address. If there is a sticker with a return address
placed on the application, contact the card issuing
company to verify the correct address.
Take care how you dispose of receipts, copies of a
credit application, insurance forms, bank checks,
brokerage statements and unsolicited credit offers.
Consider shredding them before leaving them in the
trash. Do not write your card number on a postcard
notifying you that you have won a prize or gift and
requesting the number as part of the award ar-
rangements. Do not leave gasoline credit card re-
ceipts at the pump.
No federal law requires merchants to block out credit
card numbers, although Congress is considering leg-
islation. One bill would ban the printing of more than
the card’s last five numbers on a cardholder’s re-
ceipt. Printing the expiration date also would be pro-

C H A P T E R  8
183
hibited. About 10 states already have enacted trunca-
tion laws, including Arizona, Washington, Missouri and
California.
More Quick Tips
•
Don’t give your checking account num-
ber to people you don’t know, even if
they claim they are from your bank.
•
Reveal checking account information only
to businesses you know to be reputable.
•
Report lost or stolen checks immediately.
•
Properly store or dispose of cancelled
checks and guard new checks.
•
Report any inquiries or suspicious behav-
ior to your banker who will take mea-
sures to protect your account and notify
proper authorities.
•
Do not leave your automated teller ma-
chine receipt at the ATM; it contains ac-
count information.
•
Check your bank statements carefully and
often.
•
Use direct deposit (if possible).
The next time you order pre-printed checks, only have
your initials, instead of your full name, printed on the
checks. If someone takes your checkbook, they will
not know if you sign your checks with just your ini-
tials or your full name. But your bank will know how

184
P R E V E N T I O N
you sign them. Don’t have your phone number printed
on your checks.
If you have a P.O. Box, have that address printed on
the checks. If you work, you might want to use your
employment address. Otherwise, it would be safer
not to have a pre-printed address on the checks.
CNN weather person Orelon Sidney ordered a box
of checks that he never got. Then the company sent
out a second box of checks that he did get—but the
first box had been intercepted and soon enough,
Sidney started seeing checks clearing for $1,000 and
$600 and $900. It not only took Sidney a long time to
realize the problem, but correcting the issue with the
bank, the credit bureaus and the collection agencies
after him took a long time.
Avoid this scenario by always picking up new boxes
of checks at your bank.
R E V I E W I N G  C R E D I T  R E P O R T S
Review your credit reports from each of the three
national credit reporting agencies at least twice a year.
You are entitled to a free copy of your credit report
if you are unemployed, on welfare, were recently
denied credit or if your report is inaccurate because
of fraud. (Otherwise, there is a small fee.) In addition
to your debts and payment history, credit reporting
agencies also provide: general data (name, SSN, mari-
tal status, addresses—past and present); employer’s
name and address; inquiries of your credit file; and
public record information like bankruptcies and liens.

C H A P T E R  8
185
Credit reporting agencies do not, however, main-
tain files regarding your race, religion, medical his-
tory or criminal record—if you have one.
Review your report carefully to make sure no unau-
thorized charges were made on your existing accounts
and that no fraudulent accounts or loans were estab-
lished in your name. Unfortunately, credit agencies and
FICO scores, respond slowly to remedy credit rating
effects of ID theft. This is where most of the lasting
damage happens.
Below, you’ll find the information you need to access
all three major credit bureaus.
The Big Three Credit Bureaus:
Equifax (www.equifax.com)
•
To dispute information in your report,
write to: Equifax Service Center ATTN:
Dispute Department, P.O. Box 740256,
Atlanta, GA  30374.
•
To order a credit report, call: (800) 685-
1111
•
Or mail: P.O. Box 470241, Atlanta, GA
30374 ATTN: Disclosure Department.
•
To remove your name from pre-ap-
proved offers of credit and marketing
lists, call (888) 567-8688 or write to:
Equifax Options, P.O. Box 740123, At-
lanta, GA  30374-0123.

186
P R E V E N T I O N
Experian (www.experian.com)
•
To order a credit report, call: (888) 397-
3742.
•
Or write to: P.O. Box 9066, Allen, TX
75013.
•
To dispute information in your report,
call (800) 493-1058 or write to: P.O. Box
9556, Allen, TX  75013.
•
To remove your name from pre-ap-
proved offers of credit cards, call (800)
567-8688. To remove your name from
marketing lists, call (800) 407-1088.
TransUnion (www.tuc.com)
•
To order a credit report, call: (800) 916-
8800
•
Or write to: Trans Union LLC, Con-
sumer Disclosure Center, P.O. Box 1000,
Chester, PA  19022.
•
To dispute information in your report,
call: (800) 916-8800.
•
To have your name removed from pre-
approved offers of credit and market-
ing lists, call (888) 567-8688 or write to:
Trans Union LLC’s Name Removal
Option, P.O. Box 97328, Jackson, MS
39288-7328.

C H A P T E R  8
187
I N S U R A N C E  A N D  S E R V I C E S
In 2002, federal prosecutors charged three men with
operating an identity-theft ring that had stolen credit
reports of more than 30,000 people—the largest case
in history. The defendants include a computer help-
desk employee at a Long Island software outfit who
had access to sensitive passwords for banks and credit
companies. The ring allegedly emptied bank accounts,
took out loans with stolen identities and ran up fraudu-
lent charges on credit cards.
Most of the damage could easily have been prevented
if the credit agencies adopted the common-sense
practice of directly notifying individuals whenever a
change on his or her report occurs, and whenever a
third party accesses their credit report. But they don’t.
Because ID theft has become a well-known prob-
lem, companies are responding by offering insurance
to ease the burden. Identity-theft services from the
credit card agencies and bureaus is also a burgeoning
business.
Travelers Insurance of Hartford, Conn., first offered
an identity-theft policy in 1999. Other insurance com-
panies have followed, adding coverage to their basic
homeowners policies or as riders. ID theft coverage
pays for the time and money it takes you to com-
plete the logistical and legal paperwork. This can
include lost wages, notary public fees, Federal Ex-
press or other kinds of packaging and mailing. In
some instances, legal expenses can be covered.

188
P R E V E N T I O N
Check your current policies for existing cover-
age, as a homeowners or renters insurance policy
might already contain some coverage. If you want
coverage, ask your current insurance company for in-
formation about adding coverage to existing poli-
cies, or if you need to purchase a stand alone policy.
Travelers insurance, for example, sells stand alone
policies from $59 to $180 a year.
You might also be able to find coverage through your
credit card companies, bank or employer. An em-
ployer can purchase coverage under a legal insurance
policy and you pay the premium out of your pay-
check.
Having coverage for ID theft won’t protect you from
the problem in the first place. It will only help you
once it has happened. So, on one level it offers peace
of mind…but you don’t want to have to use it. The
laws against ID theft and the insurance you can buy
will be less effective in the long-run than the simple
preventive measures you can take to avoid the crime
altogether.
When shopping for this kind of insurance, look for:
•
price;
•
content (what expense will be covered);
and
•
overlay (whether you already have cov-
erage elsewhere).

C H A P T E R  8
189
C R E D I T  M O N I T O R I N G  S E R V I C E S
Insurance companies also have been partnering with
credit management and monitoring agencies to pro-
vide new services to consumers—but at a cost. For
example, ING Direct has partnered with Privista to
give customers, among other things, online access to
weekly credit reports using Equifax credit data, weekly
updated credit scores and personalized tips to im-
prove your credit.
These services can cost between $30 to more than
$100 a year. Equifax has teamed up with the insurer
American International Group (AIG) to offer spe-
cialized insurance. Equifax’s Credit Watch product
promises to send alerts to consumers via e-mail or
letter within 24 hours after something pops up on
their credit report. The company will also reimburse
you up to $2,500 in identity theft costs.
The same companies that record your credit histo-
ries and market your good name and reputation
also sell services so you can protect your credit.
It’s important that you make sure that the monitoring
service you choose or try out delivers data in a use-
ful format. Consumers should not have to pay to
have their credit reports monitored, but until legisla-
tion changes the mechanics behind reporting, mar-
keting and monitoring people’s credit reports, you
have to decide how much you’re willing to pay for
services. Be wary of how these programs are pro-
moted: many offer “free” services of one month,

190
P R E V E N T I O N
then will gladly charge you $80 for the year if you
forget to call and cancel.
The cheapest route for consumers is to see what pro-
tection services your credit card issuers offer at no
charge. Bank of America, for example, started ad-
vertising its Total Security Protection program to
people who get their credit cards through the bank.
Bank of America’s program draws from services the
big consumer bank already offers: exempting the cus-
tomer from liability for unauthorized charges and
account monitoring for unusual activity. Discover,
another card company, offers customers free cards
with “perishable” (one-time only) account numbers
for making online purchases.
Many of the credit watch services only monitor one
of the three major credit bureaus. As with anything,
make sure you know what you’re getting before you
buy. Check out any company you’re not familiar
with before doing business with them. Contact your
local consumer protection agency or the Better Busi-
ness Bureau to find out if they have any complaints
on file.
Online services are also cropping up to help you
monitor your personal information. Cardcops
(www.cardcops.com), for example, gathers up credit card
numbers in cyberspace from public areas. Where do

C H A P T E R  8
191
they find them? In chat rooms, search engines (have
you ever Googled your credit card number?), on
merchants’ Web sites that accidentally post customer
orders and credit card numbers. Cardcops takes the
numbers it finds and puts them into a database that
you can access and see if your personal information
is floating out there in cyberspace.
B I O M E T R I C S
You might soon find yourself swiping your finger-
print instead of your check card when you go to the
market for milk. Biometric technology (which identi-
fies an individual by a physical attribute, such as the
sound of his or her voice, or recognition of eyes,
face or even DNA) is closer than you think. Within
the next five years, biometric checkout lanes could be
standard. Fast-food giant McDonald’s has already
taken fingerprints for payment during a test in Fresno,
California.
The biometrics market is still in a curious state of
anticipation as multiple government agencies mull
what will work best for everything from passports
to drivers’ licenses. At the same time, civil liberties
groups and privacy advocates are urging caution.
At three of its grocery stores in Texas, Kroger uses
technology that lets consumers scan their fingerprints
at the checkout counter. Once the system recognizes
the shopper, it charges their purchases to a designated
credit card or checking account.

192
P R E V E N T I O N
If given the opportunity to use a biometric system at
the market or bank, consider accepting it. Most banking
and security experts predict that fingerprint, hand, iris
or facial recognition will become widely used in the
2000s. Fingerprint biometrics are already used to check
welfare eligibility in California, Texas and New York,
and some governments—the Philippines, Argentina,
Hong Kong—are creating national ID programs with
the technology. And dozens of Fortune 500 compa-
nies already use fingerprint scans for network or PC
access.
T I P S  F O R  B U S I N E S S E S
The focus of this book has been on what consumers
can do to prevent ID theft. But it’s worth mentioning
a few tips for businesses, since many consumers are
running small businesses themselves and need to pre-
vent ID theft in their personal life by changing their
work setting habits. Some tips:
•
Review your bank statements regularly,
and ensure that the authorized signers
are not the same people who reconcile
the account.
•
Have Social Security, and as many other
checks as possible, deposited directly into
your bank account rather than mailed to
you.
•
Review all hiring procedures. Know
your employees. Consider background
checks.
•
Make sure two people are responsible
for accounts payable, and ensure that
mailroom personnel and procedures are
sound.

C H A P T E R  8
193
•
Keep all check stock or cash equivalents
in a secure and locked facility.
•
Change keys, entry codes and pass-
words periodically to prevent routine
access to storage areas and computers.
•
Consider surprise audits of your own
accounts.
•
Consider moving check disbursement ac-
tivity to electronic payment.
•
Read and understand your bank contracts
regarding liability for fraud under the Uni-
form Commercial Code.
•
Maintain contact with other businesses
in your area so you can receive timely
information on fraud occurrences.
•
Use bank services like positive pay, ex-
pedited return information and signature
verification systems to protect your ac-
counts payable and accounts receivable
areas.
•
Purchase check stock from well-estab-
lished vendors. If you process your
payables through a service bureau, make
sure you have a copy of its security pro-
cedures.
•
Reconcile your check disbursements and
deposits regularly.
•
If a payment account is fraudulently used,
close the account as soon as possible.
•
Be cautious when using refund accounts,
such as rebates for subscriptions. This is
another target for check fraud. The

194
P R E V E N T I O N
checks are relatively easy to obtain and
can be used for counterfeits.
•
Evaluate the use of negative check file
databases, especially if you accept a large
number of payments by check.
•
Find ways to replace paper documents
with electronic payment devices.
•
Know your customers.
In the normal course of the day, staff members will
be working with sensitive information. They should
take care not to leave papers, forms, reports and so
on out at their workstations—especially if the area is
not completely secured. Even seemingly harmless
documents can be used against the company and
employ.
Employees who work in the human resources, pay-
roll and benefits departments are commonly bound
by specific rules that govern their access to informa-
tion and that include termination penalties for violat-
ing their employers’ confidentiality policies. Make sure
they understand these rules—and that the rules will be
enforced.
C O N C L U S I O N
A lot of prevention has to do with making lifestyle
changes. It’s about how you manage your mail, fi-
nancial records and bank accounts, pay bills, use your
credit cards, use the Internet…and even pick topics
of conversation at a cocktail party.
The next chapter is more of an extension of this chap-
ter. It deals with ways of preventing identity theft via

C H A P T E R  8
195
the changes you make to your daily life. You’ll find
that a major joint of access to your identity involves
the Internet, so you’ll find some techniques to imple-
ment when you’re online, whether you’re in a com-
munity chat room or on a merchant’s site ready to
buy.

196
P R E V E N T I O N

C H A P T E R  9
197
CHAPTER
LIFESTYLE
CHANGES
9
It’s hard to know these days which way is the “safer”
way to pay for something with a credit card: online
with a known vendor or over the phone with an
equally well-known merchant? Can a phone line’s se-
curity be compromised as easily as an online transac-
tion?
Trouble is, no one knows. It’s hard to know when
and where a breach in your personal security will
occur.
The most secure way to pay for something is with
cash. But few people resort to carrying cold hard
cash in their wallets—not because they fear being
mugged, but because it’s not as convenient or they
just don’t have it (i.e., they buy on credit).
Many of the conveniences we enjoy today result in a
relinquishment of security on some level. For example,
you can use a debit card instead of writing a check
when you go to the supermarket; you can make pur-

198
L I F E S T Y L E  C H A N G E S
chases from the comforts of your home on the
Internet with a credit card; and you can sit on a public
bench in a public park and log onto the Internet using
a wireless network set up for people like you who
use your lunch hour to write e-mails and hotsink
critical information to and from your PDA.
For purposes of safeguarding your identity, would
you be willing to make changes to your lifestyle that
may be inconvenient in today’s world? Ask yourself:
•
Can I get rid of the extra credit cards?
All of them?
•
Can I find a system of passwords rather
than resorting to the same old password?
•
Can I organize my financial records and
shred everything I don’t need that con-
tains my personal information?
•
Can I resist online commerce?
•
Can I change the way I pay bills, use mail
and discard unwanted material?
How you answer these questions says something about
how serious you regard your identity…and how dedi-
cated you are at protecting that identity.
W H E N  Y O U ’ R E  O N L I N E
The Internet provides a huge window of opportu-
nity for criminals. With the easy availability of family
Web pages on the Internet, be cautious about the kind
of information you post there.
Posting pictures of the inside of your home on the
Internet for friends and family to see might seem like

C H A P T E R  9
199
fun, but the photos give a thief a road-map of what
type of valuables are in your home and where they’re
located. Do not:
•
post the itinerary for your upcoming va-
cation;
•
post information or photos about col-
lectibles;
•
post family information, names, favor-
ite places, memories or something about
your heritage;
•
post information about your child, such
as his or her age, photos, after-school
activities, friends or hang-outs; or
•
post your address, place of business,
family names or information about who
you do business with.
The key to noticing a secure Web site is in the URL.
When you log on to a Web site, take a look at where
you see the “http” in the address, after which there
will be a semicolon. If you’re on a site that’s sup-
posed to be secure, such as a place where you make
actual purchases and input personal information, you’ll
see an “s” pop up after the “http.” For example, when
you go into Amazon.com and you’re starting to buy
something, it’s going to say “https” at the very top in
that URL page.
You can also go to something called www.bizrate.com, a
Web site that displays e-business ratings by con-
sumers.

200
L I F E S T Y L E  C H A N G E S
Make sure every Web site you patronize has a toll-
free number, which gives you the ability or the op-
portunity to call in your order. Any good, legiti-
mate outfit will offer a number (many of them toll-
free) on the home page, giving you the option of
ordering over the phone.
Another good tactic: Only use one credit card when
shopping online. Designate one card for making your
online purchases.
Internet criminals often use unsolicited commercial
e-mail, known as “spam,” to commit Internet fraud
and identity theft. Spam can be used to target unsus-
pecting consumers and lure them to official looking
Webs sites—such as a billing center for an online ser-
vice provider or the front page of a mortgage infor-
mation form. When users enter passwords, SSNs or
credit card information, the information may be taken
and used or sold by identity thieves. To prevent being
duped in this fashion, practice the following 10 things:
1)
Never purchase spam-advertised prod-
ucts.
2)
Always protect your personal informa-
tion—assume that anything online may
become public.
3)
Never send personal information to e-
mail requests. (You should never be asked
for a password, credit card number or
SSN from a legitimate source via e-mail.)
4)
Verify every transaction.

C H A P T E R  9
201
5)
Beware of get rich quick schemes.
6)
Never pay “up front” for loans or credit.
Legitimate lenders generally do not “guar-
antee” a loan or credit card before you
apply.
7)
Refrain from clicking on Reply or Re-
move. Some senders may remove your
address, but others may flag your e-mail
address as “live,” and send you more
spam or even sell the address to other
spammers. Instead, forward spam to the
FTC at uce@ftc.gov.
8)
Use a “public” e-mail address when
online. Set up and use a public e-mail
address—either an additional address
from your ISP or a free e-mail address.
Use this e-mail address when participat-
ing in newsgroups, joining contests or
anytime that your e-mail is requested by
a third party online. Potential spam will
go to your public e-mail address instead
of your private e-mail address.
9)
Don’t post your e-mail address online.
You’d be surprised how often you use
your e-mail address online for newslet-
ter subscriptions, to join online groups
or in chat rooms. Before you post your
e-mail address, know whether it will be
displayed or used. Then use a public e-
mail address when necessary.
10) Use an e-mail filter to help eliminate
unwanted e-mail.

202
L I F E S T Y L E  C H A N G E S
L O O K - A L I K E  E - M A I L  S C A M S
As mentioned before, one of the ways ID thieves get
your information is by “pretexting” or simply giving
up your information to someone who is pretending
to be someone important. This can happen easily over
the phone (“Hi, I’m calling from Verizon with some
questions about your account because there seems to
be a problem…”) but it can also come in the form
of an e-mail that looks real in the sense that it con-
tains company logos and links back to the legiti-
mate company’s site.
You might get an e-mail from “eBay” that asks you
to click on a link to verify your account information,
which then takes you to a criminal’s Web page…and
a few clicks later, your personal data is in the hands
of an identity thief.
This is called “phishing,” and it involves stealing a
company’s identity to use in a scam for victimizing
consumers, then stealing their credit identities. These
e-mails usually contain a threat designed to trick con-
sumers into entering their information (e.g., “We re-
gret to inform you that your eBay account will be
suspended. According to our site policy, you will have
to confirm that you are the real owner of the eBay
account by completing the following form or else
your account will be deleted.”) Another that went
around the Internet came from Microsoft Network
(MSN):
We regret to inform you that technical diffi-
culties arose with our July 2003 updates. Un-

C H A P T E R  9
203
fortunately, part of our customer database,
and back-up system became inactive. We will
require you to enter your information in our
online billing center at your convenience. Or
by calling our customer support team. The
average hold time is 45 minutes.
Never reply to such e-mails. Legitimate companies
don’t usually ask for this kind of personal financial
data over e-mail. Be wary of e-mails that urge you to
click on a link to a Web page that asks for financial
information. Links appearing in HTML-based e-
mails cannot be trusted because programmers can
easily make a link to a criminal’s page look like a harm-
less link to a site like eBay.com or PayPal.com.
Tips for avoiding scams of this kind:
•
If you get an e-mail that warns you, with
little or no notice, that an account of
yours will be shut down unless you re-
confirm your billing information, do not
reply or click on the link in the e-mail.
Instead, contact the company cited in
the e-mail using a telephone number or
Web site address you know to be genu-
ine.
•
Avoid e-mailing personal and financial
information. Before submitting financial
information through a Web site, look for
the “lock” icon on the browser’s status
bar. It signals that your information is
secure during transmission.
•
Review credit card and bank account
statements as soon as you get them and

204
L I F E S T Y L E  C H A N G E S
look for unauthorized charges. Know
when all of your closing dates on your
cards are, and if your statement is late
by more than a couple of days, call your
credit card company or bank to confirm
your billing address and account balances.
•
Report all suspicious activity to the FTC.
Visit www.ftc.gov/spam to learn other ways to
avoid e-mail scams and deal with deceptive spam.
The FTC works for the consumer to prevent fraudu-
lent, deceptive and unfair business practices in the
marketplace and to provide information to help con-
sumers spot, stop and avoid them.
A  W O R D  A B O U T  P A S S W O R D S
If you were to tally up how many passwords and
PINs you currently have, you probably have more
than one. You should have many more than one. Be-
tween the codes you need to access your bank ac-
counts, you have ones for your computers, e-mail
accounts, voice mailboxes, cell phones, debit card,
credit cards, online subscriptions, online Web sites,
online banking, online financial accounts (e.g., invest-
ing), various memberships to clubs, frequent flyer
programs, merchants, etc. The list goes on and on.
Because everything we sign up for today often re-
quires a password or code, it’s no surprise that many
of us use the same old password for multiple pur-
poses. The one we use at the ATM is the same one
we use to log into the New York Times or msn.com.

C H A P T E R  9
205
Having the same password across the board is not
the safest thing to do. Someone can probably figure
out that password if he or she worked hard enough.
The goal: Use a system of passwords. Do not use the
same old password for everything. Get crafty.
Place different passwords on your credit card, bank
and phone accounts. Avoid using easily available in-
formation like your mother’s maiden name, your birth
date, the last four digits of your Social Security num-
ber, or your phone number or a series of consecutive
numbers. When opening new accounts, you may find
that many businesses still have a line on their applica-
tions for your mother’s maiden name. Use a pass-
word instead.
Tips to Creating a Good,
Secure Password
•
The trick: creating a word you can re-
member, but someone else can’t guess.
•
Use at least seven characters, including
upper and lower case letters, numbers
and symbols.
•
Use at least one symbol character in the
second through sixth position.
•
Use at least four different characters in
your password (no repeats).

206
L I F E S T Y L E  C H A N G E S
•
Use a sequence of random letters and
numbers.
•
Avoid any part of your name, business
logo, birth date, mother’s maiden name,
etc.
•
Avoid any actual word or name in any
language.
•
Avoid using numbers in place of letters.
•
Avoid reusing any portion of an old pass-
word.
•
Avoid using consecutive letters (i.e.,
abcdefg) or numbers (i.e., 4567).
•
Avoid using adjacent keys on the key-
board (i.e., asdfjkl).
The trick is to create a word you can remember, but
that someone else can’t guess. Fun note: the most
popular password is “PASSWORD” so avoid that
word at all costs.
Other notes about passwords:
•
Create tricky passwords for protecting
very important information or for any
online transaction where you credit is at
stake (i.e., shopping, banking, mutual
funds, brokerage, investment retirement
accounts, money management software,
tax preparation software, auctions, insur-
ance, etc.).

C H A P T E R  9
207
•
Create simple passwords for accessing
less critical information like online maga-
zines, newspapers, chat rooms, etc.).
•
Avoid the “Remember my password”
feature on most sites, unless you know
those sites are secure.
•
Avoid sharing your password or writing
it down (and sticking it to your moni-
tor!).
•
Change passwords every six months.
Monitoring Your Online Accounts
•
Review your accounts online frequently
to spot transactions you didn’t authorize,
such as online credit card charges, mu-
tual fund transfers, bank account with-
drawals, etc.
•
Review monthly statements you receive
in the mail for unauthorized activity.
•
Call an account if you don’t receive a
monthly statement in the mail.
•
Get a credit check annually to see if any-
one has opened a new account in your
name.
How would you know if someone stole your pass-
word and began using it to pretend to be you for
various reasons on- and offline?

208
L I F E S T Y L E  C H A N G E S
You’ll only know for sure if you spot unusual activity
in your accounts or if you don’t receive a monthly bill
or bank statement. If an identity thief changes the
mailing address for your accounts, you may not know
you have a problem until you get a phone call from a
collections agency…or you apply for a mortgage and
get denied.
Think of your password as a key to your home and
everything you own—including your credit and ulti-
mately, your reputation.
Things to Consider When Making
Online Purchases
•
Check seals of approval links to verify
merchants’ authenticity (e.g., TrustE,
BBBOnline, BizRate, etc.);
•
Call companies on the phone to judge
their legitimacy;
•
Read privacy policies;
•
Verify electronic security protocols;
•
Know what a merchant will do with your
personal information;
•
Know how to tell when a transaction gets
encrypted (i.e., before you enter a credit
card or personal information, look for
“https” instead of “http” in the address
bar and for the “lock” icon at the bot-
tom of your browser; and
•
Check you monthly statements for trans-
actions that don’t look familiar.

C H A P T E R  9
209
Online Activities to Avoid
•
Auctions;
•
Financial transactions (trading, banking,
applying for loans, including mortgages,
obtaining insurance quotes or other in-
formation that requires personal infor-
mation);
•
Chat rooms; and
•
Online retail or other purchasing.
If you or someone in your family uses Instant Mes-
saging (IM), understand that you pay a price for the
convenience of this service: it’s not private or pro-
tected. Let your family know that if anyone wants to
send an e-mail containing private information, that
it’s best to use a regular e-mail account and encrypt
the message.
Chat rooms are another place where personal infor-
mation can get out. Online chats provide an arena
for a countless number of listeners.
Caution any IM or chat room users in your family to
avoid sending any messages that contain private or
personally sensitive information.
Resisting all forms of online commerce is the safest
way to go…but probably an impractical one today.
If you cannot resist purchasing online, consider using

210
L I F E S T Y L E  C H A N G E S
online cash equivalents like PayPal instead of using a
credit card.
O T H E R  P O I N T S  O F  A C C E S S
There are two other vulnerable spots when it comes
to your personal information: online job boards and
mortgages.
If you use the major job boards, you should know
that those who get access to résumés may also in-
clude people bent on identity theft and fraud. And
corporate job sites, which are considered safe by many,
may not be much safer. Don’t forget to safeguard
your most private information when filling out those
online job forms and posting your résumé.
Create a résumé you use for online posting, and one
for person-to-person contact. When you create your
“e-résumé,” be as vague as possible. Avoid using
your SSN, date of birth, full name of current em-
ployers, past employers or their actual titles.
You can still get a potential employer interested in
you without revealing too much personal informa-
tion.
Mortgage applications, like résumés, can also contain
the raw materials for opening false accounts and ob-
taining fake identity cards. Few documents contain as
much personal information as a loan application—
names, addresses, phone numbers, birth dates, SSNs,
bank account records, employment histories and per-

C H A P T E R  9
211
haps tax return information. If you just refinanced
your home and you read in the paper that your mort-
gage firm was robbed of its computers, you have
something to worry about.
Mortgage firms, banks, brokerages, utilities, mer-
chants and others all hold sensitive personal infor-
mation. While businesses try to safeguard this data,
it’s impossible to plug all leaks.
So, as a consumer concerned about the information
these companies hold, don’t be afraid to ask about
how they make sure those documents are secure and
won’t end up in the wrong hand. Work with an es-
tablished, trusted company. Don’t work with a start-
up boutique mortgage firm you know nothing
about.
T E L E M A R K E T I N G  
F R A U D
We’ve all been haggled into staying on the phone
longer than necessary to say “No” to a telemarketer,
even a legitimate one. But ID theft schemes have also
come through crafty telemarketers who not only get
you to stay on the phone longer than you want, but
they manage to get you to say “Yes” and pass over
private information. You might be giving them the
information freely just because you’re sick and tired
of being on the phone and you don’t know how to
hang up.
When you’re fed up with a telemarketer on the other
end of the line, never hesitate to hang up—right in

212
L I F E S T Y L E  C H A N G E S
the middle of their pitch. Take extra precaution when
dealing with a telemarketer with the following char-
acteristics:
•
High-pressure sales tactics.
•
Insistence on an immediate decision.
•
The offer sounds too good to be true.
•
A request for your credit card number
for any purpose other than to make a
purchase.
•
An offer to send someone to your home
or office to pick up the money, or some
other method such as overnight mail to
get your funds more quickly.
•
A statement that something is “free,” fol-
lowed by a requirement that you pay for
something.
•
An investment that is “without risk.”
•
Unwillingness to provide written infor-
mation or references (such as a bank or
names of satisfied customers in your area)
that you can contact.
•
A suggestion that you should make a pur-
chase or investment on the basis of
“trust.”
•
Unwillingness to provide a phone num-
ber or legitimate business address.
Never allow yourself to be bullied into a hurried de-
cision. When in doubt, hang up! To avoid junk mail
and telemarketing calls, you can write to direct mar-
keting associations and request that your name be

C H A P T E R  9
213
removed from any junk mail lists. Be aware that al-
most every time you call an 800, 888 or 900 number,
your name and address are captured by the company
you dialed. This information becomes part of your
electronic profile.
P D A S  A N D  O T H E R  E L E C T R O N I C
D E V I C E S
The world has gone wireless and that means conve-
nience on one level, and a security nightmare on an-
other.
•
Wireless technology can quickly connect
computers and broadcast every bit of
transmitted information in the meanwhile
to anyone with a computer and a $40
wireless networking card. So, a man with
a hand-held PDA can walk down a busy
street in Manhattan and tap into your
computer four floors up a nearby build-
ing, or while you’re drinking a latté in the
nearby coffee shop, working on your
laptop.
•
There are dozens of ways to use these
wireless programs on wireless hardware
to snatch someone else’s Internet access,
IDs, passwords…and peep into the pri-
vate affairs of individuals and businesses.
Because wireless technology relies on radio signals, a
walk-by hacker can reach not only an intended target,
but any compatible equipment within a several-hun-
dred-foot radius.

214
L I F E S T Y L E  C H A N G E S
You want to safeguard the information you store on
any hand-held device—your Palm Pilot, BlackBerry,
PocketPC and the like—from hackers, loss or theft.
Products are finally emerging on the market that safe-
guard such information, as PDAs are being loaded
with increasingly sensitive information—patient
records, contact lists, price sheets, financial records
and other proprietary information. These applications
work on a wide range of devices with multiple layers
of security. Users must enter a password to access
encrypted data. If you try several times and fail to log
on within a given time, the device will dump its files.
Any safeguards loaded onto a PDA cannot be turned
off by an individual user. Hewlett-Packard, for ex-
ample, is preparing a series of iPaq PDAs with a built-
in fingerprint scanner and wireless LAN support that
will make its PDAs more secure than earlier versions.
Tips for users of wireless technology or PDAs:
•
Avoid using a wireless network when
in close proximity to insecure areas where
strangers can access your data; this could
be in parks, arenas, airports, offices, street
corners, coffeehouses, public transpor-
tation or any heavily-trafficked public
area.
•
Think about limiting your wireless net-
work to home use (unless you have curi-
ous neighbors!)
•
Consider purchasing applications for
your PDA that will safeguard the infor-
mation you carry on it.
•
Do your homework before making any
purchases; don’t sacrifice personal secu-
rity for dollars.

C H A P T E R  9
215
D A I L Y  D E A L I N G S
Protecting your identity is a daily practice. Shred mail
that contains your information, and that is headed for
the trash can. Re-evaluate how many credit cards
you need and consolidate them down to as few as
possible. If you have any that you don’t use, which
have open lines of credit, get rid of them.
It’s time to organize your records and financial mat-
ters. Keep your critical documents (deeds, titles, in-
surance papers, Social Security card, health informa-
tion, military discharge documents, mortgage docu-
ments, investment documents, etc. ) in one place and
secure. Think about using a safety deposit box or at
least a fireproof box at home to store the informa-
tion safely.
Don’t give away private information at events that
gather lots of people, strangers included (e.g., wed-
dings, large parties, awards ceremonies, holiday
gatherings, graduations, etc.) You’d be surprised
by the number of unscrupulous people who like to
hang out at such events (or work them).
Pay attention to opportunities for people to take ad-
vantage of your information. Reduce your chances
of becoming a victim by thinking ahead and mak-
ing plans accordingly. If, for example, you plan to hit
the town and go on a pub crawl with your friends
until 4 A.M., leave your wallet at home and carry only
one form of ID (a license) and cash. Avoid carrying
credit cards that you’ll leave, among other important
things, in a bar, taxi cab or the middle of the street.

216
L I F E S T Y L E  C H A N G E S
C O N C L U S I O N
Think about your privacy every day. You make mul-
tiple transactions every day and allow access to your
personal information unknowingly more than you’d
like to think. This chapter gave you some of the
lifestyle changes you need to make to secure your
personal identity. None of these changes can guaran-
tee that your identity is safe from abuse. But com-
bined, these practices will give you a suit of armor
that might deflect a potential thief to another, more
vulnerable person.
Coming up, you’ll learn how to survive a stolen iden-
tity once it has occurred. There’s a lot you can do to
avoid a stolen ID, but there’s more to do once it has
happened and you have to clean up the mess. In Chap-
ter 10, you’ll read about dealing with government agen-
cies, law enforcement, the credit bureaus, credit card
companies, banks, DMV, etc. Dealing with an ID theft
is a tough and long process. And it’s best to know
what to do before it happens. Just in case….

C H A P T E R  1 0
217
CHAPTER
HOW TO SURVIVE
YOUR STOLEN ID
10
You know how to prevent an ID theft from occur-
ring—or at least lower your risk of ID theft. But
nothing can guarantee that it won’t happen to you, so
knowing how to deal with a theft once it has oc-
curred is important. It could be a simple theft of
someone joyriding with your credit card or it could
be a serious theft involving thousands of dollars, drugs,
crime, violence and perhaps terrorists.
You may not even know how the criminal got your
information. Worry less about the point of entry when
you discover a problem, and focus your attention on
cleaning up the mess. In this chapter, you’ll get step-
by-step advice for what to do the moment you real-
ize someone is impersonating you.
Credit card companies are making so much money
that they encourage banks to give out accounts,
mail cards to everybody and give cards away in
malls. They assume that consumers will accept the
fraud as the cost of doing business. They don’t re-
ally look at the cost to the actual victim, you.

218
H O W  T O  S U R V I V E  Y O U R  S T O L E N  I D
According to one PIRG study, the average identity
theft victim spends over two years and at least $800
out of pocket, trying to recover from ID theft.
S T E P  O N E :  G E T  O N  T H E  P H O N E
Contact the fraud department at each of the major
three credit bureaus. Inform them of the basis of
your concern and ask them to “flag” your file. A
flagged file means creditors will have to get your ap-
proval before any new account is opened in your
name or a change is made to an account.
Confirm your conversation in writing by sending a
letter to each credit bureau stating whom you spoke
to, when, what was discussed and any promises of
follow-up action made by you.
Be clear in your letters about the specific outcome
you want, whether it’s a deletion or a correction. In-
clude a copy of the credit report with the disputed
item(s) circled or highlighted, as well as a factual ex-
planation for why you’re disputing each item.
If you’re questioning a debt listing, include in your
letter a request for copies of any proof that you owe
the debt, such as a signed contract or registered
note. List the account number and, if possible, in-
clude copies of bills and/or payment stubs that prove
you’re in the right.

C H A P T E R  1 0
219
Make copies of your letters and send copies; keep
originals. Send letters via registered or certified mail
with return receipt requested. Keep a log of your
conversations and retain copies of all correspon-
dence.
Obtain a copy of your credit report from each of
the three credit bureaus. (See pages 185-186 in Chap-
ter 8 for this information.) Review each report for
peculiar activity; close any account that has been opened
in your name that you did not authorize. When you
place a fraud alert on your record, ask each credit
bureau how long the flag will remain on your file—
and when you’d need to renew it. Each bureau works
differently. The hotlines for each bureau are:
•
Equifax’s (www.equifax.com) hotline:
(800) 525-6285.
•
Experian’s (www.experian.com) hotline:
(888) 397-3742.
•
TransUnion’s (www.tuc.com) hotline:
(800) 680-7289; fax: (714) 447-6034.
Contact creditors for accounts that have been tar-
nished or opened fraudulently. Speak to the security
or fraud investigations department, and follow-up
every phone call with a letter in writing.
You may also want to make a notarized affidavit
of fraud. This is simply a letter that you write—de-
scribing the dates, types and amounts of bogus
charges—and have notarized as coming from you. A
notarized affidavit of fraud can be used effectively in
most legal proceedings—if such proceedings do hap-
pen.

220
H O W  T O  S U R V I V E  Y O U R  S T O L E N  I D
Close compromised accounts and stop payment, if
necessary. Use different personal identification num-
bers (PINs) and passwords to open new accounts.
Notify your bank(s) of the theft. Cancel your check-
ing and savings accounts, and open new ones with
new numbers and passwords, etc. Obtain new ATM
cards with new passwords. Ask the bank to issue you
a secret password that must be used in every transac-
tion. Put stop payments out on any outstanding checks
that you are unsure of.
Report stolen checks and fraudulent bank activity to
Telecheck and the National Processing Company
(NPC). These companies will flag your file so that
bogus checks will be turned down. Call Telecheck at
(800) 366-2425. Call NPC at (800) 526-5380.
Notify the Social Security Administration’s Office of
the Inspector General if your Social Security number
has been used fraudulently.
General Number of SSA: (800) 772-1213.
SSA Fraud Hotline, P.O. Box 17768,
Baltimore MD 21235.
Fax: (410) 597-0118.
Call: (800) 269-0271.
TTY: (866) 501-2101.

C H A P T E R  1 0
221
If your number has become associated with bad
checks and credit, you may want to have your num-
ber changed…but this should only be considered
during extreme situations. You must notify all credit
grantors and credit reporting bureaus of your new
SSN. A new SSN may not resolve your identity
theft problems, and may actually create new prob-
lems. For example, a new SSN does not necessarily
ensure a new credit record because credit bureaus
may combine the credit records from your old SSN
with those from your new SSN. Even when the old
credit information is not associated with your new
SSN, the absence of any credit history under your
new SSN may make it more difficult for you to get
credit. There’s no guarantee that a new SSN wouldn’t
also be misused by an identity thief.
Other places to call:
•
Notify the Passport Office to be on the
lookout for anyone ordering a new pass-
port fraudulently (877) 4USA-PPT; 1-
877-487-2778; TDD/TTY: 1-888-874-
7793);
•
Call your telephone, electric, gas and
water companies and warn them that
someone might attempt to open new
service using your identification;
•
File a complaint with the police where
the theft took place;
•
File a complaint with the U.S. Postal Ser-
vice if personal mail was stolen (see
Chapter 11);

222
H O W  T O  S U R V I V E  Y O U R  S T O L E N  I D
•
If your identity was used to get a driver’s
license, visit your local DMV office to
get a new license number. Also, if your
state uses your SSN as your driver’s li-
cense number, ask to substitute another
number; and
•
Contact the FTC to file a complaint. Fill
out an online ID theft complaint (at
www.consumer.gov/idtheft), or call the ID
theft hotline at (877) ID-THEFT (438-
4338). You can also do this by mail: Iden-
tity Theft Clearinghouse, Federal Trade
Commission, 600 Pennsylvania Avenue,
NW, Washington, D.C. 20580.
•
Seek legal council if you have a prob-
lem getting creditors or credit reporting
agencies to remove fraudulent entries. The
FTC offers a sample dispute letter on its
Web site. Disputes may require a sworn
statement and a police report. For a form
affidavit that can be used for the sworn
statement, go to www.consumer.gov/idtheft/
affidavit.htm.
If a thief has established new phone or wireless ser-
vice in your name and is making unauthorized calls
that appear to come from—and are billed to—your
cellular phone, or is using your calling card and PIN,
contact your service provider immediately to cancel
the account and calling card. Get new accounts and
new PINs.
K E E P I N G  A  P A P E R  T R A I L
Keep copies of all complaints, letters and correspon-
dence. Maintain meticulous logs of your conversa-

C H A P T E R  1 0
223
tions and correspondence, including dates and names.
When you file the police report, don’t forget to get a
copy of that, too. Your creditors might ask for that
as proof of the crime.
Be polite but persistent when pursuing the clean-
up. Discuss your situation with trusted friends and
perhaps seek the advice and support from a coun-
selor or victim rights organization. Contacting your
local Consumer Credit Counseling Service office might
expedite removal of fraudulent claims from your
credit report. Call (800) 388-2227 for a list of of-
fices.
Make sure you get copies of all documentation from
all three major credit bureaus. Why? Because even
though the three bureaus are similar, they will not have
identical information. That’s why you should buy one
report from each instead of paying $30-plus for a
merged or combination report of all three.
Merged credit reports are harder to read than the
individual ones. The real estate industry is the only
one that uses a merged report, so if you have to
dispute an item or items on your report, you’ll want
the individual ones.
You’ll need an individual report if you plan to dis-
pute a listed item.

224
H O W  T O  S U R V I V E  Y O U R  S T O L E N  I D
I F  L O C A L  L A W  E N F O R C E M E N T  F A I L S
One of the hardest parts to dealing with identity theft
is getting anyone to help you quickly. Calling the
credit bureaus, your bank and creditors won’t fix the
problem immediately. It’s like getting into a car acci-
dent. Even if the accident wasn’t your fault, once you
file the claim with your insurance company, it usually
takes months—years, even—to get results. You won’t
see a resolution in 24 hours or a check in your name
at the end of the day. And you won’t get “pain and
suffering” damages when all is said and done.
Because the laws regarding identity theft lack defini-
tion and the nature of the crime requires a multi-juris-
dictional collaboration, you might find it challenging
to get local law enforcement to do anything effectively.
You’ll need a police report to dispute unauthorized
charges and for any insurance claims. Your police
department may say this is unnecessary (they usu-
ally do because they don’t want the paperwork).
Always fill out a police report as soon as you have
proof of bogus credit card charges or other evi-
dence of ID theft.
Although the Secret Service has jurisdiction over fi-
nancial fraud cases, it’s hard for an individual to get
the federal agency’s attention unless the dollar amount
is significant. If you want their attention, ask some-
one in the fraud department of your credit card com-
panies and/or banks to notify the particular Secret
Service agent with whom they work.

C H A P T E R  1 0
225
T H E  W A I T I N G  G A M E
Waiting for results can be tiring. Once you’ve disputed
an item on your credit report, the law says the credit
agencies have 30 days to respond whether or not
the disputed item is correct. If you don’t get any re-
sponse within that time frame, then all disputed items
must be removed. Most likely you’ll hear from the
credit bureau within those 30 days.
The bureaus’ replies should include a new copy of
your credit report and a cover letter explaining the
results of its investigation into your disputed
item(s). Disputed items will often be listed as “veri-
fied no change,” “deleted” or the report will con-
tain some updated information.
Deletions are good since those items will no longer
haunt your credit. Updated information is also good,
since these are usually corrected names, addresses or
other possible late-status info.
Verified items are still part of your file. If you still
think the item is wrong, try contacting the original
creditor who placed the listing.
If the report says an item is “unverified,” then by law
it must be removed from your file. Send a copy of
this along with a letter requesting the unverified item
be deleted. The credit bureau must make the change
you requested and notify anyone who received a credit
report containing that unverified item.

226
H O W  T O  S U R V I V E  Y O U R  S T O L E N  I D
By the way, sometimes items are later verified and
put back on your file. Just remember that items can-
not be reinserted on your report unless the credit bu-
reau notifies you in writing.
If a reinvestigation doesn’t eliminate a disputed item,
you can file a statement of up to 100 words ex-
plaining your side of the story. Credit bureaus must
include this explanation in your report any time they
send it out.
C R E D I T  R E P A I R  S E R V I C E
If you’ve got an extreme case of identity theft and
you can’t get the credit bureaus to remove the dis-
puted items from your report, you might have to
resort to a credit repair service for more help.
Beware: Use credit repair shops with caution. Many
will falsely guarantee things or make too-good-to-
be-true statements. Credit repair shops cannot guar-
antee to clean your record…but they can guarantee
to raise your credit score.
Adding insult to injury, some ID thieves set up bogus
credit repair operations as a pretext for getting ID
information of inattentive people. To avoid the scam
artist working in the credit repair shop, consider these
tips:
•
Look around for repair shops that are
established and offer reasonable rates that
aren’t dirt cheap or ridiculously expen-
sive.

C H A P T E R  1 0
227
•
Check with the Better Business Bureau
or local Chamber of Commerce to get
histories and accreditations.
•
Before you hire a credit repair service,
read their contracts carefully and ask
about refunds.
Typically, a credit repair service will cost you $500.
This may seem like a lot of money, but it might be a
good investment if it cleans up errors and allows you
to apply for lower-interest loans and lines of credit.
If you do go with a credit repair service, you should
not apply for credit until the company’s work is com-
pleted. And, again, don’t expect a perfect ending.
Remember: Whether you fight the battle yourself or
get professional help, you can wipe out errors from
your credit report. Disputing wrong information is
just one of the many ways you can take control of
your financial future.
One of the most common things a shady credit re-
pair company will do is bombard the credit report-
ing companies with disputes about items on an
individual’s credit report with the hope that the credit
reporting companies will be too overwhelmed to
confirm all items within 30 days, and will then tem-
porarily remove negative items from the consumer’s
credit report. This won’t fix your report in the long
run, since any verified item will come back.
Another thing to watch out for: credit repair shops
that encourage you to create a “new” credit report or

228
H O W  T O  S U R V I V E  Y O U R  S T O L E N  I D
identity by applying for an employer identification
number to use instead of your Social Security num-
ber. Obtaining an EIN, which is used primarily by
businesses, under false pretenses is a crime. If you’re
fighting an identity theft case, the last thing you want
is to do something illegal in cleaning up after some-
one else’s criminal behavior.
C R E D I T  W A T C H  S E R V I C E S
We talked about all the new services offered by credit
card companies, credit bureaus and insurance com-
panies to monitor your credit. Although most of these
services can cost—upwards of $120 a year—it might
be worth it for you to have, especially if you don’t
know whether the person who has already stolen your
identity once won’t do it again.
Credit watch services won’t do much that you can’t
do on your own. What these services offer is a help-
ing hand through the credit bureaucracy. The FTC
will take a report of the identity theft, notify law-
enforcement officials and offer advice, but it won’t
resolve the problems a thief leaves behind.
If you didn’t have insurance to help cover the ex-
pense incurred by fixing an ID theft problem, con-
sider getting some. Call your homeowners or rent-
ers insurance company to inquire about adding a
rider or purchasing a stand alone policy. But be care-
ful: you might already have some coverage on your
policy. And, you should not have to pay more for the
security you should already be getting automatically

C H A P T E R  1 0
229
from your credit bureaus and credit card companies.
Maybe it’s time to evaluate the kinds of cards you
carry in your wallet, and the kind of service you get
when you call those toll-free numbers for help.
When battling the credit card agencies to erase credit
they gave out to someone impersonating you, re-
quest a “letter of clearance” that you can use to
send to collection agencies. And when you do, send
it certified mail, return receipt requested, and keep
a copy for your files.
D O N ’ T  F O R G E T  T H E  L A W S
Starting in Chapter 6 we took a look at the laws and
agencies that are available to help you when you be-
come a victim of identity theft. Don’t forget about
your rights and options. Federal laws mandate pro-
cedures for correcting credit report and billing errors
and for stopping debt collectors from dunning you
for sums you do not owe. The Truth in Lending
Act limits your liability for unauthorized credit card
charges to $50 per card in most cases. The Fair Credit
Billing Act establishes procedures for resolving billing
errors on your credit card accounts, including fraudu-
lent charges.
If someone steals your checks and forges your signa-
ture, there are no federal statutes that limit your losses,
but state laws offer some protection. Most states hold
the bank responsible for losses from a forged
check—provided that you have taken reasonable care

230
H O W  T O  S U R V I V E  Y O U R  S T O L E N  I D
of your account and you notify the bank promptly
that a check was lost or stolen
The Fair Credit Reporting Act establishes procedures
for correcting mistakes on your credit records and
requires that access to your records be limited to people
who have a permissible purpose.
Remember: If you file a claim with a credit bureau
stating that your records are inaccurate, the credit
bureau must investigate it in a timely manner, usu-
ally within 30 days. It must delete from your file
any disputed information that cannot be verified
and must also correct erroneous information.
Even though the law gives you important protections
and rights, the old proverb still holds: An ounce of
prevention is worth a pound of cure.
F I G H T I N G  B A C K
One summer day, Jerad Rose, from Louisville, Ken-
tucky, bought computer equipment from an online
merchant. Three days later, while checking his bank
statement online, he discovered an unauthorized pur-
chase for $825. Rose immediately paid a visit to his
bank and canceled his card. But it was too late. Within
a few days, 14 purchases, totaling more than $1,600,
had been charged to his account. Rose had broken
one of the most important online rules: he’d used
his debit card. So the criminal had access to his bank
account, leaving his checking account overdrawn.

C H A P T E R  1 0
231
Rather than let his bank handle the matter, Rose called
each of the online merchants where illegal purchases
were made and explained his problem. Together, Rose
and the vendors were able to trace the computer
from which the order came, confirming that it wasn’t
from his computer. The result? He prevented more
than $1,100 in sophisticated camera equipment from
being shipped to an unknown person in Indonesia.
Rose’s experience—and his persistence in getting to
the bottom of his problem—is a lesson to all: You
must become a savvy, aggressive consumer and
take matters into your own hands. While it’s impor-
tant to get your identity mess cleared up, it’s also
important and useful to get an explanation as to
when, where and how the fraud occurred.
Jill Maggio’s experience is yet another example of
what fighting back can do. One day, a man entered
her San Jose cellular shop and asked for four phones
for his business. He showed Maggio his company
Web site and, after clearing his credit check, he paid
the $719 bill with a company check.
But the company wasn’t his…and the check was coun-
terfeit. Maggio didn’t simply pick up the phone and
notify police or cancel the man’s Nextel’s service, how-
ever. Instead, she got crafty and had the man’s
voicemail service rerouted to her. She recorded his
messages and sometimes spoke with his callers. When
she had enough ammo (i.e., people the police could
actually contact), she turned it all over to the San Jose

232
H O W  T O  S U R V I V E  Y O U R  S T O L E N  I D
police. After 20 years in the business, Maggio wasn’t
about to let her first counterfeit scam go unpunished.
Authorities eventually arrested the man responsible,
Julian Antonio Torres of San Mateo. He was part of
a Bay Area crime ring that stole mail from posh homes
in San Francisco, Woodside and elsewhere, then used
the credit cards and bank accounts to buy luxury ho-
tel rooms, fancy sports cars, motorcycles, laptops and
other electronic gadgets.
S O F T W A R E  F O R  V I C T I M S
Alongside the growing ID theft problem is an ex-
panding market for products that help consumers
manage the clean-up process. Identity Restoration, Inc.,
for example, has introduced a software program—
IDentity SecurityNet—that helps victims repair their
damaged names and prevent future damage.
Such programs can walk you through the process of
clearing your name and credit by organizing and
tracking vital information.
User-friendly computer programs that guide you
through the difficult process of completing letters and
forms, providing a complete report for law enforce-
ment, and taking measures to prevent theft can help
remove some of the frustration out of damage
control. Particularly useful of these programs is their
ability to link you to the places you need to go: the
Social Security Administration, law enforcement agen-
cies, credit card companies, credit reporting agencies,

C H A P T E R  1 0
233
banks and financial institutions…and various govern-
ment agencies. Further, you can access Web sites that
answer questions about privacy and personal security.
A note about services and programs: There’s nothing
wrong with paying someone to help you navigate the
clean-up process once your identity has been stolen.
But know what your limits are for shoveling money
out for expensive programs, access to 24-hour ID
theft hotlines and credit watches. The great majority
of ID theft prevention and management (i.e., clean-
up) is free. For example, it doesn’t cost money to
notify the credit card companies and Social Security
Administration of your theft…but you could pay
someone to help you do that.
Cleaning up the leftover mess from an ID theft will
cost you in time, energy, postage (for the letters
you send) and perhaps the help of an attorney in
dire situations (e.g., you’ve been arrested falsely
and need to get out of jail). What you decide to
spend on extra help getting back on track is up to
you.
Keeping alert is one of the most important things
to do post-theft. The problems often don’t end with
phone calls and follow-up letters—particularly if the
thief is still at large and still using your identity. For
some, paying for a service or program that keeps
you tuned in to the ongoing problem is worth the
money.

234
H O W  T O  S U R V I V E  Y O U R  S T O L E N  I D
C O N C L U S I O N
Besides the frustration you must endure once your
identity has been stolen and abused, there’s a lot to be
said about the other emotions that accompany the
crime: anger, embarrassment and disbelief. You can-
not keep the issue a secret or think that it will take
care of itself in a short time. Identity theft often af-
fects the people around you, too—your friends, your
family and even your business colleagues.
Falling victim to any crime is life-changing. It’s not an
experience anyone should go through alone. Talk to
your family, friends and business contacts about your
problem and what you are doing to fix it. It might
make you feel better knowing there are people to
support you. They will most likely want to help in
some way, which they can do by simply watching out
for you and keeping your head up.
When someone runs off with your ID, don’t sit and
ponder where you went wrong or where you goofed
and let a thief walk into your shoes. Focus, instead, on
the problem. Once you make those initial phone calls
to the Feds, police, credit agencies and bureaus, call
your friends and family to let them know. There’s noth-
ing to be embarrassed about. As this book has shown,
ID thieves don’t discriminate. They fool stupid
people as well as sharp people; they can dupe a young,
old, rich or poor person. ID theft can happen to any-
body.
In the next and final chapter, you’ll find a checklist of
things to do before, during and after someone has
stolen your identity. These are good checklists to have
when you need a quick refresher course on this com-
plex and deepening problem.

C H A P T E R  1 1
235
CHAPTER
CHECKLISTS &
CONTACTS
11
The following chapter is a collection of checklists
to refer to when dealing with identity theft. Some of
this information was adapted from the FTC’s Web
site at www.ftc.gov, which is a great source of informa-
tion, links and advice. The site contains sample dis-
pute letters and an affidavit you should fill out when
you suspect someone has illegally used your ID. Re-
member: Identity theft often involves crimes com-
mitted across state lines and requires multi-jurisdic-
tional cooperation. You’ll have to contact many places
in the clean-up process.
V I C T I M ’ S  O V E R A L L  G O A L S
•
Close fraudulent accounts;
•
Clear yourself of responsibility for any
debts or other criminal activities the thief
has perpetrated in your name;
•
Ensure that your credit report is correct;
and
•
Find out as much information about the
suspect as you can so you can share that
information with the police and the FTC.

236
C H E C K L I S T S  &  C O N T A C T S
O R G A N I Z A T I O N
Start with phone calls, but follow each and every call
with a letter in writing. Use certified mail, return re-
ceipt requested.
•
Keep copies of all correspondence or
forms you send. Send copies, keep origi-
nals.
•
Log every phone call with names, num-
bers, details of the conversation, what
you were told, and the date of the con-
versation. Consider setting up a folder
on your computer to handle the logging
of information. You can use a spread-
sheet or a word processor—unless you
have already purchased a program that
simplifies the process—to organize the
information in a quickly retrievable man-
ner.
•
Set up a filing system for easy access to
your paperwork.
•
Keep old files even if you think your
case is closed. Although most cases once
resolved, stay resolved, in some cases,
problems can crop up again. Should this
happen, you’ll be glad you kept your files.
I M M E D I A T E  C A L L S  T O  M A K E
•
Call the toll-free fraud number of any
one of the three major credit bureaus to
place a fraud alert on your credit re-

C H A P T E R  1 1
237
port. This can help prevent an identity
thief from opening additional accounts
in your name.
•
When you receive your reports, review
them carefully to make sure no fraudu-
lent accounts have been opened in your
name or unauthorized changes made to
your existing accounts.
•
Contact the creditors (for example,
credit card companies, phone compa-
nies and other utilities and banks and other
lenders) to close any accounts that have
been tampered with or opened fraudu-
lently. Ask to speak with someone in the
security or fraud department of each
creditor. It’s particularly important to
notify credit card companies in writing.
•
File a report with your local police. Get
a copy of the police report in case the
creditors, credit bureaus or others need
proof of the crime.
•
File a complaint with the FTC.
C O M P U T E R  
P R O T E C T I O N S
The World Wide Web opens many doors, both for
you to the outside world, and for others looking to
come into your home via your home computer. As
much as a personal tool the Web can be, it can also be
a key for others to use to access your personal infor-
mation. Take action to help safeguard your personal
computer from myriad things: damage or misap-

238
C H E C K L I S T S  &  C O N T A C T S
propriation of your software and data; viruses; ob-
jectionable content; intruders contacting your children,
etc. There’s a lot to protect when it comes to your
computer and several things you can do to minimize
unwelcome consequences to your privacy and com-
puter security. Because a lot of ID theft is perpetu-
ated by computers and the Internet, securing your
computer is key. To assess your risks, ask yourself:
•
What is your computer used for?
•
Who has access to your computer?
•
What kind of Internet connection ser-
vice do you have? (cable? DSL?)
•
How often is your computer online as
opposed to offline?
•
What sort of security features do you
have on your computer? Firewall? Con-
tent advisor settings? Anti-viral software?
•
What kind of sites are your users visiting
when on the Web?
•
What kinds of transactions are taking
place on your home computer?
•
What are your children doing on the
Internet? Do they have unsupervised ac-
cess?

C H A P T E R  1 1
239
W H E N  M A K I N G  O N L I N E  P U R C H A S E S
•
Check seals of approval links to verify
merchants’ authenticity (e.g., TrustE,
BBBOnline, BizRate, etc.);
•
Call companies on the phone to judge
their legitimacy;
•
Read privacy policies;
•
Verify electronic security protocols;
•
Know what a merchant will do with your
personal information;
•
Know how to tell when a transactions
gets encrypted (i.e., before you enter a
credit card or personal information, look
for “https” instead of “http” in the ad-
dress bar and for the lock icon at the
bottom of your browser; and
•
Check you monthly statements for trans-
actions that don’t look familiar.
T H E  R E D  F L A G S
Mail: Your mailbox—filled with incoming or out-
going mail—is an easy target. Watch out for missing
bills or bank statements. Check washing is another
method; a thief can wash out the ink on a signed
check, change the amount and rewrite the check to
himself. Watch out for those pre-approved credit cards
that come in the mail, too.

240
C H E C K L I S T S  &  C O N T A C T S
Fraudulent change of address: A thief can fill out
a change-of-address form at the post office or with
the victim’s credit card company so the mail and bills
get redirected to the thief’s address or mail drop.
Trash cans and dumpsters: Business and building
dumpsters are attractive items to thieves looking for
discarded letters with business and customer account
information. A thief can disguise himself as a home-
less person digging through garbage.
Onlookers: Whenever you expose your ATM or call-
ing card in a public place, someone might be looking.
They might even look from afar with the help of
binoculars, camcorders or a zooming camera.
Lost or stolen purse or wallet: This is when keep-
ing certain things like your Social Security card and
health insurance card (which often bears your SSN)
out of your purse is key.
Inside jobs: An employee of a business might ille-
gally retrieve information that a business has collected
for legitimate reasons. An entry-level employee at a
financial institution, for example, might be able to
access others’ personal information, and sell it to iden-
tity thieves.
Internet: Personal Web pages are targets, and genea-
logical databases give thieves access to maiden names,
which are often used as passwords to bank accounts
and the like.
Skimmers: Thieves who carry skimmers, devices that
can read the magnetized strip from a credit card, bank
card for account numbers, balances, verification codes,

C H A P T E R  1 1
241
are hard to spot because they often work where you’re
using your card to make purchases. These thieves obtain
temporary work within restaurants, hotels and retail
stores where they capture and retain the information
from the card you hand over when making a pur-
chase.
Pretexting: You might be duped into giving up your
personal information over the phone with someone
who disguises himself as a representative with a reli-
able company that you use, like your phone com-
pany, local department store or cable company.
S I M P L E  P R E V E N T I V E  M E A S U R E S
•
Ask your employer to dispose of sen-
sitive, personal information and to se-
cure anything that cannot be destroyed.
•
Ask your employer to control access to
sensitive, personal information…and to
limit the use of your Social Security num-
ber in the workplace.
•
Buy a personal shredder and use it to
shred bank and credit card statements,
canceled checks and pre-approved of-
fers before throwing away.
•
Secure your mailbox with a locking
mechanism or use a door with a mail
slot.
•
Avoid leaving outgoing checks or paid
bills in your residential mailbox. Take all
mail to the post office or nearest U.S.
Mailbox. Consider paying bills electroni-
cally.

242
C H E C K L I S T S  &  C O N T A C T S
•
Check your credit report annually with
Experian, TransUnion or Equifax and
look for address changes and fraudulent
accounts.
•
Pick up re-ordered checks at your bank
instead of having them mailed to you.
•
Notify your credit card company if your
card has expired and you have not yet
received a replacement.
•
Clean your wallet out of excess infor-
mation. Do not carry your Social Secu-
rity card.
•
Check your bills carefully. Look for dis-
crepancies between your receipts and
statements. Open bills promptly and re-
port anything unchecked quickly.
•
When making purchases with a credit
card in public, keep your eyes on your
card, try to keep the numbers facing
down, and get it back as soon as pos-
sible.
•
Keep a record of your credit card in-
formation in a safe place.
•
Limit amount of information on the
Internet, including your home page or
Web sites that detail family genealogy.
•
Don’t give out personal information over
the phone unless you initiated the call and
know who you are calling.

C H A P T E R  1 1
243
T H E  B I G  T H R E E  C R E D I T  B U R E A U S
Equifax: www.equifax.com
•
To order your report, call: (800) 685-1111
or write: P.O. Box 740241, Atlanta, GA
30374-0241.
•
To report fraud, call: (800) 525-6285 and
write: P.O. Box 740241, Atlanta, GA
30374-0241.
•
Hearing impaired call (800) 255-0056
and ask the operator to call the Auto Dis-
closure Line at 1-800-685-1111 to re-
quest a copy of your report.
Experian: www.experian.com
•
To order your report, call: (888)
EXPERIAN (397-3742) or write: P.O.
Box 2002, Allen TX 75013.
•
To report fraud, call: (888) EXPERIAN
(397-3742) and write: P.O. Box 9530,
Allen TX 75013; TDD: 1-800-972-0322.
TransUnion: www.transunion.com
•
To order your report, call: (800) 888-4213
or write: P.O. Box 1000, Chester, PA
19022.
•
To report fraud, call: (800) 680-7289 and
write: Fraud Victim Assistance Division,
P.O. Box 6790, Fullerton, CA 92634;
TDD: 1-877-553-7803.

244
C H E C K L I S T S  &  C O N T A C T S
O T H E R  T I P S
•
Seek legal council if you have a prob-
lem getting creditors or credit reporting
agencies to remove fraudulent entries.
•
Use different personal identification num-
bers (PINs) and passwords to open a
new accounts.
•
Obtain new ATM cards with new pass-
words. Ask the bank to issue you a se-
cret password that must be used in ev-
ery transaction. Put stop payments out
on any outstanding checks that you are
unsure of.
•
Report stolen checks and fraudulent bank
activity to Telecheck and National Pro-
cessing Company (NPC). These compa-
nies will flag your file so that bogus
checks will be turned down. Call
TeleCheck: (800) 710-9898 or 927-0188.
Call NPC at (800) 526-5380. Call
Certegy, Inc. (previously Equifax Check
Systems) at (800) 437-5120.
•
To find out if the identity thief has been
passing bad checks in your name, call:
SCAN: (800) 262-7771.
•
Notify the Social Security Administration’s
Office of the Inspector General if your
Social Security number has been used
fraudulently. If your number has become
associated with bad checks and credit,
you may want to have your number
changed…but this should only be con-
sidered during extreme situations. You

C H A P T E R  1 1
245
must notify all credit grantors and credit
reporting bureaus of your new SSN.
•
Notify the Passport Office to be on
the lookout for anyone ordering a new
passport fraudulently.
•
Call your telephone, electric, gas and
water companies and warn them that
someone might attempt to open new
service using your identification (see be-
low).
•
File a complaint with the U.S. Postal Ser-
vice if personal mail was stolen (see be-
low).
•
Be polite but persistent when pursuing
the clean-up. Discuss your situation with
trusted friends and perhaps seek the ad-
vice and support from a counselor or
victim rights organization.
•
Contacting your local Consumer Credit
Counseling Service office might expe-
dite removal of fraudulent claims from
your credit report. Call (800) 388-2227.
If you’re having trouble getting your financial institu-
tion to help you resolve your banking-related identity
theft problems, including problems with bank-issued
credit cards, contact the agency with the appropriate
jurisdiction. If you’re not sure which of the agencies
listed below has jurisdiction over your institution, call
your bank or visit www.ffiec.gov/nic.htm and click
on “Institution Search.”

246
C H E C K L I S T S  &  C O N T A C T S
T H E  F D I C
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)
at www.fdic.gov supervises state-chartered banks that are
not members of the Federal Reserve System and in-
sures deposits at banks and savings and loans.
Call the FDIC Consumer Call Center at (800) 934-
3342; or write: Federal Deposit Insurance Corpora-
tion, Division of Compliance and Consumer Affairs,
550 17th Street, NW, Washington, D.C. 20429.
F E D E R A L  R E S E R V E
The Federal Reserve System (Fed) at www.federalreserve.gov
supervises state-chartered banks that are members of
the Federal Reserve System.
Call: (202) 452-3693; or write: Division of Consumer
and Community Affairs, Mail Stop 801, Federal Re-
serve Board, Washington, D.C. 20551; or contact the
Federal Reserve Bank in your area. The 12 Reserve
Banks are located in Boston, New York, Philadel-
phia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis,
Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas and San Francisco.
T H E  N C U A
The National Credit Union Administration (NCUA)
at www.ncua.gov charters and supervises federal credit
unions and insures deposits at federal credit unions
and many state credit unions.
Call: (703) 518-6360; or write: Compliance Officer,
National Credit Union Administration, 1775 Duke
Street, Alexandria, VA 22314.

C H A P T E R  1 1
247
T H E  O C C
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
(OCC) at www.occ.treas.gov charters and supervises na-
tional banks. If the word “national” appears in the
name of a bank, or the initials “N.A.” follow its name,
the OCC oversees its operations.
Call: (800) 613-6743 (business days 9:00 A.M. to 4:00
P.M. CST); fax: (713) 336-4301; write: Customer As-
sistance Group, 1301 McKinney Street, Suite 3710,
Houston, TX 77010.
T H E  O T S
The Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) at
www.ots.treas.gov is the primary regulator of all federal,
and many state-chartered, thrift institutions, which
include savings banks and savings and loan institu-
tions.
Call: (202) 906-6000; or write: Office of Thrift Su-
pervision, 1700 G Street, NW, Washington, D.C.
20552.
M A I L  F R A U D
•
The U.S. Postal Inspection Service
(USPIS) is the law enforcement arm of
the U.S. Postal Service and is responsible
for investigating cases of identity theft.
•
USPIS has primary jurisdiction in all
matters infringing on the integrity of the
U.S. mail.
•
If an identity thief has stolen your mail
to get new credit cards, bank or credit

248
C H E C K L I S T S  &  C O N T A C T S
card statements, pre-screened credit of-
fers or tax information, has falsified
change-of-address forms, or obtained
your personal information through a
fraud conducted by mail, report it to your
local postal inspector.
•
You can locate the USPIS district office
nearest you by calling your local post of-
fice or checking the list at www.usps.gov/
websites/depart/inspect.
B A N K R U P T C Y  
F R A U D
If you believe someone has filed for bankruptcy in
your name, write to the U.S. Trustee (UST) in the
region where the bankruptcy was filed.
A list of the U.S. Trustee Programs’ Regional Offices
is available on the UST Web site, or check the Blue
Pages of your phone book under “U.S. Government
Bankruptcy Administration.”
For more information, visit the Web site at
www.usdoj.gov/ust
I N V E S T M E N T  
F R A U D
The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission’s
(SEC) Office of Investor Education and Assis-
tance serves investors who complain to the SEC
about investment fraud or the mishandling of their
investments by securities professionals.

C H A P T E R  1 1
249
Additional investment fraud tips:
•
If you believe that an identity thief has
tampered with your securities investments
or a brokerage account, immediately re-
port it to your broker or account man-
ager and to the SEC.
•
You can file a complaint with the SEC
using the online complaint center at:
www.sec.gov/complaint.shtml.
•
Be sure to include as much detail as pos-
sible. If you don’t have access to the
Internet, you can write to the SEC at:
SEC Office of Investor Education and
Assistance, 450 Fifth Street, NW, Wash-
ington D.C., 20549-0213. For general
questions, call (202) 942-7040. For gen-
eral information: www.sec.gov.
P A S S P O R T  
F R A U D
If you’ve lost your passport or believe it was stolen,
or is being used fraudulently, contact the United States
Department of State (USDS) at www.travel.state.gov/
passport_services.html or call a local USDS field office.
Local field offices are listed in the Blue Pages of your
telephone directory.
P H O N E  F R A U D
If an identity thief has established phone service in
your name, is making unauthorized calls that seem to
come from—and are billed to—your cellular phone,

250
C H E C K L I S T S  &  C O N T A C T S
or is using your calling card and PIN, contact your
service provider immediately to cancel the account
and/or calling card. Other phone fraud tips:
•
Open new accounts and choose new
PINs. If you’re having trouble getting
fraudulent phone charges removed from
your account or getting an unauthorized
account closed, contact the appropriate
agency from the list below.
•
For local service, contact your state Pub-
lic Utility Commission, listed in the Blue
Pages of your telephone directory.
•
For cellular phones and long distance, con-
tact the Federal Communications Com-
mission (FCC; www.fcc.gov). The FCC regu-
lates interstate and international commu-
nications by radio, television, wire, satel-
lite and cable.
•
You can contact the FCC’s Consumer In-
formation Bureau to find out about in-
formation, forms, applications and cur-
rent issues before the FCC. Call: (888)
CALL-FCC; TTY: (888) TELL-FCC; or
write: Federal Communications Com-
mission, Consumer Information Bureau,
445 12th Street, SW, Room 5A863, Wash-
ington, D.C. 20554.
•
You can file complaints via the online
complaint form at www.fcc.gov/cgb/
complaints.html, or e-mail questions to
fccinfo@fcc.gov.

C H A P T E R  1 1
251
S T U D E N T  L O A N  F R A U D
Contact the school or program that opened the stu-
dent loan to close the loan. At the same time, report
the fraudulent loan to the U.S. Department of Edu-
cation.
•
Call:  Inspector General’s Hotline at (800)
MIS-USED
•
Online: www.ed.gov/offices/OIG/hotline.htm
•
Write:  Office of Inspector General; U.S.
Department of Education; 400 Mary-
land Avenue, SW; Washington, D.C.
20202-1510
T A X  F R A U D
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) (www.treas.gov/
irs/ci) is responsible for administering and enforcing
tax laws.
If you believe someone has assumed your identity to
file federal Income Tax Returns, or to commit other
tax fraud, call toll-free: (800) 829-0433.
Victims of identity theft who are having trouble filing
their returns should call the IRS Taxpayer Advocates
Office, toll-free: (877) 777-4778.
S S N  T H E F T  A N D  M I S U S E
The SSA’s Office of the Inspector General investi-
gates cases that involve the use of your SSN to fraudu-
lently obtain Social Security benefits.

252
C H E C K L I S T S  &  C O N T A C T S
The SSA Office also investigate cases that involve the
use of counterfeit SSN cards, the manufacturing or
selling of counterfeit SSN cards, the selling of legiti-
mate SSN cards or information, or the misuse of
SSNs linked to terrorist groups or activities. Tips for
SSN abuse:
•
Report any of these allegations to the SSA
Fraud Hotline. Call: (800) 269-0271; fax:
(410) 597-0118; write: SSA Fraud
Hotline, P.O. Box 17768, Baltimore, MD
21235; or e-mail: oig.hotline@ssa.gov.
•
You also can call SSA at (800) 772-1213
to verify the accuracy of the earnings re-
ported on your SSN, and to request a
copy of your Social Security Statement
or to get a replacement SSN card if
yours is lost or stolen. Follow up in writ-
ing.
•
For more information, visit their Web
site at www.ssa.gov/pubs/idtheft.htm.
A T M  F R A U D
The Electronic Fund Transfer Act provides con-
sumer protections for transactions involving an ATM
or debit card or other electronic way to debit or credit
an account. It also limits your liability for unautho-
rized electronic fund transfers. Other tips include:
•
Report lost or stolen ATM and debit
cards immediately because the amount
you can be held responsible for depends
on how quickly you report the loss.

C H A P T E R  1 1
253
•
If you report your ATM card lost or
stolen within two business days of dis-
covering the loss or theft, your losses are
limited to $50.
•
If you report your ATM card lost or
stolen after two business days, but within
60 days after a statement showing an un-
authorized electronic fund transfer, you
can be liable for up to $500 of what a
thief withdraws.
•
If you wait more than 60 days, you
could lose all the money that was taken
from your account after the end of the
60 days and before you report your card
missing.
•
The best way to protect yourself in the
event of an error or fraudulent transac-
tion is to call the financial institution and
follow up in writing by certified letter,
return receipt requested.
After receiving notification about an error on your
statement, the institution generally has 10 business
days to investigate. The financial institution must tell
you the results of its investigation within three busi-
ness days after completing the investigation and must
correct an error within one business day after deter-
mining that the error has occurred. If the institution
needs more time, it may take up to 45 days to com-
plete the investigation—but only if the money in dis-
pute is returned to your account and you are notified
promptly of the credit. At the end of the investiga-
tion, if no error has been found, the institution may
take the money back if it sends you a written expla-
nation.

254
C H E C K L I S T S  &  C O N T A C T S
•
VISA and MasterCard have voluntarily
agreed to limit consumers’ liability for
unauthorized use of their debit cards in
most instances to $50 per card, no mat-
ter how much time has elapsed since the
discovery of the loss or theft of the card.
C R I M I N A L  
V I O L A T I O N S
If you are accused wrongfully of a crime, contact the
arresting or citing law enforcement agency (i.e., the
police or sheriff’s department that originally arrested
the person using your identity, or the court agency
that issued the warrant for the arrest).
•
File an impersonation report to con-
firm your identity. The police department
may take a full set of your fingerprints
and your photograph, and make copies
of any photo identification documents
like your driver’s license, passport or visa.
They should compare the prints and pho-
tographs with those of the imposter to
establish your innocence.
•
If the arrest warrant is from a state or
county other than where you live, ask
your local police department to send the
impersonation report to the police de-
partment in the jurisdiction where the
arrest warrant, traffic citation or criminal
conviction originated.

C H A P T E R  1 1
255
The law enforcement agency should then recall any
warrants and issue a “clearance letter” or certificate
of release (if you were arrested/booked). Keep this
document with you at all times in case you’re wrongly
arrested. Also, ask the law enforcement agency to file,
with the district attorney’s (D.A.) office and/or court
where the crime took place, the record of the fol-
low-up investigation establishing your innocence. This
will result in an amended complaint being issued. Once
your name is recorded in a criminal database, it’s un-
likely that it will be completely removed from the
official record. Ask that the “key name,” or “primary
name,” be changed from your name to the imposter’s
name (or to “John Doe” if the imposter’s true iden-
tity is not known), with your name noted only as an
alias. Other things to do:
•
To clear your name in the court records,
you’ll need to determine which state
law(s) will help you do this and how. If
your state has no formal procedure for
clearing your record, contact the D.A.’s
office in the county where the case was
originally prosecuted. Ask the D.A.’s of-
fice for the appropriate court records
needed to clear your name.
•
Finally, contact your state DMV to find
out if your driver’s license is being used
by someone else. Ask that your files be
flagged for possible fraud.
•
If you think your name or SSN is being
used by an identity thief to get a driver’s
license or a non-driver’s ID, contact your
DMV. If your state uses your SSN as
your driver’s license number, ask to sub-
stitute another number.

256
C H E C K L I S T S  &  C O N T A C T S
L I N K S  T O  S T A T E  A N D  L O C A L
G O V E R N M E N T
National Conference of State Legislatures: www.ncsl.org
Alabama Attorney General: www.ago.state.al.us
Alaska Attorney General: www.law.state.ak.us
Arizona Attorney General: www.attorneygeneral.state.az.us
Phoenix Police Department: www.ci.phoenix.az.us/PO-
LICE/idthef1.html
Arkansas Attorney General: www.ag.state.ar.us
California Attorney General: caag.state.ca.us
California Office of Privacy Protection:
www.privacyprotection.ca.gov
California Department of Motor Vehicles: www.dmv.ca.gov
Colorado Attorney General: www.ago.state.co.us
Connecticut Attorney General: www.cslib.org/attygenl
Delaware Attorney General: www.state.de.us/attgen
District of Columbia Office of the Corporation
Counsel: occ.dc.gov/main.shtm
Florida Attorney General: legal.firn.edu
Georgia Attorney General: ganet.org/ago
Georgia Stop Identity Theft Network:
www.stopidentitytheft.org
Hawaii Attorney General: www.state.hi.us/ag/index.html

C H A P T E R  1 1
257
Idaho Attorney General: www2.state.id.us/ag
Illinois Attorney General: www.ag.state.il.us
Indiana Attorney General: www.in.gov
Iowa Attorney General: www.iowaattorneygeneral.org
Kansas Attorney General: www.accesskansas.org/ksag
Kentucky Attorney General: www.law.state.ky.us
Louisiana Attorney General: www.ag.state.la.us
Maine Attorney General: www.state.me.us/ag
Maryland Attorney General: www.oag.state.md.us
Massachusetts Attorney General: www.ago.state.ma.us
Michigan Attorney General: www.michigan.gov/ag
Minnesota Attorney General: www.ag.state.mn.us
Mississippi Attorney General: www.ago.state.ms.us
Missouri Attorney General: www.ago.state.mo.us
Montana Attorney General: doj.state.mt.us
Nebraska Attorney General: www.ago.state.ne.us
Nevada Attorney General: ag.state.nv.us
New Hampshire Attorney General: www.state.nh.us/nhdoj
New Jersey Attorney General: www.state.nj.us/lps
New Mexico Attorney General: www.ago.state.nm.us
New York Attorney General: www.oag.state.ny.us

258
C H E C K L I S T S  &  C O N T A C T S
North Carolina Attorney General: www.jus.state.nc.us
North Dakota Attorney General: www.ag.state.nd.us
Ohio Attorney General: www.ag.state.oh.us
Oklahoma Attorney General: www.oag.state.ok.us
Oregon Attorney General: www.doj.state.or.us
Pennsylvania Attorney General: www.attorneygeneral.gov
Rhode Island Attorney General: www.riag.state.ri.us
South Carolina Attorney General: www.scattorneygeneral.org
South Dakota Attorney General: www.state.sd.us
Tennessee Attorney General: www.attorneygeneral.state.tn.us
Texas Attorney General: www.oag.state.tx.us
Utah Attorney General: attorneygeneral.utah.gov
Vermont Attorney General: www.state.vt.us/atg
Virginia Attorney General: ww.oag.state.va.us
Washington Attorney General: www.wa.gov/ago
West Virginia Attorney General: www.state.wv.us/wvag
Wisconsin Attorney General: www.doj.state.wi.us
Wyoming Attorney General: attorneygeneral.state.wy.us

I N D E X
259
I N D E X
arrest  1-4, 28, 30, 54, 71-72, 83, 93, 99, 112, 119-123, 125,
138, 232-233, 254-255 
ATM machine  12
bank account  5, 13, 15, 36, 46-47, 83, 90, 99-100, 102, 
114, 139, 203-204, 207, 210, 230, 232, 240
bankruptcy  5, 134, 153, 167, 248
biometric identification system  39, 61, 73, 75, 77, 191-192
birth certificate fraud  69
breeder documents  51, 62, 68
bust-out schemes  88, 91-92
check washing  11, 239
children  6, 26, 29-30, 32-33, 43, 47, 105, 165-166, 238
children’s credit history  6
college campus  34
collusive employee  32
common family names  33
common sense  21, 78-79
computer technology  25
convenience  13, 97, 106,  174, 197, 203, 209, 213
corporate security  48
     tips for businesses  192
credit bureaus  10-11, 17-18, 44, 53, 57, 149, 151-153, 157-
163, 166-167, 170-171, 184-185, 190, 218-219, 221, 223-
226, 228-230, 236-237, 243
     Equifax  17, 53, 57, 151-152, 158, 160, 164-166, 185, 189,
219, 242-244
     Experian  17, 53, 57, 90-91, 151-152, 157, 186, 219, 242-
243
     TransUnion  17, 53, 57, 151-152, 158, 186, 219, 242-243

260
I N D E X
credit card  2, 5-9, 11-13, 15-16, 18, 20, 25-27, 34-43, 45-
46, 54, 57, 63-64, 69, 81, 84-86, 88-91, 93, 96-99, 
102-103, 105-106, 110, 113-114, 121, 150, 161, 164, 169-
171, 179-182, 186-188, 190-191, 194, 217, 224, 228-229,
232-233, 237, 239-242, 245, 247
credit monitoring services  160-161, 189
credit repair services  226-227
credit reports  5, 15, 17-19, 22, 33, 57, 92, 152-154, 158-160,
163, 166-167, 184-187, 189, 218-219, 221-223, 225, 
227, 229-230, 232, 235-236, 242, 244-245
credit watch services  44, 190, 228, 233
creditors  14, 153, 155-156, 158, 218-219, 222-225, 237, 244
crime  1-2, 4, 6-8, 10, 14-16, 25, 30-31, 38, 40, 42, 50, 54, 
65, 67, 81, 92, 94, 98, 107, 113, 125, 173, 188, 217, 
223-224, 228, 232, 234-235, 237, 254-255 
     criminal act  3, 20, 115, 235
      criminal violations  254
data mining  98, 103-104, 115-116
dead people  33, 55
Death Master File (DMF)  55-57
debit card  230, 252, 254
Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV)  10-11, 36, 61-62, 64-
68, 76, 78, 112, 222, 255-256
     driver’s license  22, 26, 36, 51, 59-69, 72-75, 77-80, 82,
89, 108, 110, 112, 116, 119,  121, 123, 179, 191, 222, 254-
255
drugs  29, 84, 107, 120-121, 217
dumpster diving  31
elderly  35-38, 123
electronic devices  213
e-mail addresses  201
e-mail scams  202, 204
Employee Verification Service (EVS)  108-109
employer identification number (EIN) 100, 228
     employment information  41
employment-related fraud  9
     entry-level employee  12, 240

I N D E X
261
Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA)  153-154, 156-157, 159, 163,
166, 230
Fair, Isaac & Co. (FICO)  17, 150-151, 158, 160-161, 185
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)  19, 103-104, 113-115, 
117, 120
Federal Trade Commission (FTC)  6-10, 19, 28, 153, 163, 
167, 171, 201, 204, 222, 228, 235, 237
financial crisis  3
financial services  18, 149-151, 157, 160, 166, 169
fraud  93, 96, 98-99, 101-102, 104-105, 107-113, 115, 119, 
121, 124-125, 150-151, 154,  161-164, 169, 178-179, 181-
182, 184-185, 187, 193, 200, 204, 210-211, 217-224, 
229, 231, 235-237, 240, 242-245, 247-253, 255
     ATM fraud  252
     bankruptcy fraud  248
     check fraud  150, 162, 193
     credit card fraud  5, 8-9, 42, 54, 150, 161
     financial fraud  151, 224
     investment fraud  248-249
     mail fraud  10, 39, 247
     passport fraud  221, 245, 249
     phone fraud  249-250
     student loan fraud  251
     tax fraud  145, 251
     telemarketing fraud  211
fraud alert  219, 236
fraud by family member  26
fraudulent checks  5
government records  16, 71
Gramm-Leach Bliley Act (GLB)  149, 157, 169-170
hospital personnel files  47, 101
identification  81-82, 89, 98, 100, 102, 110, 112-115, 117, 
127-128, 138, 140, 145, 162, 169, 179, 180, 220-221, 
228, 244-245, 254 
     fake ID  51, 63, 68, 83, 107, 210

262
I N D E X
Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998
(Theft Act) 8, 19, 127, 130, 138
identity-theft services  187
illegal immigrants  107, 111-112
instant messaging (IM)  85, 209
immigration forms  110
insurance  11-12, 34, 41, 43-44, 65, 76, 101-102, 104, 149-
153, 156, 158, 165, 180, 182, 187-189, 206, 209, 215,
224, 228, 240, 246,
Internal Revenue Service (IRS)  19, 30, 52, 58, 79, 99-100,
102, 112, 163, 167-168, 177-178, 251
     fake IRS forms  99
Internet  11, 13-14, 18, 21, 32, 34, 41, 45, 49, 55, 63, 70, 77-
78, 82-83, 93-99, 103, 105-106, 131, 141, 176, 194-195,
198, 200, 202, 213, 238, 240, 242, 249
     Internet risks  95
     online accounts  207
     online job boards  210
     online purchases  86, 190, 200, 208, 239
     online shopping  96
     wardriving  93
law enforcement  7, 20, 55, 60-61, 71, 73, 76, 82, 84, 86-
87, 89, 91, 93, 98, 103, 113, 116, 125, 128-135, 137, 
143, 148, 173, 216, 224, 232, 247, 254-255
lifestyle changes  49, 21-22, 194, 216
live-in companion  36
mail theft  36, 54
mailbox  11, 16, 31, 39, 81, 83-85, 204, 239, 241
mailing address  5, 208
marketing  18, 38, 53, 76, 96, 146, 160, 162-166, 171,
185, 186, 189, 211-212
marriage license records  144
medical ID theft  101, 103-104
     medical information  106, 156
     Medicare  48, 101-102
     Medicaid  47-48, 52, 101-102
     physician identities  47, 101

I N D E X
263
monthly statement  88, 207-208, 239
mortgage  5, 18, 36-37, 43, 76, 85, 90, 162, 200, 208-211, 
215
mother’s maiden name  5, 40, 100, 205-206
national ID card  73-77
national identifier  14
opt-out  170-171, 181
organized crime groups  15-16
passwords  13, 17, 48-49, 71, 90, 94-95, 100, 180, 187, 193,
198, 200, 204-208, 213-214, 220, 240, 244
personal computer  95-96, 237
personal identification number (PIN)  17, 49, 87, 96, 100,
179-180, 204, 220, 222, 244, 250
personal information  5, 7, 9, 12-15, 17-19, 27, 31-32, 34, 
40-41, 45-46, 53, 59, 64, 67, 72, 76, 94-96, 98-100, 
102-103, 131, 133, 137, 142-144, 146-147, 151, 165-166, 
169-171, 174, 176, 181, 190-191, 198-200, 208-211, 216,
237, 239-242, 248
personal Web pages  13, 240
phone or utilities fraud  9
police report  105, 222-224, 237
pretexting  13, 202, 241
prevention  21, 57, 162-163, 173-174, 194, 230, 233
primary ID  68-69
privacy  6, 13, 15-17, 41, 52, 56, 64, 96, 139, 141, 146-147,
153, 162, 164-167, 169, 180, 191, 208, 216, 233, 238-
239, 256
Privacy Act  16
public records  70, 144, 147, 167, 175, 184
reputation  17-18, 26, 31, 64, 174, 189, 208
secondary ID  68-69
skimmer  13, 88, 240
Social Security Administration (SSA)  7, 9, 14, 19, 38, 40,
54-58, 73, 79, 107-111, 113, 120, 124, 129, 137, 140,
178-179, 220, 232-233, 244, 251-252

264
I N D E X
Social Security card  7, 12, 21-22, 54, 69, 72-73, 80, 108-
111, 121, 123-125, 175, 215, 240, 242
Social Security Earnings and Benefits Statement  178
Social Security number (SSN)  1, 5-7, 9, 11-12, 14, 16-17, 
19, 25-26, 30, 34-36, 40, 42,  45, 48, 51-59, 64, 74,
76, 78, 80, 82, 89-90, 93, 95, 100, 102, 111, 113, 115,
124, 141, 145, 151, 161-164, 166-169, 175-179, 184, 200,
205, 210, 220-222, 228, 240-241, 244-245, 251-252, 
255 
software  64, 94, 96, 103-104, 161, 187, 206, 232, 238
stealing checks  82
students  33-35, 53-54, 251
technology  20, 25, 55, 60-62, 77-78, 105-106, 116, 133, 
136, 144, 173, 191-192, 213-214
telemarketers  38, 211
temporary worker  42
terrorism  38, 58, 75, 107, 113-114, 116, 125, 135
     terrorists  22, 111, 113-118, 120, 134, 139-140, 163, 217,
252
     9/11 hijackers  113-114, 116-118
U.S. birth certificate  68, 108
U.S. passport  68, 118
wallet  12, 21, 31, 45, 80-81, 175, 179-181, 197, 215, 229,
240, 242

