
No one likes a know-it-all. Most of us realize there’s no such thing–how could there be?
The world is far too complicated for someone to understand everything there is to know.
So when you come across a know-it-all, you smile to yourself as they ramble on because
you know better.
You understand that the quest for knowledge is a never-ending one, and you’re okay with
that. You have no desire to know everything, just the next thing. You know what you don’t
know, you’re confident enough to admit it, and you’re motivated to do something about it.
At Idiot’s Guides, we, too, know what we don’t know, and we make it our business to find
out. We find really smart people who are experts in their fields and then we roll up our
sleeves and get to work, asking lots of questions and thinking long and hard about how
best to pass along their knowledge to you in the easiest, most-accessible way possible.
After all, that’s our promise–to make whatever you want to learn “As Easy as It Gets.”
That means giving you a well-organized design that seamlessly and effortlessly guides you
from page to page, topic to topic. It means controlling the pace you’re asked to absorb
new information–not too much at once but just what you need to know right now. It means
giving you a clear progression from easy to more difficult. It means giving you more
instructional steps wherever necessary to really explain the details. And it means giving
you fewer words and more illustrations wherever it’s better to show rather than tell.
So here you are, at the start of something new. The next chapter in your quest. It can be an
intimidating place to be, but you’ve been here before and so have we. Clear your mind and
turn the page. By the end of this book, you won’t be a know-it-all, but your world will be
a little less complicated than it was before. And we’ll be sure your journey is as easy as it
gets.
Mike Sanders Publisher, Idiot’s Guides


This book is dedicated to my lovely wife Sarah, who has always stood by me and
supported me. Without her, I could never have done this.

ALPHA BOOKS
Published by Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA • Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700,
Toronto, Ontario M4P 2Y3, Canada (a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.) • Penguin Books Ltd., 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England •
Penguin Ireland, 25 St. Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd.) • Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road,
Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty. Ltd.) • Penguin Books India Pvt. Ltd., 11 Community Centre,
Panchsheel Park, New Delhi—110 017, India • Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore, Auckland 1311, New Zealand (a
division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd.) • Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty.) Ltd., 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa •
Penguin Books Ltd., Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
Copyright © 2015 by Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, scanned, or distributed in any printed or electronic form without permission. Please do not
participate in or encourage piracy of copyrighted materials in violation of the author’s rights. Purchase only authorized editions. No patent liability is
assumed with respect to the use of the information contained herein. Although every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the
publisher and author assume no responsibility for errors or omissions. Neither is any liability assumed for damages resulting from the use of
information contained herein. For information, address Alpha Books, 800 East 96th Street, Indianapolis, IN 46240.
IDIOT’S GUIDES and Design are trademarks of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
eISBN: 9781615647453
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 2014951305
17 16 15 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Interpretation of the printing code: The rightmost number of the first series of numbers is the year of the book’s printing; the rightmost number of the
second series of numbers is the number of the book’s printing. For example, a printing code of 15-1 shows that the first printing occurred in 2015.
Printed in the United States of America
Note: This publication contains the opinions and ideas of its author. It is intended to provide helpful and informative material on the subject matter
covered. It is sold with the understanding that the author and publisher are not engaged in rendering professional services in the book. If the reader
requires personal assistance or advice, a competent professional should be consulted. The author and publisher specifically disclaim any responsibility
for any liability, loss, or risk, personal or otherwise, which is incurred as a consequence, directly or indirectly, of the use and application of any of the
contents of this book.
Most Alpha books are available at special quantity discounts for bulk purchases for sales promotions, premiums, fund-raising, or educational use.
Special books, or book excerpts, can also be created to fit specific needs. For details, write: Special Markets, Alpha Books, 375 Hudson Street, New
York, NY 10014.
Publisher: Mike Sanders
Executive Managing Editor: Billy Fields
Senior Acquisitions Editor: Brook Farling
Development Editor: Kayla Dugger
Production Editor: Jana M. Stefanciosa
Cover Designer: Laura Merriman
Book Designer: William Thomas
Indexer: Brad Herriman
Layout: Brian Massey
Proofreader: Virginia Vasquez Vought
DIGITAL OPERATIONS, LONDON
Digital Producer: Alex Valizadeh
Senior Digital Producer: Miguel Cunha
DIGITAL OPERATIONS, DELHI
Head of Digital Operations: Manjari Rathi Hooda
Producer: Rahul Kumar
Assistant Editor: Etika Kapil
DTP Designer: Manish Bhatt
Operations Assistant: Tauhid Nasir

Contents
Part 1: What Is 3D Printing?
1 The Goal of 3D Printing
For Businesses
Rapid Prototyping
Manufacturing
For the Hobbyist
The Maker Culture
A Tool in Your Arsenal
Common Misconceptions
Materials You Can Use
A Replicator in Every Home
The Time It Takes
What It Can Print
Finishing
2 The History and Future of 3D Printing
3D Printing Is Born
Hull’s and 3D Systems’ Contributions
The Invention of FDM Printing
The Development of Other 3D Printing Processes
The RepRap Project
Initial Intentions
The Importance of Open Source
Rapid Development
Refinement, Availability, and Your Wallet
Maturation of Technology
Availability of Parts
The Race to the Lowest Price
3 Manufacturing with 3D Printers and CNC Mills
The Simple Principle Behind 3D Printing
Slicing and Creating Layers for Your Model
Extruding Filament
CNC Milling and How It Works
Subtracting with CAM Software
Milling the Material
Pros and Cons of 3D Printers vs. CNC Mills
Cost

Part Geometry
Material Matters
Surface Finish
Using the Right Tool for the Job
4 Types of 3D Printers
Stereolithography
Digital Light Processing
Powder Bed Printing
MultiJet Printing
Selective Laser Sintering
Fused Filament Fabrication
Part 2: All About the Hardware
5 The Frame
Cartesian Layouts
Ways Cartesian 3D Printers Are Constructed
Cartesian Layout Considerations
The Importance of Frame Construction
Rigidity and How It Affects Quality and Reliability
What Makes a Good Frame
Size Matters
6 Movement Components
Components for Smooth Linear Motion
Rails and Smooth Rods
Bearings
Stepper Motors
Belts and Pulleys
Weight-Bearing Components for Converting Motion
Lead Screws
Threaded Rods
Attachment and Connection Components
Couplers
Nuts
7 The Extruder
What Is Extrusion?
The Cold End
Direct Feed
Bowden
Direct Drive vs. Geared

The Hot End
Thermistor
Heating Element
Physical Design and Makeup
The Nozzle
Print Fans
Using Multiple Extruders
For Support Material
For Filaments with Different Properties
8 The Build Platform
Build Platform Materials
Heated Beds
Heated Build Chambers and Enclosures
Surface Treatments
Painter’s Tape
White Glue
Polyimide Film
PET Film
ABS Juice
Hairspray
9 Control Components
End Stops
Mechanical End Stops
Optical End Stops
Other Kinds of End Stops
Control Boards
Arduinos and Proprietary Control Boards
Changing or Upgrading Control Boards
SD Card Support
Using an SD Card
Benefits of SD Cards
LCD Controllers
10 Choosing a 3D Printer
Open or Closed?
What Does It Mean to Be Open Source?
Why It Might Matter to You
Assembled, Kit, or DIY?
Assembled 3D Printers
3D Printer Kits

Building a DIY 3D Printer
Determining Your Needs
Print Volume
Print Resolution
Filament
Prices
Printers with Unusual Designs
Part 3: Setting Up and Printing
11 Software Setup and Printer Control
Firmware Explained
Choosing Host Software
Choosing Slicing Software
Connecting to Your Printer
Controlling Your Printer
G-Code
Printing with G-Code
Performing Functions Manually with G-Code
12 Leveling the Bed and Adjusting the Z Height
Why Does Your Bed Need to Be Leveled?
Manual Leveling
Auto-Leveling
How to Adjust Your Z Height
Setting the Z Height Manually or Automatically
Knowing the “Correct” Z Height
13 Slicing and Printing
Configuring Your Slicing Software
Slicer Settings Explained
Printer Settings
Filament Settings
Print Settings
Preparing for and Running a Print
Host Preparation
Running a Print
14 Troubleshooting Your Prints
What’s the Problem?
Extrusion Problems
Overextrusion
Underextrusion

Jamming
Poor Dimensional Accuracy
Temperature Problems
Hot End Is Too Hot
Hot End Is Too Cold
Cracking of Part Due to Cooling
Discoloration of Filament Due to Heat
Adhesion Problems
Warping
Part Comes Loose
Part Breaks During Removal
Other Printer Problems
Blobs
Stringing
Drooping
Ghosting
Project 1: Carabiner
Preheat the Extruder and Heated Bed
Load the .STL File
Slice the Model
Load the Filament
Extrude Some Filament
Start the Print
Watch the First Layer
Let the Part Cool
Remove the Part
Project 2: Pencil Holder
Load the .STL File and Resize the Model, If Necessary
Preheat the Extruder and Heated Bed, and Load the Filament
Modify the Slicer Settings to Make the Model a Cup
Slice the Model
Start the Print
Watch the First Layer
Remove the Part
Project 3: Robot
Load the .STL File
Preheat the Extruder and Heated Bed, and Load the Filament
Modify the Slicer Settings for Supports
Slice the Model

Start the Print
Watch the First Layer
Remove the Part
Remove the Supports
Project 4: Storage Box with Drawers
Open Your Host Software and Load the Storage Body .STL File
Slice the Storage Body
Print the Storage Body
Load the Drawer .STL File and Slice It
Print the Drawer
Print Two More Drawers
Part 4: 3D Modeling
15 Introduction to CAD
Why CAD Came About
Artistic 3D Modeling vs. CAD Software
CAD Software Options
An Overview of Common CAD Program Commands
Modeling Commands
Sketching Commands
The Importance of Units and Scale
Choosing Units
Scaling in CAD
16 Modeling Techniques and Best Practices
Premodeling
Tricks of the Trade
Assemblies and Fitting Parts
Planning an Assembly
Fitting Parts Together
Modeling Successful 3D Parts
Exporting Files
17 Practical Reverse Engineering
Why You Should Learn Basic Reverse Engineering
Finding the Right Measurement Tools
Digital Calipers: A Necessary Tool
3D Scanners: Not All They’re Cracked Up to Be
Measuring the Part
Inferences
Geometric

Design Intention
Proportions
Modeling the Part
Project 5: Monogrammed Coaster
Open Your CAD Program and Create a New Part
Extrude a Circle
Fillet the Top Edge
Cut the Letter
Export the .STL File and Print
Project 6: Custom Storage Drawer
Open Your CAD Program and Create a New Part
Extrude the Body of the Drawer
Cut an Opening for the Handle
Design the Compartments
Add a Rough Handle
Add Fillets to Handle
Add Ridges for Grip
Export the .STL File and Print
Project 7: Dust Collector
Create a New Part and Revolve the Body
Cut a Groove
Create the Second Part and Revolve the Body
Make the First Clip
Copy the Clip
Export the .STL Files and Print
Project 8: Reverse Engineering a Useful Part
Create a New Part and Extrude the Body
Fillet the Edges
Shell the Cover
Cut One Socket Opening
Mirror the Socket Opening
Create the Screw Hole Support
Add the Screw Hole
Export the .STL File and Print
Part 5: Advanced Usage and Techniques
18 Printing with Other Materials
What Materials Are Available?
Nylon

Polycarbonate
Flexible Filament
Wood Filament
PET
HIPS
Hardware Needed
All-Metal Hot Ends
Print Fans
Heated Beds and Bed Materials
Printing Techniques
Temperature
Speed
Cooling
Layer Thickness
19 Modifying Your Printer
Adding a Fan Shroud
Adding a Heated Bed
Bed Size
Control Board
Power Supply
Switching to All-Metal Hot Ends
Installing Multiple Extruders
Extending Axes
Converting to a PCB Mill
Alterations for Laser Cutting
Finding Parts
Appendixes
A Glossary
B Resources
C Further Uses of 3D Printing

Introduction
In many ways, 3D printing is the fulfillment of the future we were all promised. We may
not have flying cars or robot housemaids, but we do have access to an almost magical
device that can make our imaginations a reality. It wasn’t long ago that such a device was
considered far-fetched, even by science fiction standards.
I’ve been a lifelong geek myself. As long as I can remember, I’ve been building things,
taking things apart, and putting them back together (sometimes successfully). When I was
very young, this mostly meant building things like spaceships with Legos. When I got a
little bit older, I gained access to hammers and nails, and suddenly I could build things at a
life-size scale (though this mostly resulted in lopsided tree houses).
Like many geeks my age, I found computers in my teenage years. This opened up a whole
new world for me. No longer was I constrained by the cost of wood and nails, because I
could create programs on old computers I found at garage sales. Into adulthood, computers
were my life. I built them, programmed them, and repaired them.
But the desire to create something tangible never left me. I knew I wanted to make things.
So I went to school for drafting and mechanical design. After graduating, I got a job in the
engineering team at a biomedical company. While working there, our engineering
department got a professional 3D printer for making prototypes of our products.
I was, of course, instantly smitten. Here was a machine that could produce a physical part
from my designs in just a few hours. As you might expect, everyone on the engineering
team felt the same way. In between prototyping parts, we took turns printing designs for
our own personal projects.
But I wasn’t satisfied to just print things at work when the printer was available, so I
purchased an inexpensive consumer 3D printer. Suddenly, I could print anything I wanted
at any time. If some idea struck me, I could design it and print it in just a few hours. It
brought back that feeling of building spaceships out of the Legos that I hadn’t felt since I
was a kid. That feeling of being able to create anything I could imagine.
It’s a feeling that most people never find again after childhood. But, if you’re reading this,
I suspect you might be searching for that feeling yourself. Even if you’ve just picked this
book up at the bookstore out of curiosity, I think that means you’re yearning to flex those
creative muscles once again.
And that’s what 3D printing can do for you. Yes, it’s challenging. No, it’s not a
particularly cheap hobby. But it’s a very rewarding one. The feeling of pride you get when
your first print is completed will be undeniable. The smile that crosses your face the first
time you see one of your own designs made real will be one of the brightest you’ve had in
years. If you’re looking for a way to express your creativity, 3D printing is the answer.
This book will help you through the complicated task of learning how to do that.
How This Book Is Organized
This book has been written to help you really understand 3D printing, not just to teach you

the basics. To that end, the book has been split up into five parts:
Part 1, What Is 3D Printing?, gives you useful information on the background of 3D
printing and how it actually works. This includes the history of 3D printing, how 3D
printers developed into a consumer product, and how different kinds of 3D printing
processes work.
Part 2, All About the Hardware, teaches you everything you need to know about the
different parts of consumer 3D printers. Learning how the hardware of a 3D printer
actually works is valuable knowledge that can help you a lot throughout your journey.
(And, because you’re reading this book, I suspect you’re the type of person who likes to
learn anyway.)
Part 3, Setting Up and Printing, is where you start getting into the nitty-gritty of 3D
printing. This is where you learn how to actually set up and operate a 3D printer. 3D
printers aren’t like the old inkjet printer you have on your desk; they’re complicated
machines that are chock full of confusing settings. This part gives you the information you
need to really get started. I also walk you through four projects designed to teach you how
to get started with 3D printing.
Part 4, 3D Modeling, goes beyond just 3D printing models you find online, because 3D
printing is about so much more than just replicating other people’s designs. Can you
imagine if, as a kid, you were only allowed to build official designs with your Legos? It
would have been awful! For that reason, this is where you learn how to design your own
3D models that you create with a 3D printer. In this part, I also show you how to start 3D
modeling with four more projects for you to model and print.
Part 5, Advanced Usage and Techniques, is what you want to read once you’ve gained
proficiency in basic 3D printing. Here, you learn how to print with exotic materials, how
to print with multiple extruders at once, and some popular modifications you can make to
your 3D printer. You also learn about some unexpected uses for your 3D printer that you
may not have even realized were possible.
Extras
Throughout this book, you’ll find some handy bits of information and advice beyond the
main text in sidebars. They’re broken up into a handful of types for your convenience.
DEFINITION
The 3D printing industry is full of technical terms and words that may have a meaning
specific to 3D printing. These sidebars include words you’re not familiar with, or that have a
different meaning in the context of 3D printing.
WATCH OUT!
While 3D printers are now consumer products that are safe for the home, they’re still
machines that can hurt you. Therefore, keep an eye out for these warning sidebars, which give
you safety information and help you avoid accidentally damaging your 3D printer.

HOT TIP
Sometimes, there are multiple ways of doing something. These tips help you avoid hassles
and headaches. Learn from my mistakes, and take these into account!
FASCINATING FACT
I can’t always fit the good stuff into the main body of the text. Check these out for interesting
facts, history, and other information related to 3D printing.
But Wait! There’s More!
Have you logged on to idiotsguides.com lately? If you haven’t, go there now! As a bonus
to the book, we’ve included the 3D printing model files you’ll need for the Part 3 projects,
all online. Point your browser to idiotsguides.com/3dprinting, and enjoy!
Acknowledgments
I could never have written this book without the support of my friends and family, who
have always encouraged me. My beautiful wife Sarah, who put up with me working late
into the night. My friends Daniel, Sean, Sam, Zach, Amanda, and Jonathan, who were
always happy to start new hobbies with me. My in-laws Bonnie and Javad, who somehow
believed in me when no one should have. My parents Sharon and David and siblings
Danielle, Lynnze, and Nathin, who had to live with me for so long. Tom, Beth, and Mike,
who nurtured my inner geek when I was young. And my dog Calaveras, who kept me
company while I wrote this book, and because she’s just so darn cute.
I’d also like to give a special thanks to the fine folks at Aleph Objects (especially Harris
Kenny and Jeff Moe), who were kind enough to lend me a LulzBot TAZ to use for this
book. The RepRap project also deserves a huge amount of credit for making 3D printing
possible for hobbyists and consumers.
Special Thanks to the Technical Reviewer
Idiot’s Guides: 3D Printing was reviewed by an expert who double-checked the accuracy
of what you’ll learn here, to help us ensure this book gives you everything you need to
know about 3D printing. Special thanks are extended to Aaron Trocola.
Trademarks
All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be or are suspected of being
trademarks or service marks have been appropriately capitalized. Alpha Books and
Penguin Group (USA) Inc. cannot attest to the accuracy of this information. Use of a term
in this book should not be regarded as affecting the validity of any trademark or service
mark.

PART
1
What Is 3D Printing?
Every topic needs some background information, and 3D printing is no different. In this
part, you learn about the history of 3D printing, including how it was invented and how it
entered the consumer space. You also learn about the different kinds of 3D printing
technologies available, and the pros and cons of each.
This part also covers the principles behind how 3D printing actually works. In addition to
how it works, I go over how it differs from other prototyping and manufacturing methods.
This includes how 3D printing can be used by businesses, and what you can use it for
personally.

CHAPTER
1
The Goal of 3D Printing
In This Chapter
Why businesses invest in 3D printers
What you can do with 3D printing
Common misconceptions about 3D printing
It wasn’t that long ago that 3D printing was a just an obscure technology relegated to
prototyping use by a handful of specific industries. But in the past couple of decades, 3D
printing has become a must-have technology for engineering companies, and even more
recently a useful consumer tool.
But why did 3D printing become such an indispensable tool for businesses? What
advantages do 3D printers give the consumer and hobbyist? In this chapter, we look at
why 3D printing is becoming so popular, what it can do for you, and what its limitations
are.
For Businesses
I say this completely without hyperbole: 3D printing is a dream for an engineering team.
A technology that would have been the stuff of fantasy just a few decades ago, today it
gives companies the ability to bring an idea to life quickly, efficiently, easily, and
inexpensively.
The original intent for 3D printing was to create prototypes for engineers. This allowed
them to quickly test an idea before moving on to production and manufacturing. Very
recently, some companies have even begun to use 3D printing for the actual
manufacturing of production parts. Both uses have exploded in popularity, and both
benefit businesses in a number of ways.
Rapid Prototyping
Rapid prototyping, simply enough, is any process that can be used to quickly create a
prototype of a part. A prototype part is essentially a test part, and is useful during the
development of a new product (or when revising an existing product). What the prototype
is intended to test is up to the engineer, but it’s commonly used to test the following:
How parts fit together in an assembly
The strength of the part
Regulation compliance

When a new product is being developed, it’s rare that a single design is kept until
production. Commonly, a handful of potential designs are tested, and whichever design is
chosen for production will evolve quite a bit throughout the design process. Much of the
testing of these designs is done via simulation with computer-aided design (CAD)
software, but it’s almost always necessary to have a real physical part to work with during
this process.
DEFINITION
Computer-aided design (CAD) software is a type of computer program used by
engineers and designers to develop products using 3D models or 2D drawings. Before CAD
software, drawings were hand drawn by drafters for production. Now, CAD software can export
models directly to 3D printers (see Chapter 15 for more on CAD).
CAD software being used to create a 3D model.
That’s where rapid prototyping, and especially 3D printing, comes in. As the design of a
product evolves, engineers can 3D print the design and test it. In the past, prototypes were
costly and often required outsourcing to companies who specialized in producing these
prototypes using traditional methods like machining, welding, sand casting, and other
costly processes. Now, it’s commonplace for an engineering team to have a 3D printer in
their office with which they can print a prototype in a matter of hours and for a relatively
low cost.
Aside from the physical testing of the part, prototypes are also valuable for user testing,
design proposals, and promotion. When a new product is in the early stages of
development, it doesn’t always have funding secured for the entire design process. Project
funding (whether internal to the company or from outside investors) often depends on a
design submittal, which is essentially a proposal of the product design.
Design proposals can be anything from a simple explanation of the idea to a complete
working prototype. But 3D printing has made it possible to speed up this process and has
made it much cheaper. Therefore, physical prototypes have recently become a virtual

necessity for securing outside funding via crowdsourcing. Backers of crowdsourcing want
to see that a design is functional before they invest, and 3D printed prototypes are the
cheapest way to show that.
Manufacturing
While rapid prototyping is definitely the most common use of 3D printing, it’s starting to
become a viable method of actual production manufacturing. Traditionally, injection
molding is by far the most common method of manufacturing plastic parts. In mass
production, injection molding can produce high-quality parts very quickly and
inexpensively.
Injection molding is a fairly simple process in concept: molten plastic is shot into the
cavity of a two-piece (or more) metal mold and cooled, and then the mold is pulled apart
and the plastic part is removed. In a manufacturing setting, that process can happen very
quickly and a new part can be made in a few seconds. It can also be very inexpensive (per
part), as the plastic itself is cheap in raw form.
However, injection molding has one critical downside: the cost of tooling. Tools, in
reference to injection molding, are the molds and associated part-specific machinery
needed to produce a particular part. Every individual part needs its own tooling, and that
can be very expensive. Molds are usually made from steel or aluminum and require
precision machining. Mold making is a specialized task, and individual molds start in the
thousands of dollars and often reach into the tens of thousands of dollars.
When you take into account the fact that most products are assemblies made up of many
individual parts (which would each need their own tooling), it’s obvious that the costs of
getting set up for injection molding can be very high. That’s okay if you’re making
thousands of that part, because the cost per part gets lower as the total quantity increases.
But what if you want to produce your parts in smaller quantities? The parts must be
manufactured in huge quantities in order for the price per part to reasonable.
FASCINATING FACT
Aleph Objects, a 3D printer manufacturer based in Loveland, Colorado, uses its own 3D
printers to manufacture some of the parts to build new printers. This “cluster” of 3D printers
used for manufacturing is the largest in the world, consisting of 135 individual 3D printers.
That’s where 3D printing has started to enter the manufacturing world. With 3D printing,
there is no high tooling cost up front—your printers can produce whichever part you need
them to at a given time. You can print one part or a hundred, and your price per part will
be the same. This means you can manufacture in low quantities without incurring huge
tooling costs. Possibly even more valuable is the ability to change designs on the fly. You
can redesign a part and immediately start manufacturing the new design without having to
purchase a new mold, which means your product can evolve in real time as you improve
the design.

The cluster of 135 3D printers used for manufacturing at Aleph Objects.
(Photo courtesy of Aleph Objects)
Of course, 3D printing in a manufacturing setting does have its downsides, which have
kept it from gaining widespread adoption. If a part is going to be manufactured in large
quantities, it’s still cheaper to have it injection molded (despite the cost of the molds).
That’s because the raw material is much cheaper for injection molding than it is for 3D
printing. Possibly even more importantly in mass production is time—an injection-molded
part might only take a few seconds to make, while a 3D-printed equivalent can easily take
hours.
To be able to keep up with an injection molding machine, many 3D printers would have to
be run simultaneously. So injection molding is still the best option when parts need to be
produced in mass quantities. But for small quantities or designs which need to be updated
often, 3D printing is becoming an attractive alternative.
For the Hobbyist
Engineering 3D printing prototypes for corporations is all well and good, but what’s really
exciting is 3D printing for the average person at home! In just a couple of decades, 3D
printers have gone from being too expensive for most companies to buy to being cheap
enough that you can realistically purchase one just to tinker with at home. But why would
you want one in your home? What could you even do with it?
The Maker Culture
The idea of making stuff for fun and self-fulfillment has gained tremendous popularity

recently, but the basic motivation is an inseparable part of human nature. The same urge to
invent that put man on the moon is also what motivated your father to build that birdhouse
when you were a kid, and it’s the same thing that has you interested in 3D printing. We all
have this urge to create (to varying degrees, of course), and the maker culture is just a
modern branding of that—a way to identify like-minded people and form a community.
3D printing has been a huge factor in the growing maker community, and for good reason.
Traditional maker activities include things like wood working and metal working. Those
are skills which take a great deal of practice, patience, time, and money. But 3D printing
allows you to create similar physical objects quickly and relatively easily. It’s become a
fairly simple task to take the ideas from your head and make them real.
At its heart, maker culture is about creating things. It’s using whatever tools you have
available creatively to invent and construct things that interest you. In the same way that
your father may have used a hand saw, a hammer, and nails to build that birdhouse, you
can use a 3D printer to make whatever you can imagine. Robots, electronics enclosures,
and artistic creations are all possible, along with anything else that interests you.
A Tool in Your Arsenal
By definition, a 3D printer is just a tool, and that’s how you should think of it. If you want
to hammer nails, you use a hammer. If you want to cut a piece of wood, you use a saw.
And if you want to make a part out of plastic, you use a 3D printer. It’s important to think
of a 3D printer like any other tool—a very versatile tool, but still a tool.
HOT TIP
Make sure to utilize 3D printing in the right context. It’s impractical to try to 3D print an entire
coffee table, but you can certainly use your 3D printer to make brackets, drawer handles,
tracks, and other parts. Like any other tool, a 3D printer has uses for which it’s well suited, and
some things which would be better handled by another tool.
As always, it’s best to use the right tool for the job. It might be possible to cut a metal pipe
with a wood saw, but it’s not a good idea. 3D printers are no exception—they can do a lot,
but they’re not the right tool for every job. When you first start 3D printing, you’ll be
tempted to try and use it for everything. Birdhouse? 3D print it! A coffee table? Print the
pieces and glue them together! But you’ll quickly learn that 3D printers aren’t the solution
to every problem.
With that said, 3D printers are incredibly versatile. That’s why they’re such a
revolutionary tool. You can use them to print everything from things like pencil holders to
replacement parts for your car. This is what makes 3D printing so exciting: if it fits on the
printer and it’s made of plastic, you can make it! Sure, 3D printers aren’t the solution to
every problem, but they’re one of the most widely useful tools ever invented.
Common Misconceptions
In essence, the goal of 3D printing (whether for business or consumer use) is to be able to
quickly and easily create objects with a single device. To an extent, 3D printers today do
accomplish that feat.

But 3D printing presents a kind of perfect storm of misunderstanding that many fall victim
to. It’s a technology that is very new to consumers, it’s complex, and it’s still fairly
experimental. It’s somewhat reminiscent of the early days of the internet, when most
people still didn’t quite know what to make of it. There are some real-world drawbacks
which keep them from being the miracle devices envisioned in popular science fiction and
media.
Materials You Can Use
Probably the most common of these misconceptions concerns materials. 3D printing
technology has come a long way, and there are a variety of materials available to print
with. But, for consumer printers at least, all of these materials are still some type of
plastic. Printing metal is out of the question for a consumer printer. Metals, ceramics, and
other more exotic materials are possible on extremely expensive professional 3D printers,
but don’t expect to be printing them at home anytime soon.
This is primarily because the technology needed to print in metal or ceramics is far more
complex than what is needed for a consumer 3D printer. Consumer 3D printers use fused
deposition modeling (FDM) or fused filament fabrication (FFF) technology, which is
inexpensive (see Chapter 2). But to print in metal, for example, an expensive and complex
process like selective laser sintering (SLS) is required. SLS 3D printers use high-powered
lasers to actually melt metal powder, and, as you can imagine, those aren’t cheap. So for
now, consumer printers are relegated to just printing plastic.
A Replicator in Every Home
A popular theme in news articles about 3D printing is the idea of a replicator in every
home. It’s the picturesque future from the popular culture of the ’60s and ’70s: a device
that instantly produces anything you need at the touch of a button.
FASCINATING FACT
The replicator was first introduced in Star Trek: The Original Series (and officially named in
Star Trek: The Next Generation) as a device that could recycle garbage and waste and
synthesize food and other useful things. The idea is so similar to 3D printing that a popular line of
3D printers made by MakerBot even uses the replicator name for some of their models.
The setup is simple: there you are in your kitchen cooking dinner, when suddenly your
spatula breaks. Your dinner is starting to burn, and you don’t have time to drive up to the
store and buy a new spatula. Not to worry though, you have your trusty 3D printer! You
run over, push a button or two, and in a matter of minutes you have a new spatula.
Problem solved! This is the kind of thing imagined by the media and those unfamiliar with
the realities of 3D printing.
Unfortunately, reality doesn’t quite meet the expectations set by these kinds of stories. 3D
printer developers would certainly love to be able to produce such a product, but it’s just
not the case (and probably won’t be for a very long time).
Your dinner fiasco would be quite a bit different in real life today: your spatula breaks, and
dinner is about to start burning. You turn to your 3D printer for help. But before you can
start printing that new spatula, you’ve first got to find a 3D file to print from. After

searching for a few minutes online, you’re lucky and find one (saving yourself from
having to 3D model one). Now all you have to do is load the file, heat up the printer, start
it printing, and wait an hour or two for it to print. Of course, by that point, your dinner is
already burned.
As you can see, as amazing and versatile as 3D printers are, they do have their limits (of
which there are many). Eventually, you may have that sci-fi replicator in your house, but
we’re not quite there yet.
The Time It Takes
The time involved to print something is also a highly misunderstood topic. 3D printing is
often referred to as being very fast (I’ve even said so earlier in this chapter). But it’s
important to note that that’s only in relation to traditional manufacturing methods. Even
the smallest prints are going to take a few minutes at best. Larger prints on consumer 3D
printers can take the better part of a day, and it’s possible for a single print to take days
(even on an average-size consumer printer). So don’t expect to be printing out parts
instantly; it’s usually a fairly long wait.
WATCH OUT!
3D printers have very hot parts and can be a significant fire hazard. Only leave a 3D printer
unattended at your own risk, and be sure to follow appropriate fire safety precautions when printing
with it.
What It Can Print
3D printers carry with them the promise of being able to print anything. But there are
some caveats when it comes to what geometry you can actually print. Overhangs are the
biggest enemy here. Overhangs are geometry which have no supporting material directly
underneath, which is troublesome for obvious reasons. This can be overcome with support
material, which I’ll go over in more depth in later chapters, but you should be aware of the
fact that 3D printing does have design challenges of its own.
Another area where 3D printers (especially consumer 3D printers) have difficulty is with
printing small features with fine details. They’re limited by the size of the filament being
extruded (or pushed out) from the nozzle, and fine detail tends to get washed out when
common nozzle sizes are used. Professional 3D printers that use more expensive
technology are capable of astounding detail, but consumer 3D printers are still pretty
limited.
Finishing
The finish of the printed object is one of the most glaring limitations of 3D printing.
Because of the nature of the process (essentially stacking layers of plastic), the surface
finish of vertical surfaces is usually quite poor. Even on the highest-quality settings, you’ll
still be left with a series of small ridges. It’s virtually impossible to get a truly smooth
finish straight from a consumer 3D printer. People expend a great deal of effort trying to
minimize this and improve surface finish, and there are some postprint techniques you can
use to smooth it out. But don’t expect to get a nice, smooth part hot off the printer.

Even with high-quality settings, layer ridges are evident on this owl model.
You shouldn’t be too disheartened by all of this, though. These are all fairly minor
limitations, and are just part of 3D printing. There are ways to deal with most of them, and
a lot of work is being done to overcome these challenges. It’s important to keep your
expectations for 3D printing realistic, but don’t let these downsides trouble you too much.
The Least You Need to Know
3D printers initially gained popularity for rapid prototyping, which remains their most common use today.
Manufacturing with 3D printers is a viable option for small-scale production but is still impractical for mass
production.
The maker culture has been fueled by 3D printing and the creative outlet it provides.
Being able to produce anything in your own home is an exciting idea, but it’s far from being a reality.

CHAPTER
2
The History and Future of 3D Printing
In This Chapter
The development and history of 3D printing
How the RepRap project accelerated development
Predicting the near future of consumer 3D printers
If you want to understand something, it’s always a good idea to begin by looking at the
history. It’d be difficult to truly understand how a car works, for example, if you didn’t
know how the internal combustion engine was developed. 3D printers are no exception to
the rule, and for such a new product they have quite a rich history.
In this chapter, I take you through the history of 3D printing and the effects of its
evolution on you now and in the future.
3D Printing Is Born
3D printing has just entered the public consciousness in the past few years as consumer
3D printers have become available. But 3D printing has actually been around for decades
in the industrial world. 3D printing revolutionized the way companies produce prototypes,
and that provided the basis for consumer 3D printing.
So how was 3D printing actually developed? Who invented it and why?
Hull’s and 3D Systems’ Contributions
The first patent for a 3D printer was filed in 1984 by Charles W. Hull. His patent was for a
3D printing process called stereolithography (SLA), which used UV light to cure
photopolymer resin in a vat to form parts. Hull, an engineer specializing in materials
science at the time, came up with the idea for SLA while working on resin coatings for
tabletops.
DEFINITION
Photopolymer resin is a type of liquid resin that solidifies into plastic when exposed to
light (usually in the ultraviolet spectrum). Manufacturers can produce the resin in many varieties,
with different mechanical and chemical properties.
The company Hull was working for at the time, Ultra-Violet Products (UVP), employed
him to develop UV-curable coatings to improve the durability of tabletops. These coatings
were a liquid resin that reacted with UV light to become solid plastic. While working with
this resin, Hull started imagining a device which could cure this resin in successive layers

to form a three-dimensional object.
Hull took his idea to UVP and was granted permission to work on a prototype device on
nights and weekends, while continuing his normal duties during the day. The development
process was not without its hurdles, one of the biggest being how to translate a 3D
computer model into printing instructions for his SLA printer.
At the time, in the early ’80s, computer-aided design (CAD) was still in its infancy. 3D
modeling was a difficult process, and not a whole lot could be done with the resulting
models. Hull knew he needed 3D models in a file format that could be used to create
instructions for his printer, but no suitable file format existed. So Hull created his own: the
SLA file format, abbreviated as STL, which is still the standard today. (These days,
because the STL file format is used in a wide range of manufacturing processes, STL is
often considered an abbreviation for standard tessellation language.)
The STL file is created by taking a 3D model from CAD software and converting it into a
surface mesh consisting of many triangles. The beauty of the STL format is that the
number of triangles determines the detail of the resulting surface mesh, making it scalable.
With this file format in hand, Hull was able to create software to translate the 3D model
into a series of instructions for his printer to follow.
In 1983, Hull successfully printed his first 3D model: a basic cup. Knowing he had a
viable and useful new method of rapidly creating prototypes, he filed his patent for SLA in
1984. In 1986, his patent was granted, and in the same year he created his company 3D
Systems to develop and sell SLA printers.
FASCINATING FACT
While Charles W. Hull did patent his SLA process, he didn’t patent the STL file format that he
developed. This has allowed STL files to be used by other 3D printer manufacturers and
even in other types of machines, like computer numerical control (CNC) mills. For this reason, the
STL file format has become the standard for 3D printing and CNC milling.
The Invention of FDM Printing
The fused deposition modeling (FDM) printing process—a technology used by the vast
majority of consumer printers today—was originally developed by Scott Crump in 1989,
in order to ease the process of prototyping at IDEA, Inc., a company he cofounded in
1982. Crump, along with FDM printing itself, also developed some of the necessary
associated technologies (such as ABS filament, which I’ll discuss more in Chapter 4).
After inventing the FDM 3D printing process in 1989, Crump founded Stratasys—
currently the largest 3D printer manufacturer—with his wife Lisa. In 2009, Stratasys’s
FDM printing patent expired, opening up the market for consumer FDM 3D printers,
usually referred to as fused filament fabrication (FFF) for non-Stratasys 3D printers.
The Development of Other 3D Printing Processes
During the same time frame that Stratasys and 3D Systems were developing SLA and
FDM 3D printing, other 3D printing processes were being developed independently. At
the University of Austin in the mid-1980s, selective laser sintering (SLS) was developed

by Dr. Carl Deckard and Dr. Joe Beaman with sponsorship from Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA). This technology was originally sold by DTM
Corporation, which was then purchased by 3D Systems in 2001.
Meanwhile, in the early ’90s at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), inkjet
3D printing was invented. Z Corp. gained the license for this technology and produced
inkjet 3D printers until 2012. On January 3, 2012, Z Corp. was purchased by 3D Systems
in order to acquire the associated inkjet printing patents and licenses.
Due to the expiration of key patents, many of these technologies are starting to enter the
consumer market (or will be soon). But it was FDM printing that jump-started consumer
3D printing. This was mostly thanks to the RepRap project.
The RepRap Project
3D Systems, Stratasys, and others revolutionized research and development with 3D
printing. But for many years, 3D printers remained expensive and complex tools. The high
learning curve to use them meant that most users needed special training, and their high
cost meant they were out of reach for an individual person. That remained true until the
RepRap project was launched in 2005 by Dr. Adrian Bowyer, an engineering lecturer at a
university in the United Kingdom.
Initial Intentions
When Dr. Bowyer first founded the RepRap project, his intentions were simple: to develop
an inexpensive open-source 3D printer, with a long-term goal of self-replication. The
name “RepRap” is a contraction of “replicating rapid prototyper.” The idea is that the best
way to get a 3D printer into as many hands as possible is to design a 3D printer that can
3D print a copy of itself. If each person prints two new printers for friends, the spread
would be exponential, and before long, everyone would have small-scale manufacturing at
their fingertips.
The goal of self-replication is a long way off from fruition; it is a lofty goal, after all. Such
a design would have to be capable of not only printing the plastic frame pieces, but also
motors, electronics, and other complex nonplastic parts. But that optimistic long-term goal
has yielded bountiful developments for consumer 3D printers.
The Importance of Open Source
One of the core tenants of the RepRap project, possibly the most important of them, is that
it is completely open source. Every design and development is completely public,
allowing anyone to use the designs and contribute to the project.
Anytime a new breakthrough is made, it can be immediately released and integrated into
the design of new printers. A good example of this is the RepRap Arduino Mega Pololu
Shield (RAMPS) control board, which is essentially the brain of the 3D printer. The
RAMPS board connects to an Arduino (another open-source project) to provide computer
control of the 3D printer’s motors and extruder. The development of RAMPS allowed
people to quickly, cheaply, and easily control their 3D printers, so it was quickly

integrated into the design of subsequent RepRap printers.
DEFINITION
Arduino is an open-source platform for developing and prototyping electronics. Arduino
models are generally small circuit boards without inputs and outputs for controlling various
electronics. The Arduino Mega is used by the RAMPS control board for 3D printing.
The same is true of any other new RepRap development. Because it’s open source, there
are no patents to deal with, and the new development can be freely used and improved.
This concept has been essential to the success and rapid evolution of RepRap 3D printers,
and consumer printers in general.
Rapid Development
Due to their open-source nature, RepRap printers have evolved extremely quickly. The
first complete design, the Darwin 3D printer, was released in 2007. Darwin was a very
basic design, wrought with limitations and capable of only mediocre-quality printing, but
it proved that 3D printers could be inexpensive and built at home by hobbyists. Like most
subsequent RepRap printers, and consumer printers in general, Darwin utilized the fused
filament fabrication (FFF) 3D printing process. FFF is exactly the same as FDM in
practice (filament is melted and squeezed out of a nozzle in lines, forming layers) and was
only named differently to avoid legal problems with Stratasys, who patented the FDM
process.
The RepRap Darwin, which was the first design released by the RepRap project.
In 2009, a new RepRap design called Mendel was released. It made a number of

improvements to the Darwin design, which increased reliability and print quality and
decreased the difficulty of building the printer. Mendel integrated many developments that
had been made between 2007 and 2009 into a complete package, which would be a
continuing trend with new designs that followed.
By the time the Prusa Mendel and Huxley RepRap designs were released in 2010, the
community had already grown tremendously. Many offshoots and derivatives of the
standard models already existed, making improvements and customizations to suit
individual tastes. Today, there are at least 30 official RepRap designs, with derivatives
numbering in the hundreds. Current designs rival the consumer printers being released by
companies like 3D Systems and Stratasys, who independently developed their own
(closed-source) designs. RepRap printers have achieved quality and reliability so high that
they’re even being used in professional prototyping settings.
FASCINATING FACT
RepRap models, following the convention set by the original Darwin, are named after notable
evolutionary biologists. However, some derivatives, such as the Prusa Mendel, are named
after their designers or names they chose.
Refinement, Availability, and Your Wallet
The jump from expensive professional 3D printers to consumer 3D printers happened
astonishingly quickly. In just a few years, consumer 3D printing went from being
experimental, unreliable, and difficult to something that could feasibly be taken advantage
of by the average hobbyist. So how did that rapid evolution happen, and what drove it?
That was largely due to the development pioneered by the RepRap project.
Until the RepRap Darwin proved that consumer 3D printers were feasible, virtually all 3D
printers were expensive professional machines meant for corporate buyers. But with the
success of the RepRap project, consumer 3D printing was suddenly on everyone’s mind.
3D printer manufacturers specializing in inexpensive models intended for home use began
popping up rapidly. Some of these manufacturers sold printers based on RepRap designs,
while others developed their own. However, even those that developed their own did so
with knowledge and information that often originated with the RepRap project.
In the short time since Darwin was released in 2007, the consumer 3D printer market has
grown exponentially. Prices have dropped from the tens of thousands of dollars to just a
few hundred dollars for the least expensive printers. But it’s not just the price that has
changed. The quality of available 3D printers has evolved by leaps and bounds as well.
Just like with the Cambrian Explosion, the market has gone from being essentially
nonexistent to being a huge and diverse ecosystem full of evolved and refined 3D printers.
What does that explosion of 3D printer evolution in recent years mean for the current
market? With such a short history, you might expect that 3D printers aren’t quite ready for
mainstream use, and to an extent you’re right. 3D printing in the home is still pretty
experimental, and it’s not as simple as printing on a sheet of paper with an inkjet printer.
But 3D printing is a revolutionary and exciting technology, and the pace at which it’s

improving is astounding.
Maturation of Technology
No matter what the particular product is, you can bet that it will improve as the associated
technology matures. This has been especially evident since the advent of personal
computing. The first personal computers were big, expensive, slow, and weren’t
particularly useful. But the technology improved so quickly that within a few years, prices
had dropped dramatically and usefulness had improved exponentially. Of course, now the
technology is so good that computers are ubiquitous.
A similar metamorphosis is happening with 3D printers right now. We’re already past the
“expensive and useless” stage now, and we’re well into 3D printing entering mainstream
use. As the technology has matured, proven formulas and design principles have started to
emerge.
In the early days of consumer 3D printing, everything was still highly experimental.
Engineers were still trying to figure out the best way to design printers, individual parts
were still being cobbled together from whatever was available on the market, and printing
methods and practices were still being developed. Now we’ve entered a stage of
refinement. We’ve got the basics down, there is a solid knowledge base with which to
work from, and industry standards have started to form.
At this point, printer manufacturers are no longer trying to simply invent a practical 3D
printer; instead, they’re improving the functionality of proven designs. In the same way
that auto manufacturers refine existing engine designs rather than inventing new engines,
3D printer manufacturers are now working on refining their printers to make them better
and more useful.
Availability of Parts
As a technology matures, there is also a significant increase in the availability of parts
specific to that industry. When a company like Dell decides to build a new laptop, they
don’t manufacture all of the individual parts from scratch. Instead, they purchase
processors from Intel, memory from Corsair, hard drives from Seagate, and so on. These
parts are all standardized, and Dell can purchase them knowing they’ll work together.
They can then assemble the parts into a working computer of their design.
FASCINATING FACT
Just 10 years ago, in 2004, the most inexpensive 3D printers available still cost about
$25,000. Now, in 2014, functional 3D printers can be purchased for as little as $200. This
perfectly illustrates the effect that development and parts availability has had on 3D printer prices.
The same process is true in most industries. But until recently, 3D printing was so new
that individual parts simply weren’t available to printer manufacturers. Manufacturers
were forced to either repurpose parts used in other industries (which may not be well

suited to 3D printing) or make them themselves (in which case, quality and cost became a
problem). The lack of parts available in the 3D printing industry was a huge factor in the
high costs of early consumer printers.
But that has started to change. Many parts are starting to become available to printer
manufacturers. Just like Dell can order a processor from Intel, a 3D printer manufacturer
can now order a hot end, control board, or heated bed for use in their printers. This has
greatly reduced the costs involved in designing and manufacturing 3D printers and has
also improved quality.
Instead of the printer manufacturer having to try and design each and every individual part
with marginal results, they can now order them from a company which specializes in that
individual part. E3D, for example, is a company that makes hot ends for 3D printers, and
that’s all they do. Because it’s their sole focus, E3D can concentrate on just trying to make
the best hot ends on the market. Printer manufacturers can then purchase those hot ends
for their printers and have a high-quality part without a massive design and manufacturing
investment.
A hot end manufactured by E3D that’s intended for use on a variety of printers.
With companies like E3D producing parts specifically for the 3D printing industry, the
quality of consumer 3D printers has increased very noticeably. And that will only get
better as new manufacturers of parts enter the market and competition increases.
The Race to the Lowest Price
That competition between part manufacturers, and the competition between 3D printer
manufacturers, has done wonders for the consumer market. Competition in the
marketplace always fuels progress and innovation, and that has been particularly evident
with 3D printers because it’s happened so fast. In the short time since the RepRap project
was started, a large number of 3D printer manufacturers have sprung up. Virtually all of
them have the same goal: to provide a high-quality and easy-to-use printer to consumers at
the lowest price possible.
Originally, that lowest price was still pretty high. But as parts availability has increased

and designs have matured, those prices have been falling like a rock. 3D printers are now
under $350, when originally the cheapest consumer printers were still thousands of
dollars.
HOT TIP
While prices are certainly going to keep going down, they’re already starting to level out. So
if you’ve been waiting to purchase a 3D printer until prices drop, don’t expect them to get
dramatically lower (at least not for a worthwhile model).
However, the race to have the lowest prices can only go so far before it levels out.
Materials and manufacturing are always going to be an unavoidable expense for 3D
printer manufacturers, and there will be a point when it’s just not possible to sell printers
any cheaper. We may not even be that far from that point today.
The good news is that just because prices can’t drop anymore, that doesn’t mean progress
can’t still be made. Once prices level out, the new race will be toward making the best
printer at that price. A $500 computer that you buy today will vastly outperform a $500
computer from 10 years ago. And something similar is likely to happen with 3D printers
in the future. Prices might level out at around a couple hundred dollars, but what you get
for that money will continue to get better and better as time passes.
The Least You Need to Know
3D printing was originally invented by Charles W. Hull. He also started 3D Systems, which remains one of the
largest 3D printer manufacturers. FDM 3D printing—the technology used on most consumer 3D printers—was
invented by Scott Crump, who went on to found Stratasys with his wife Lisa.
The consumer 3D printer market was largely nonexistent until the RepRap project fueled open-source
development.
3D printer prices have decreased dramatically as the technology has matured and parts have become available.
Quality, reliability, and ease of use have simultaneously improved as a result.
While the cost of 3D printers is sure to lower a little bit more, prices are starting to level out. However, the
printers themselves will almost definitely improve a great deal in coming years.

CHAPTER
3
Manufacturing with 3D Printers and
CNC Mills
In This Chapter
How 3D printers work
The workings of CNC mills
Should you use a 3D printer or a CNC mill?
When it comes to rapid prototyping, there are generally two approaches that can be taken:
3D printing and computer numerical control (CNC) milling. CNC milling isn’t strictly
considered “rapid prototyping,” but that’s mostly a matter of semantics. In practice, CNC
mills can create 3D parts just like a 3D printer, and can often do it more quickly and with
greater precision.
However, CNC mills and 3D printers differ greatly in their actual operation. Essentially,
they’re two completely different ways of solving the same problem: how to quickly create
a functional three-dimensional part from a computer model. 3D printers solve this problem
with additive manufacturing, meaning the 3D printer starts with nothing and adds material
to create the part. On the other hand, CNC mills use subtractive manufacturing, a process
which starts with a block of material and cuts it away, leaving the part behind.
Both processes have their advantages and disadvantages and are useful in different
situations. You’ve purchased this book, so you’ve probably already decided that 3D
printing is right for you. So why even discuss CNC milling? For one, highlighting the
differences will help you understand how 3D printing works and its benefits. The second
reason is more practical: it’s often possible to convert CNC mills into 3D printers, and
some manufacturers are even building multipurpose machines that are capable of both
CNC milling and 3D printing. In this chapter, I take you through the functions of both 3D
printers and CNC mills and how they can be useful to you in the 3D printing process.
The Simple Principle Behind 3D Printing
3D printing is an additive manufacturing process, and how a 3D printer operates is all
about laying down new material as precisely as possible. For virtually all 3D printers
today, this is accomplished by building the part up in a series of horizontal layers stacked
on top of each other. In consumer 3D printing, those layers are almost always created by
extruding molten plastic in a precise 2D cross-section of the part.

Slicing and Creating Layers for Your Model
The one thing that virtually all 3D printers have in common, regardless of the particular
technology they’re using, is that they all build parts layer by layer. Part of the 3D printing
work flow is taking the desired 3D model (generally in STL format) and feeding it into
slicing software. This appropriately named software then slices that 3D model into a series
of thin horizontal cross-sections that will form the complete part when stacked.
A screen capture of Slic3r, an open-source program for slicing models for 3D printing.
These horizontal cross-sections (called layers) can vary in thickness depending on the
hardware of the 3D printer being used and the settings entered by the user. For consumer
3D printers, the layer thickness is generally somewhere between .10mm and .50mm,
although it can be outside that range with the right hardware and settings.
HOT TIP
Check to see if the manufacturer of a 3D printer has published recommended layer settings.
Manufacturers usually do testing to determine an optimal layer thickness based on their
hardware. These recommended settings will be a good starting point and will help you quickly
achieve high-quality prints.
Layer thickness is one of the most relevant contributors in the quality of the printed part.
The thinner each layer is, the higher the quality of print. The easiest way to visualize this
is to picture it at its extremes. If you had a model with very thick layers, say 5mm (which
is way outside of what actual 3D printers will print), your printed part would be extremely
blocky. At the other end of the spectrum, a model printed with extremely small layers, like
.01mm, would yield a very-high-quality result.

The difference between 5mm (left) and .01mm (right) layer heights.
But, of course, there are limitations that keep you from being able to print very small
layers. The hardware itself, especially for consumer fused filament fabrication (FFF) 3D
printers, has limits on how thin it can extrude filament. Even if the hardware was capable
of extremely thin layers, it would take an impractical amount of time for the slicing
software to generate the layers.
The most noticeable factor for the end user, however, ends up being print time. As the
thickness of the layers decreases, the total number of layers increases. The more layers
there are to print, the longer it will take the print to complete. For example, if a particular
model takes two hours to print with layers set at .4mm, you would expect it to take four
hours when the layer thickness is cut in half to .2mm. You doubled the number of layers,
and so the time to print would double as well, right?
Unfortunately, that’s not the case, and the print time would actually increase by a lot more
than that. The reason for this is that the filament being extruded has a 3D profile, so as the
height decreases (in the Z direction), its width (in the X/Y plane) also decreases. The
result is that each layer itself takes longer to print, in addition to having more layers to
print.
Extruding Filament
Filament extrusion is how the 3D printer actually creates each of those layers. In consumer
FFF printers, the process generally works like this: a spool of filament is fed into an
extruder (see Chapter 7), which has a motor and drive system to push the filament into the
hot end. The hot end then very quickly melts the filament and pushes it through a small
nozzle. The result is a thin thread of soft molten plastic being squirted out of the nozzle.
DEFINITION
The hot end of a 3D printer is what heats and melts the filament that is fed by the
extruder assembly. As filament is pushed into the hot end, a heating element heats the hot end.
The temperature is hot enough to almost instantly melt the plastic into a very viscous fluid, which is
then squeezed out of the nozzle and deposited on the print bed.
While the 3D printer is running, the tip of the nozzle is held very close to the print bed.
As it’s being ejected from the nozzle, the thread of plastic sticks to the print bed. The 3D
printer continuously moves the tip of the nozzle around the print bed, trailing a thread of
plastic behind, to form a solid layer of plastic that matches the layer generated by the

slicing software. The printer then moves the nozzle up slightly (relative to the bed) and
starts extruding a new layer of plastic on top of the previous layer. That process is repeated
until all the layers have been printed and the part is complete.
The size of the molten plastic thread coming out of the nozzle, the distance between the
nozzle and print bed, and the amount of filament being pushed into the hot end are how
the 3D printer controls the thickness of the layer it’s printing. The thread size is directly
proportional to the size of the hole in the tip of the nozzle. So layer thickness can be
adjusted by changing these parameters.
Molten filament being extruded to create the first layer of a part.
However, as I touched on in the previous section, the layer thickness is linked to the
amount of time it takes to print the layer. As that thread of molten plastic gets thinner, it
takes more time to create a solid layer. The result is a trend that holds true in most aspects
of 3D printing: the quality of the printed object and the time it takes to print are locked
together.
CNC Milling and How It Works
Milling machines are a standard tool in machine shops around the world. In their most
basic form, they have a motor called a spindle that spins an end mill (which is very similar
to a drill bit). The material to be milled is attached to a platform that can be moved in

three (or more) dimensions, relative to the end mill. The machinist then manually moves
the platform (or end mill) around using control mechanisms. This allows him to cut away
at the material with the end mill to form the desired part.
FASCINATING FACT
Before the advent of computer numerical control, there was just numerical control. Numerical
control mills relied on a complex mechanical punch card system to program the mill. These
programs took a great deal of time and expertise to create, but the repeatability of the programs
made numerical control mills useful in manufacturing settings.
CNC mills simply remove manual operation from the equation. Instead of a machinist
having to manipulate the controls, a computer controls the movement. The way the
computer controls movement is actually pretty similar to the way 3D printers work:
electric motors move the end mill in the X, Y, and Z axes relative to the print bed. The
primary differences are the subtractive manufacturing aspect and the materials CNC mills
can work with compared to 3D printers. The similarity between the three-axis movement
in CNC mills and 3D printers is what makes it possible to convert a CNC mill into a 3D
printer. It’s also what allows manufacturers to make machines that can handle both tasks.
Subtracting with CAM Software
Because CNC mills create a part by subtracting material (as opposed to adding it like a 3D
printer), the software and process they follow are completely different. While 3D printers
add material in layers, CNC mills start with a block of material (or bar, cylinder, and so on
depending on the stock used) and cut away material in “pockets.” They don’t cut away a
layer at time, but rather cut out particular sections and features (often completely) before
moving onto other features. Sometimes cast metal parts are even used as the initial stock
and then are refined with CNC milling.
This is controlled with computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) software. Like slicing
software, CAM software takes a 3D model (often in STL format) and processes it to create
instructions for the CNC mill to follow. However, unlike slicing software for 3D printers,
CAM software generally requires much more operator interaction. This is a profession
unto itself, because setting up a CNC program requires experience and skill.

CAM software serves the same purpose as slicing software but follows very different rules.
HOT TIP
The skill and experience of the CNC operator is important because CNC milling techniques
and settings can vary tremendously based on the shape of the part being made, the material
it’s cut from, the type of end mill being used, and the desired surface finish and quality. For these
reasons (among others), 3D printers are more suitable for home use, as the slicing software is
much simpler to use than CNC CAM software.
Milling the Material
While 3D printers are mostly limited to plastic (except in experimental printers and very
expensive printers), a common CNC mill is capable of creating parts from a variety of
materials. Steel, aluminum, brass, titanium, wood, and most plastic types are all possible
to machine on a suitable CNC mill. Whatever the material, CNC mills start with a block of
it, and whatever is milled is either thrown away or recycled.
That versatility makes CNC milling useful for more than just rapid prototyping. CNC
mills are very often used to actually manufacture parts, especially aluminum and steel
parts. The precision of CNC milling also allows it to achieve very tight tolerances that are
necessary for production parts.
However, because milling is a subtractive process, the material that’s cut away is generally
wasted. 3D printers usually only use the material that’s actually needed to create the part
(although sometimes more is used for support structures). Considering the high cost of
materials, that can be a significant factor in the price of the part.
Pros and Cons of 3D Printers vs. CNC

Mills
3D printers and CNC mills are both versatile and useful, and each excels at different tasks.
Each has jobs for which they’re better suited, and each has jobs for which they would be a
poor choice. So what are the pros and cons of each? When should you use one versus the
other?
Cost
The most obvious difference, for anyone purchasing a 3D printer or CNC mill, is going to
be cost. Capable consumer 3D printers can be purchased for under $1,000, while CNC
mills capable of machining metals like aluminum and steel are rarely less than $5,000 (and
are usually much more). However, less powerful CNC mills capable of milling soft
materials like wood are significantly less expensive (usually less than $2,000).
The cost difference is mostly due to the expensive high-power electric motor needed for
the CNC spindle, the cooling systems needed when milling metal, and the fact that CNC
mills require a very solid and rigid frame. 3D printers, in comparison, require much less
expensive parts to build.
Aside from the price of the machine itself, there are other costs to consider. CNC mills
require end mills, which need to be replaced after they become worn. Most CNC operators
prefer to have a range of end mills as well, in different sizes and shapes for different jobs.
3D printers, on the other hand, generally only require that your purchase the material
itself.
If you wanted to convert a CNC mill to a 3D printer, it is relatively inexpensive, generally
only a few hundred dollars.
HOT TIP
While 3D printers don’t require expensive consumable accessories like end mills, you
should consider the cost of filament. Most people end up purchasing many rolls of filament
in a variety of colors and materials. This expense can be significant, especially for exotic filament
materials.
Part Geometry
One of the biggest advantages that 3D printers have to offer is their ability to create
complex geometry. There are parts that can be 3D printed that simply aren’t possible with
traditional manufacturing methods. The way that 3D printers create parts in layers means
that internal geometry can be produced just as easily as external geometry, a prospect
which simply isn’t possible with any other manufacturing method.
An easy-to-understand example of this is a simple cube with a hollow sphere in the center.
No other manufacturing method is capable of producing such a part, but it’s a trivial task
for a 3D printer. Practically speaking, it’s not any more difficult for a 3D printer to create a
part like that than it would be to create a solid cube.
This capability unleashes a whole world of possibilities that were previously considered
unfeasible or simply impossible. You could even print two (or more) parts that are already

assembled, allowing you to create assemblies which wouldn’t be possible with any other
manufacturing tool.
A part that could only be created by a 3D printer.
Even more traditional parts are easier to create with a 3D printer. Parts with features on all
sides, for example, can’t be machined on a standard three-axis CNC mill without
additional work. The part would have to be turned over to machine the other side, or a
fourth axis would have to be added to the mill for rotating the part (which is a fairly
expensive addition).
However, 3D printers do have limitations on what kind of geometry they can handle
(especially consumer FFF printers). These limitations are usually related to overhangs in
the part, as there always has to be something to print on top of. But that can be overcome
by printing support material which is later removed.
FASCINATING FACT
3D printers with two or more extruders can use one of the extruders solely for printing
support material. This support material is often a special kind of filament produced
specifically for this use. Once the print is finished, it can be soaked in a chemical bath, which
dissolves the support material but leaves the rest of the part untouched. Such a setup would be
capable of producing almost any geometry imaginable.
Material Matters
As I explained in the previous sections, the material CNC mills are capable of machining
is a lot more varied than what 3D printers can print. 3D printers in the consumer market

are limited to different kinds of plastics, while CNC mills can machine most common
materials (with the right setup).
But it’s actually not that simple in practice. The cost of material is certainly a concern.
Machinable blocks of material suitable for CNC milling tend to be fairly expensive and
have to be purchased or cut in the necessary sizes. If the part you’re making isn’t very
close in size to the block of material, the chances are good that a lot of material will go to
waste.
Milling different materials also requires that the CNC mill be set up for that material. The
end mill, cooling system, and even the frame of the CNC mill itself needs to be correct for
that material. This is why mills are less expensive when they only need to be capable of
cutting soft materials, and are more expensive when they need to cut hard materials like
steel. Each material also requires different milling settings, and it takes experience and
knowledge to properly mill a variety of materials.
In contrast, 3D printers generally only require that you adjust a few settings (namely
temperature) when switching between materials. Simply put, 3D printing is much easier,
and the learning curve is shorter than CNC milling. CNC mills certainly have the
advantage of material versatility, but that versatility is difficult to achieve.
Surface Finish
The final quality of a part is largely a consequence of the surface finish on the part. The
surface finish, in this context, is mostly about how smooth the completed part is. In a
manufacturing setting, surface finish has a slightly different connotation. For production
parts, a smooth surface isn’t always what is desired. Sometimes it’s preferable to have a
rough finish, brushed finish, or matte finish. These are all different types of surface
finishes, and there are many others. No particular type is necessarily better; it’s just a
matter of what’s needed for the part.
However, in most cases, the manufacturer must first start with a smooth finish and then
add the desired surface finish. If we use injection molded plastic parts as an example, this
process is part of making the mold. If a textured matte finish is desired on the part, that
finish has to be on the surface of the mold. In this case, the mold is milled as smoothly as
possible, and then the finish is added afterward (either mechanically with sanding or with
chemical etching).
In almost every case, the mold or part is ideally as smooth as possible to begin with, and
then the surface finish is added. The reason it’s done that way is to avoid imparting
unintended artifacts onto the surface. And so, you’d want to be able to achieve as smooth
of a surface finish as possible when initially making a part.
Getting a very smooth finish is usually a simple matter with a CNC mill. It does take skill
on the CNC operator’s part, and usually a smoother finish takes longer to machine, but it’s
certainly possible to get a very smooth finish straight off the mill. Unfortunately, this isn’t
the case with 3D printers, and is probably one of the primary reasons that 3D printing isn’t
more common in production manufacturing.
As I’ve explained previously, the nature of 3D printing makes ridges on the surface almost
unavoidable. The way 3D printers create parts by adding layers virtually ensures that

small differences between those layers will be visible. Very-high-end (non-FFF) 3D
printers used in professional settings can achieve smooth surface finishes, but those kinds
of printers are far out of reach for consumers. Their high cost also makes them impractical
for any kind of manufacturing, even for the companies that can afford them.
Even at high-quality settings, a 3D-printed part has a rough surface.
So is it ever possible to achieve a smooth surface finish on a consumer 3D printer?
Luckily, the answer is yes! Smooth finishes on 3D-printed parts can be attained with
postprint finishing. There are many techniques to do this: everything from simply sanding
the part to more complicated chemical methods. But those postprint finishing methods are
still an additional step that CNC mills don’t require.
At the end of the day, if you’re looking for professional-looking parts with a smooth
surface finish, CNC mills are the better choice. Without postprint finishing, 3D-printed
parts will always look like they were 3D printed. You can get a nice and professional
finish on a 3D-printed part; it will just take more work.
Using the Right Tool for the Job
With all of these differences, how do you know if you should use a 3D printer or a CNC
mill? As always, it’s important to choose the right tool for the job. Just like you wouldn’t
use a wood saw to cut a metal pipe, you don’t want to use a 3D printer when a CNC mill
would do the job better (and vice versa). In this case, choosing the right tool is about first
determining what the job will be.

HOT TIP
There are practical differences which might affect your decision as well. For example, CNC
mills are very loud and can be quite messy. 3D printers, however, are usually fairly quiet and
don’t create much mess. If you live in an apartment, a CNC mill would probably be pretty
disturbing to your neighbors, while a 3D printer shouldn’t even be noticeable to them.
If you intend to make production parts or molds for injection-molded parts, a CNC mill is
generally the clear choice. They’re still capable of creating prototype parts in a short
amount of time but can also produce professional parts with a high-quality surface finish.
However, their noise, mess, and expense are certainly a concern.
For most home users and hobbyists, a 3D printer will be easier to use and more useful in
general. You can create a wide range of parts with little concern about geometry
limitations and complicated settings. The cost of material is lower, you waste less of it,
and the noise and mess are minimal.
In the end, it’s easy to see why a machine capable of both tasks would be so useful. The
frame, movement mechanics, and controls are very similar between 3D printers and CNC
mills. Switching the CNC spindle for an extruder allows you to do both CNC milling and
3D printing with the same basic machine. This is certainly more expensive than a
dedicated 3D printer or CNC mill, but much less expensive than purchasing one of each.
The Least You Need to Know
3D printers create parts by building up layers of material, a process called additive manufacturing.
CNC mills use subtractive manufacturing, which means they create parts by cutting away material.
Generally speaking, 3D printers are better for the home user, while CNC mills may be a better choice for
businesses, depending on the expected use.

CHAPTER
4
Types of 3D Printers
In This Chapter
Stereolithography and its subset, digital light processing
Creating colorful models with powder bed printers
Printing strong parts with MultiJet printers
Melting particles with selective laser sintering
The reason for fused filament fabrication’s popularity
So far in this book, I’ve talked about 3D printing in generic terms that apply to most 3D
printers. But in practice, not all 3D printers work in the same way. To move forward with
this book, I need to pick a particular 3D printing process that I can dig deeper into.
There are many kinds of 3D printing technologies on the market today, and each of them
operates differently. Most of these processes are used specifically for a certain application
or a particular material. I don’t have the space to cover every process here, so instead I go
over the most common types of 3D printing in use today, plus talk about why fused
filament fabrication (FFF) printing is the go-to type for many hobbyists.
Stereolithography
If you recall from Chapter 2, this is the original type of 3D printing process developed by
Charles W. Hull and his company 3D Systems in the ’80s. Stereolithography (SLA) works
by shining a UV laser onto a vat of UV-curable photopolymer resin. The laser is focused
on the resin to produce the 2D cross-section of each layer on a build platform, and then the
platform is slightly lowered in order to form the next layer.
SLA, aside from having the proven history of being the first 3D printing process, has some
key advantages which make it a popular choice even today. An SLA printer can print parts
with relatively smooth surface finishes compared to other types of 3D printing, with
almost completely unnoticeable differences between layers. This quality is possible
because of the high precision of the UV laser, which also allows it to create parts within
very tight tolerances.
The quality and precision of SLA printers makes them ideal in professional research and
development situations, where prototype parts need to very closely resemble their mass-
produced counterparts. The surface finish also has a high-enough quality that SLA printed

parts can be used as masters for creating molds.
However, the quality of an SLA printer comes at a high price. High-end consumer model
SLA printers have started entering the market recently, but they’ve mostly been used only
by businesses for creating prototypes. The cheapest SLA printers start in the thousands of
dollars and can be more than a hundred thousand dollars for professional models.
Aside from the cost of the printer itself, expensive resin is also needed as the material to
create parts. This resin can cost anywhere from $80 to $200 per liter, and is much more
expensive than the plastic filament used in most consumer 3D printers. The way SLA
printers create parts in a vat also means that, for conventional designs at least, hollow parts
will be filled with resin. This can add to the cost of the material and to the weight of the
part.
In some cases, the printed part requires additional curing as well. This is dependent on the
printer and resin being used, but is still a factor. Curing the part generally requires a
separate device and additional time.
Digital Light Processing
Digital light processing (DLP) 3D printing is very similar to SLA printing; in fact, it’s
considered a subset of SLA printing. DLP printing works almost exactly like SLA
printing, with a vat of photopolymer resin that is hardened layer by layer.
The primary difference between DLP printing and traditional SLA printing is the method
used to shine light onto the resin. If you’re familiar with video projector systems, you may
have already heard of DLP in the context of movie projects. The technology is used to
project light (in the form of images) onto a screen.
This same technology can also be used to cure the layers of resin in a DLP 3D printer.
Instead of projecting a video, a DLP printer projects light in the shape of each cross-
section on the resin. This allows a DLP 3D printer to cure an entire layer at once, a big
advantage over the single-point laser used in conventional SLA printers.
FASCINATING FACT
DLP 3D printers are capable of curing an entire layer of resin in just a few seconds. This
speed allows them to print very quickly compared to other types of printers.
By curing an entire layer at once, DLP printers dramatically reduce the time it takes to
print a part. Additionally, the size, shape, and complexity of each layer have no effect on
the time it takes a print. Aside from the obvious advantage of being able to print large and
complex parts, this also means that many duplicate parts can all be printed at once without
adding any print time compared to a single part.
However, DLP 3D printers tend to have the same downside as standard SLA printers: cost.
While the price of resin is usually about the same as SLA resin, the printers themselves are
more expensive. DLP projectors are still complex and expensive pieces of technology, and
adding them to a 3D printer is not a cheap proposition.

Powder Bed Printing
A handful of specific printing processes could all be considered powder bed printing. All
of these types of printers have one thing in common: a powder material is spread on a bed,
and a liquid binder is used to solidify it in layers. The differences come from the
following:
The type of powder material used
The type of binder used
The method used to inject the binder into the powder
The types of powder and binder used can vary based on need, and have evolved over the
years since power bed printing was invented. It can be anything from simple plaster
powder that is solidified by injecting water (like the original binder jetting process
developed at MIT and sold by Z Corp.) to advanced resin or epoxy combinations that
replicate common engineering materials.
One of the most common and popular of these powder bed printers on the market today is
the inkjet type. They use a print head similar to what is used in common household inkjet
printers, but instead of printing ink, they print a binder onto the powder.
There are two primary advantages that powder bed inkjet printers have over other types of
printers: support material isn’t necessary, and they have the capability of printing
multicolor parts. They don’t need additional support material because the powder itself
can support overhangs while the part is being printed.
The leftover powder can be reused, so not much material is wasted. However, cleaning the
powder off the part isn’t a small job. It can be a time-consuming task, sometimes made
even more difficult by the fragility of the part produced by some printers (and depending
on the material). Removing the powder without damaging the part in those cases takes
finesse and care, but the other major benefits can make that inconvenience worthwhile.
By using multiple inkjets in the print head, each with a different-color binder, parts can be
printed in multiple colors. Colors can even be combined, similarly to inkjet printing on
paper, to create a wide spectrum of colors.
The ability to handle overhangs with ease and to print colorful parts has made powder bed
inkjet printers very popular for creating architectural models. Usage for architectural
models is also a result of the relative ease of building large powder bed printers, which
aren’t limited to small sizes like other technologies. This allows architecture firms to print
large full-color models of their building designs for presentation purposes.
Most powder bed printers have a major downside though, which is that prints tend to be
brittle and weak (though this problem has largely been solved with newer materials and
processes). This often necessitates the use of additional postprint treatments just to make
the part suitable for handling. The powder bed also introduces the same problem that is
common with printers that use vats of resin: you can’t print a hollow part without a way of
removing the unused material inside before it’s completely sealed.

MultiJet Printing
MultiJet Printing (MJP) , also called PolyJet Printing, is another 3D printer technology
that uses an inkjet-style print head and can print in multiple colors. But unlike powder bed
printers, MJP printers don’t use powder beds; instead, they print UV-curable resin directly
onto the print bed. MJP printers add a UV light to the print head, which instantly cures the
photopolymer resin as it’s deposited.
HOT TIP
MultiJet Printing and PolyJet Printing are examples of different companies using similar
technologies under different names. MultiJet Printing is used by 3D Systems, while
Stratasys uses PolyJet Printing. Both work in approximately the same way but use different names
for trademark, patent, or marketing reasons. When looking at 3D printers, keep in mind that the
same type of printer can go by multiple names.
Because they use resin instead of powder, MJP and PolyJet printers can produce strong
and usable parts. This gives them a distinct advantage over powder bed printers, which
produce relatively weak parts.
MJP printers handle overhangs by printing a gel support material where necessary. The
support material can be easily washed away without damaging the part, making the
support removal process easier and faster than more traditional approaches.
The disadvantages of MJP and PolyJet printers are the cost of the printer itself and the cost
of the resin. The resin cost is on par with the resin used in other types of printers.
However, to print in multiple colors or materials, different types of resin are required. In
the long term, this shouldn’t add any significant cost, because the total amount of resin
being used should be roughly the same. But in the short term, it can be a large upfront cost
to get outfitted with a range of resin types.
The printers themselves are priced similarly to other professional 3D printers, which of
course are still too expensive for most consumers. Being a new technology, MJP printers
haven’t yet matured enough to reach more affordable prices that would allow them to be
purchased for home use.
Selective Laser Sintering
Selective laser sintering (SLS), direct metal laser sintering (DMLS), and selective laser
melting (SLM) all work in basically the same way. They use high-power lasers to actually
“sinter” or melt powdered particles together into a solid mass.
Like power bed inkjet printers, they use a container that is filled with powder layer after
layer. After a new layer of powder is added, the laser heats the part cross-section and then
moves onto the next layer. As usual, the process is repeated until the part is finished.
However, unlike other powder bed printing methods, SLS printing doesn’t require any
kind of binder. That means any material that can be powdered and melted or sintered with
a laser can be used, such as various metals, ceramics, plastics, and even green sand.

DEFINITION
Green sand is a specially formulated material used for sand casting. Sand casting is
used to produce metal parts by pouring molten metal into a mold made of sand. The mold is
normally produced by forming it around a positive master part; however, 3D printing the mold
removes the need to first create a master part.
These are the only commonly used 3D printers capable of printing metal parts, which
gives them an obvious advantage. In some cases, the printed parts can even be as strong as
an identical part manufactured by traditional means. This makes SLS-created parts
particularly unique and especially useful.
Unfortunately, SLS, DMLS, and SLM 3D printers are all very expensive at this point, to
the point that they’re mostly only used in a handful of industries that require the specific
capabilities they offer. In most cases, a capable multiaxis CNC mill is more economical
than an SLS printer, so companies that purchase them don’t usually do so without a strong
necessity.
Fused Filament Fabrication
All of the technologies I’ve talked about so far in this chapter have been too expensive or
too specialized for consumer use. So what process are you likely to use at home? That’s
where fused filament fabrication (FFF) comes in. This process takes a string of
thermoplastic (called filament), melts it, and deposits it on to the print bed.
FFF printers are highly economical, making them popular for consumer use. The
affordability of the printers themselves is due primarily to the low cost of the individual
parts which make up the printer and the fact that they don’t need to be precisely built to
function well. Most of the other printer types I’ve discussed are difficult to build and have
to be finely tuned to produce good results.
On the other hand, FFF printers can be built in a garage with common hand tools and still
print well. Mechanically speaking, they’re also relatively simple and easy to understand.
No complex laser or optical systems are needed, because they operate on mechanical
principles.
If you’ve ever used a hot glue gun, you can probably understand how an FFF 3D printer
works. The filament is comparable to the glue stick, the hot end is similar to the heated
nozzle of the glue gun, and the extruder works like the trigger system that pushes the glue
stick into the hot nozzle (although extruders work with continuous rotation).
The FFF 3D printer process, then, is like using a hot glue gun to draw a square, and then
another square on top of that one, and then another square on that one, and so on. The 3D
printer is doing it much more precisely than you could by hand, of course, and it’s doing it
with plastic, but the general idea is the same.
While the affordability of FFF 3D printers makes them ideal for consumer use, the
technology is used for professional 3D printers as well. Professional versions work in
exactly the same way as consumer models, just with greater precision and sometimes with
additional features added.

The cost advantage doesn’t stop at the printer itself either. The filament used in FFF
printers is the most inexpensive material available for any 3D printer out there. This is
partially due to the low-tech nature of the filament, but it’s also a result of the competition
in the consumer market driving prices down. The popularity of FFF printers has also
ensured rapid development of both the printers themselves and the filament used with
them.
While FFF printers are popular mostly because they’re affordable and easy to understand,
unfortunately, they probably yield the lowest-quality prints of any of the 3D printer types
discussed in this chapter. The filament extrusion method of layering plastic is inherently
imprecise. And, while a great deal of effort is being put into improving the quality, FFF
printers still lag behind the others.
HOT TIP
While the quality is lower than other printers, FFF printers can print a range of
thermoplastics. Many of those thermoplastics are popular for engineering work because of
their superior mechanical properties. Parts printed with materials like ABS and nylon are very
strong, and are usable as soon as they’re finished printing.
Another downside is the time it takes an FFF printer to create a part. Because of the
weight being moved around, FFF printers can only accelerate so fast. This makes small
features slower to print. Because the plastic is melted as it’s being deposited, it’s also
necessary for it to cool before printing another layer on top of it. Most of the time, it’s
already cool by the time the next layer is printed. But if the layers are very small, an FFF
3D printer will either need to pause between layers or risk deforming the part due to the
heat.
That heat also provides the underlying cause of the single biggest disadvantage of FFF
printers: warping. Because thermoplastics expand and contract as they’re heated and
cooled, the part actually changes shape slightly as it’s being printed. If some layers cool
before the others, this will result in the part warping or even cracking.

An FFF-printed part showing warping and cracking.
How extreme this warping is depends on the particular thermoplastic being used.
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS), for example, is especially prone to warping and
cracking. Other materials minimize warping, but none of them seem to be able to avoid it
entirely.
Printer manufacturers, in an effort to avoid warping and cracking issues, have introduced a
number of ways to try and control it—heated beds, enclosures, and heated print chambers.
These methods are mostly related to managing the temperature of the part to try and keep
it consistent throughout the print. These work fairly well and almost completely eliminate
the problem in some materials. Right now, however, it still can’t be avoided entirely.
FASCINATING FACT
Some of the methods of reducing warping, such as heated build chambers, are patented
technology. This means that small 3D printer manufacturers can’t use those methods without
making a deal with the patent owner. This is part of the reason that some of the features seen on
professional 3D printers aren’t available on consumer printers.
Though warping problems and relatively low print quality are certainly considerable
disadvantages, there is no denying the low cost of FFF 3D printers. They are by far the
most popular type of 3D printer on the consumer market, and virtually all printers in use
by hobbyist and home users today are FDM/FFF 3D printers. Therefore, it’s extremely
likely that this will be the type of printer you’ll be purchasing.
For that reason, throughout the rest of the book, I’ll be talking about 3D printing in the
context of FFF 3D printing. Many of the principles apply to other types of 3D printing as
well, but the FFF process is what I’ll be focusing on.

The Least You Need to Know
There are many types of 3D printers on the market, each with their own advantages and disadvantages.
While SLA, DLP, powder bed, MJP, and SLS printers print high-quality parts, their cost keeps many hobbyists
from buying them.
FFF 3D printers are the most popular for consumer use because of their affordability.

PART
2
All About the Hardware
3D printers are complicated machines, which is why I’m devoting this part to explaining
how all of that hardware actually works. Not only does understanding the hardware help
you understand how 3D printing works, but it also gives you the knowledge necessary to
troubleshoot any problems you may run into. You also learn how best to prepare your 3D
printer for successful prints.

CHAPTER
5
The Frame
In This Chapter
Cartesian-layout 3D printers
The importance of frame rigidity
Choosing the right-size printer for you
The frame of a 3D printer is what everything else is built on, making it a very important
factor in the quality of your prints. Printers are built in a variety of different ways, and all
the different layouts and construction materials make a difference. To understand why, it’s
best to start by learning how 3D printer frames are generally constructed.
In this chapter, I go over the Cartesian layout of 3D printers, construction techniques for
them, and the importance of size when it comes to your 3D printer.
Cartesian Layouts
When it comes to 3D printers, layout refers to the way the printer is designed to move in
three-dimensional space. That movement can be achieved in different ways, but the most
common of those is the Cartesian style. These printers are named after the Cartesian
coordinate system, which is the most basic way to define a point in 3D space. This
coordinate system is what you probably remember using in your math classes in school: a
point is defined by its X coordinate and Y coordinate on a 2D plane. With 3D Cartesian
coordinate systems, you’re simply adding another axis (Z) to define the vertical position
of the point.
DEFINITION
Cartesian is an adjective used to describe things related to René Descartes, who was a
French mathematician and philosopher. His many contributions to mathematics were the reason
for the Cartesian coordinate system being named for him (though he wasn’t solely responsible for
its development).
Cartesian 3D printers use the same basic principle to move the tip of the hot end to a
specific point. They have mechanisms to move in the X axis, Y axis, and Z axis, allowing
them to position the hot end anywhere in 3D space. For example, if the hot end needs to
move from the point [10, 10, 10] (X, Y, Z) to [20, 5, 10], it’s a simple matter of moving
the X axis 10 units in the positive direction and the Y axis 5 units in the negative direction.
3D printers with Cartesian layouts are by far the most common, both in the consumer
market and the professional market, most likely due to the simplicity of the math involved

in controlling their movement. Other types of layouts, like Delta printers, require the use
of trigonometry to adjust for a simple move on a single axis. Cartesian printers also seem
to be easier for people to understand because they mirror the Cartesian coordinate systems
used in CAD programs (see Chapter 15).
Ways Cartesian 3D Printers Are Constructed
Despite the simplicity of the way Cartesian 3D printers handle positioning, their actual
construction can be quite varied. The X, Y, and Z movement is only how the hot end
moves relative to the print bed. The parts that are actually physically moving can be
completely different between printers. One 3D printer model might have the print bed
move in the X and Y directions, and the hot end move in the Z direction. Another printer
might have the print bed move in the Y direction, and the hot end move in the X and Z
directions.
This 3D printer has a bed that moves in the Y axis and an extruder carriage that moves in the X and Z axes.
The most common setup right now seems to be to have the print bed moving in one
direction (either X or Y) and the hot end moving in Z and the other direction (either X or
Y). But this is by no means a rule, and it’s not even necessarily the best method. That’s
mostly because what’s best depends on your priorities and what you’re trying to achieve.
Cartesian Layout Considerations
So why do 3D printer manufacturers use different Cartesian layouts? Should it even matter

to you? The short answer to the first question is that one 3D printer manufacturer might be
trying to achieve something different than another manufacturer. The particular layout
they choose to use can affect the cost of the printer, the quality of the prints, the speed at
which it can print, the overall size of the printer, and the difficulty of building it.
Cost is usually the most obvious of the factors, and it’s certainly noticeable to both the
manufacturer and the customer. The cost varies between different setups because of the
materials needed and how powerful the motors need to be. If all of your movement is done
by the hot end while the print bed stays stationary, the Z axis motors will need to be very
powerful in order to lift the weight of all the components of the X and Y axes. And of
course, if a particular layout uses more material in its construction, it will cost more.
The quality of the prints and the speed at which the printer can print are also inherently
interrelated. Generally speaking, print speed is limited by print quality. Most printers are
capable of physically moving much faster than they actually print. It’s a matter of how fast
a printer can move while maintaining acceptable print quality. These two things are largely
determined by the amount of mass being moved and how well the frame of the printer can
handle the stress of that mass.
Print quality is affected by moving mass because of simple inertia. If you remember your
physics lessons, you’ll recall that inertia increases proportionally with mass. Inertia is the
resistance of a mass to change in its current state of motion. The reason this affects print
quality is pretty straightforward: if you’re printing in one direction and need to change
direction (for example, when you reach a corner), inertia will resist that change. And
because inertia is related to mass, that change in direction will be more difficult as more
mass is added. So the printer will have a tendency to overshoot the corner, resulting in
poor print quality on that corner.
This is why speed is a significant factor as well. If the moving mass is high on that axis,
the printer may not be able to turn that corner quickly at high speed. But at lower speeds,
the effect will be reduced, resulting in better print quality. The lesson here is that you can
print at faster speeds as moving mass is lowered while maintaining the same print quality.
FASCINATING FACT
Backlash (an undesirable delay in movement during direction changes) produces somewhat
similar effects to those caused by poor rigidity, but is a separate phenomenon with a different
cause. Backlash is caused by looseness in the interfacing parts of the linear movement systems
used on 3D printers. When that looseness is present, there is a small delay before the system is
engaged when the direction of an axis’s movement is changed.
But what does that have to do with the particular layout used for a given 3D printer? It
means that printer manufacturers try to reduce the moving mass on the X and Y axes,
which is why that movement is often divided between the hot end and the print bed. That
way, the one axis only has the mass and inertia of the extruder to deal with, while the other
axis only has to handle the mass and inertia of the print bed. This allows you print at
higher speeds while maintaining an acceptable print quality.
The size of the printer is also directly affected by the layout chosen, especially when you
consider the total area needed by the printer when the print bed moves. If the print bed
were to move in both the X and Y directions, the printer would need four times the area of

a completely stationary bed. This is simply because each axis would need to be twice as
long as the bed in order for the nozzle to reach every point on the bed. So if the goal is to
produce a very compact 3D printer that takes up very little desk space, a stationary bed
with all movement done by the hot end would be ideal. Of course, that would lead to a lot
of moving mass, and potential print speeds would be lower.
The size difference between a Printrbot Simple (left) and a LulzBot TAZ 4 (right). Note, however, that the Printrbot has a
6×6-inch bed, while the LulzBot has a 12×12-inch bed.
How all of this affects the difficulty of actually building the printer should be readily
apparent. The more complex the design of a 3D printer, the longer it will it take the
manufacturer to assemble it (or you, if you buy a kit). Between this and all of the factors
involved, it’s obvious that 3D printer manufacturers have a lot to consider when designing
a printer.
But should you be concerned with what layout a particular model uses? It does matter, for
the reasons I’ve gone over in this section. But it’s difficult to determine real-world results
based on the layout alone. That’s because things like the inertia and momentum can be
counteracted, and one of the best ways to do that is with a high-quality frame.
The Importance of Frame Construction
How the 3D printer is actually constructed is one of the most important factors when it
comes to print quality and reliability. Every other part of the printer could be perfect, but if
the frame is poorly constructed, the results will be very poor.
A 3D printer frame doesn’t just need to hold the other parts together; it also has to keep

them stable and aligned. It has to hold up to the forces of momentum and inertia caused by
the mass being moved around the printer’s axes, as well as keep the axes properly aligned
at all times and maintain the calibration of the printer under the stress of constant
movement and vibration.
Rigidity and How It Affects Quality and Reliability
The single most important characteristic of a 3D printer frame is rigidity. Flexibility in the
frame is the biggest enemy of print quality. If there is any flex in the frame, the
momentum of the moving parts will result in poor print quality, unless you print at slow
speeds.
Reliability is also affected by the rigidity of the frame. 3D printers require calibration in
order to produce high-quality prints. Calibration involves, among other things, setting a Z
height in a “Goldilocks zone.” If the Z height is too high, the first layer won’t adhere
properly to the print bed; if it’s too low, you won’t be able to extrude a clean and solid
line.
The acceptable range for Z height is very small; usually, it needs to be within 1/20 of a
millimeter for good results. A Z height outside of that range will result in failed or poor-
quality prints. To keep from having to frequently calibrate the Z height, a 3D printer
should be capable of maintaining your calibration for a long time. A flexible or loose
frame will cause your Z stop, Z axis components, or hot end to move slightly over time.
That slight movement means that you will have to constantly recalibrate your printer to
continue to get good results.
What Makes a Good Frame
So you now know why it’s important for the frame to be rigid, but what makes a high-
quality and solid frame? Rigid frames have a few characteristics in common:
The design of the frame structure: 3D printer frame structure design is a fairly complex
subject. Because of the complexity involved in designing a frame structure optimized for
rigidity, a lot of 3D printer manufacturers take the overkill approach by using heavy-duty
materials for the frame. The best way to be sure you have the most rigid frame possible is
to make it fully boxed, with each frame piece connected at both ends to another part of the
frame. Other more unconventional designs can still yield good results, but difficulty of
engineering them makes them less common.
HOT TIP
Your intuition might be your best tool when it comes to determining the quality of the frame.
Ideally, you want to actually get your hands on the printer and see how it feels. If you can
flex it with your hands, it’s probably not a good choice. But even just looking at it should give you a
good idea: if it looks nice and sturdy, it probably is.
The connections between frame components: Even the most ingenious frame design is
going to fail if the frame is held together with duct tape. Frame pieces should be connected
together with a strong material that resists flex, while the connections themselves should
be designed to resist movement in all directions. A simple flat sheet metal 90-degree
connector will do a great job of resisting flex and movement parallel to its plane but will

do a poor job when a perpendicular force is applied to that plane. To resist forces in all
directions, connectors should be 3D instead of flat. Or, if flat connectors are used, two
should be used together in a perpendicular orientation.
The frame material: In essence: strong materials are good. Metal is better than wood.
Steel is stronger (but heavier) than aluminum. Plastic could be okay if it’s a high-quality
plastic and the frame is well designed.
The best possible performance would be achieved with a big, heavy, cast-iron frame.
These are the kinds of frames used in heavy-duty machine tools, because they’re
incredibly rigid and strong. However, the weight and cost make them pretty impractical
for use in 3D printers (especially for consumer desktop printers).
A safe and common frame material is standard t-slot aluminum extrusion. This is a high-
quality structural material used in a variety of industries. It’s popular in 3D printer
construction because it’s fairly inexpensive, easy to find in all kinds of sizes, easy to work
with and to connect parts to, and pretty strong for its weight.
T-slot aluminum extrusion is a very versatile construction material used in a wide variety of applications, including 3D
printer frames like this one.
HOT TIP
T-slot aluminum extrusion comes in a variety of sizes and shapes. 3D printers commonly
use the very popular 20×20mm size, which is adequate for the application. But bigger would
be even better to increase the strength of each piece of extrusion (assuming the overall design is
the same).
Wood is also used pretty frequently, mostly because it’s cheap and easy to laser cut and
work with. However, wood probably isn’t the best material to use in 3D printing. It’s hard

to achieve and maintain dimensional accuracy in wood parts, especially because they can
expand or contract in the presence of moisture. Wood also tends to be at least somewhat
flexible, which, as you know by now, is a bad thing.
Plastic and sheet metal frames can both be acceptable as long as they’re well designed.
They should be fully boxed and preferably reinforced. Plastic frames should be made from
a sturdy and rigid plastic, making acrylic a popular choice.
Size Matters
Now that I have all of that dense engineering stuff out of the way, I can move on to a more
straightforward topic: the size of the printer itself.
There is no denying the benefit of a large 3D printer. The bigger the printer, the bigger the
parts you can print. Having the ability to print large objects is certainly useful. However,
the size of a 3D printer influences more than just the size of the objects you can print.
The larger a printer gets, the more it’s going to cost. This is partially because of the
obvious material increase, but that’s not the only reason. Bigger printers mean more mass,
which means more powerful motors are needed for movement. That additional mass also
means the frame needs to be stronger to resist flex. The longer smooth rods (see Chapter 6
for more on smooth rods) also need to be thicker so they don’t sag.
Those powerful motors and a larger heated bed are also going to need more power. Not
only does that mean you need a bigger power supply to feed them, but it also means you
may need special control electronics that can handle the load.
Put that all together, and there are a lot of costs associated with increasing the size of a 3D
printer. Subsequently, size usually ends up being the single biggest factor in the price of
consumer FFF 3D printers.
Of course, price might not be the only downside to large 3D printers. Depending on how
much space you have available, you just might not have enough room for a big 3D printer.
A small printer that sits comfortably on the corner of your desk might be more suitable.
In order to figure out what size printer you need, you should ask yourself what size objects
you’re likely to print. Big parts can take a very long time to print, use a lot of material, and
increase your chances of some kind of print failure during the print—there is nothing
worse than a 24-hour print getting ruined 1 hour before completion. But the usefulness of
a large print area is hard to deny. The ability to print large parts when needed is very
handy, and it will be equally capable of printing small parts the rest of the time.
HOT TIP
No matter what size printer you’re looking at, make sure the frame is nice and sturdy. Pay
attention to the layout and look for any potential flaws, like the print bed or hot end moving
on both axes. Look at the printer as whole, not just the individual components, to determine its
quality.
The Least You Need to Know

Cartesian 3D printers have mechanisms to move in the X axis, Y axis, and Z axis, allowing them to position the
hot end anywhere in 3D space.
Rigidity is very important in 3D printer design. Frames with flex will have poor print quality or will only be able
to print slowly.
The larger the printer, the bigger the parts you can print. However, larger printers tend to cost more.

CHAPTER
6
Movement Components
In This Chapter
How linear motion works in 3D printers
Using stepper motors for precise movement
How threaded rods make 3D printers more affordable
Basic connection components
The frame of a 3D printer is the foundation for every other part, which makes it very
important. But even the best frame in the world is useless without some kind of
mechanical system for movement. The goal for all 3D printers is to provide linear
movement on each axis. The specific way this is accomplished can vary based on the
particular printer, but most use the same fundamental parts and systems.
In this chapter, I go over the pieces that accomplish the movement needed with a 3D
printer.
Components for Smooth Linear Motion
With any kind of linear motion system, it’s important that the motion be constrained to a
single axis in one dimension. Any kind of movement outside of that one dimension is
almost always considered to be undesirable, because it introduces unintended movement
in the other axes.
Furthermore, the motion on that one axis should be as smooth and frictionless as possible.
The less friction there is in the system, the less force is required for movement on that
axis. Friction in the system increases the power required for motion on that axis and can
create inconsistencies in the movement.
For smooth linear motion, regardless of the particular machine, the most common setup is
a smooth rod or rail with bearings on the moving part. This works in exactly the way that
you would expect: the bearings reduce friction in the movement, and the rod or rail gives
the bearing a smooth and straight surface to ride on. The concept is simple, but the
individual components are still important.

Smooth rods and solid bearings on a Lulzbot TAZ 4.
Rails and Smooth Rods
Smooth rods are exactly what they sound like: a straight cylindrical metal rod that is
polished smooth. Rails are similar, except they don’t need to be cylindrical and can be flat
instead. Rails are often used when they need to provide some level of structural support,
while rods generally aren’t used as part of the structure. However, rods have the advantage
of constraining movement in two directions with a single bearing, while rails often need
two or three bearings to do the same.
FASCINATING FACT
In some 3D printer designs, the aluminum extrusion that makes up the frame is also used as
the rail for moving parts to ride on. One or more bearings make contact with the surface of
the extrusion, allowing parts like the print bed to slide across it. These designs are usually very
economical but may not be capable of the same quality as designs that have dedicated smooth
rods.
Whether it’s a rod or a rail, there are a few characteristics that are important for them to
work well:
The smoothness of the surface
The hardness of the surface
The straightness of the part
The stiffness of the part
The diameter of the part

The smoothness of the surface is important for reducing friction, of course. But the other
qualities need a little more explanation.
The importance of surface hardness, for example, may not be immediately obvious. After
all, it’s not like you’ll be hammering it or anything. But what you will be doing is
continuously running a bearing back and forth along the length of the part. Over time, the
bearing can gouge the surface, making the surface significantly less smooth. And as you
know, without a smooth surface, friction can be a problem.
How straight the rod or rail is also important for a reason that should be readily apparent
—if it’s not straight, movement won’t be perfectly linear. But what may not be apparent is
exactly how straight it needs to be. In manufacturing, straightness has its own specific
geometric tolerance (a specification for how closely the real part must match the design).
This tolerance is very tight in rods and rails manufactured for use in linear motion systems
but may not be quite so strict for rods and rails that are specifically made for this purpose.
For that reason, it’s important to be careful about choosing those components when
building a 3D printer.
Luckily, the reason rods or rails need to be stiff is straightforward. Rods or rails used in
linear motion systems simply can’t have any flex in them under the intended loads. This
and the other characteristics mean that only a few materials are both suitable for the
application and affordable.
Of those materials, the most commonly used seems to be hardened stainless steel. When
manufactured properly, this material can possess all of the desired characteristics while
also being corrosion resistant and fairly inexpensive. Other materials can be used (and
may even be necessary in some industries), but for 3D printers, there doesn’t seem to be
any reason to use anything else.
The last factor, particularly for smooth rods, is the diameter of the rod. While the rods
don’t generally provide structural support for the frame, they do need to support the
weight of the moving parts. How much weight they need to support and how long they are
will determine the diameter needed for the rods. This varies from one 3D printer to
another, but smooth rods are usually somewhere between 8mm and 12mm (although they
can be bigger or smaller in some cases).
Bearings
As far as mechanical components go, bearings are some of the most fundamental parts in
use; in fact, they’re almost comparable to fasteners like nuts and bolts. Anytime there are
moving parts, bearings practically become a necessity. The purpose of a bearing is simply
to reduce friction between moving parts. There are two basic types of bearings: solid
bearings (usually called bushings) and roller bearings.
A solid bearing doesn’t have any rolling elements and is usually meant to be lubricated.
The bearing itself is made of either metal or plastic. When it’s made of metal, the metal
should be of a different type than the shaft it’s in contact with. Generally, a softer metal is
ideal so the bearing wears instead of the shaft. Combined with a lubricant, a solid metal
bearing can be satisfactory for reducing friction.

HOT TIP
When looking at bearings, be aware that many different names are used to describe
essentially the same things. For example, solid bearings are often called sleeve bearings.
This is a result of their long history, their use in many different industries, and very minute
differences between similar bearings.
Solid plastic bearings are made from self-lubricating types of plastic like nylon, Delrin
(the trade name for a strong, self-lubricating plastic), or some variation of polyethylene
(like UHMW, HDPE, or LDPE). These types of plastics have very low coefficients of
friction, allowing them to be used for solid bearings without any lubricant. This makes
them ideal in mechanical systems where lubricant is impractical, like in sealed systems or
when lubricant can damage the mechanisms.
The primary advantage of solid bearings has traditionally been cost. Because there are no
small moving parts, they’re inexpensive to make, which reduces the overall cost of the
machine being built. They were also the first type of bearing used, before the Industrial
Revolution made roller bearings feasible. Even now, solid bearings are still the most
common type of bearing in use.
But when a mechanism needs to have as little friction as possible, roller bearings are the
answer. These types of bearings, often called ball bearings, usually have three
components: an inner sleeve, an outer sleeve, and a number of small balls between the
two. As one sleeve is rotated, it rolls on the balls. For linear ball bearings, the shaft itself
acts as the inner sleeve and the balls roll between the shaft and outer sleeve.
Both solid bearings and roller bearings come in two basic styles: linear and rotational. The
application determines which kind is needed. If the moving parts only need to rotate on a
single axis, rotational bearings are used. If linear motion is needed, like in a 3D printer,
linear bearings are used. Therefore, no matter the type of bearing, your printer will need
them to be linear.
Stepper Motors
With all of this motion happening, there has to be some kind of electric motor involved to
actually make things move. There are many types of electric motors that are technically
capable of providing this motion. However, there is one type in particular that is perfectly
suited to the task: a stepper motor.
The key characteristic of a stepper motor is its ability to rotate very precisely. A plain old
electric motor will simply rotate when electricity is applied, and will rotate faster as the
amount of electricity being applied is increased. This simplicity means that a regular
electric motor is very efficient, but it also means they’re difficult to precisely control. This
is what stepper motors were created specifically to address.
A stepper motor is a type of electric motor constructed specifically to allow precise
control. That precision is important for producing accurate and detailed prints. It does this
by rotating in a series of steps, instead of just rotating continuously when electricity is
connected. A common stepper motor, like what is used in most 3D printers, can have 200

steps for every complete rotation of the output shaft.
The internal construction of a stepper motor. Notice how the teeth of the rotor are designed so that when they are aligned
to one phase, they are misaligned to the other.
HOT TIP
While stepper motors are by far the most common type of motor for 3D printing, there are
other options. Continuous-rotation servos can be used and are also fairly accurate. And, in a
method similar to what paper printers use, a plain electric motor can be used in combination with
an encoder strip to monitor position. But the ease of use and high precision of stepper motors
continues to make them ideal for 3D printing.
Because the stepper motor can move a single step at a time, that means it can rotate the
output shaft precisely 1.8° for each step (for a 200-step motor). Additionally, a technique
called microstepping can be used to reduce each step even further. Microstepping is
handled by the stepper motor controller, and many controllers are capable of 1/16
microstepping. That means each individual step can be broken up into 16 microsteps.
At 16 microsteps on a 200-step motor, the output shaft is capable of being positioned at
3,200 individual places per rotation. That’s one position every .1125°, an incredible level
of precision that simply isn’t possible with any other kind of electric motor.
This high level of precision is what makes stepper motors ideal for machines like 3D
printers. Even without using microstepping, the accuracy is very high. If a full rotation of
the stepper motor output shaft moves an axis 1mm, each step will move it .005mm. That
means each axis of the 3D printer can be positioned anywhere within a tolerance of +/-
.0025mm, and that can be made significantly more accurate with microstepping.

With that kind of accuracy, it’s easy to see why stepper motors are so popular, and why
they’re used in virtually all 3D printers. But how does the rotational movement of a
stepper motor translate into the linear motion needed for 3D printing? That’s where belts,
pulleys, and lead screws or threaded rods come in.
Belts and Pulleys
Belt and pulley systems are one of the oldest mechanical systems in history and have a
wide range of uses. Aside from simply transmitting motion from one pulley to another,
they can be used to reduce a drive system to gain mechanical advantage.
DEFINITION
Mechanical advantage is the amplification of force with the use of a tool or mechanical
system. This is usually achieved by trading movement distance for force. A lever is the most basic
example of this, because if one side of the fulcrum (pivot point) is twice as long as the other, it will
double the force exerted (though it will also double the distance it needs to be pushed). This same
basic concept is applied in a vast array of machines using things like gears, pulleys, screws, and
so on.
In its most basic setup, a belt and pulley system is very simple. One pulley is driven by a
motor of some kind, and a belt connects it to a second pulley to transmit the rotation of the
first pulley to the second. If both pulleys are the same size, the drive system has a 1:1 ratio
and the purpose of the system is simply to transfer power.
Mechanical advantage is achieved when the pulleys are of different sizes. If the first
pulley (the drive pulley) is smaller than the second, the resulting output has more torque
but less speed. When the system is reversed and the first pulley larger than the second, the
output has greater speed but reduced torque.
Multiple pulleys can be used to gain even greater reductions and significant mechanical
advantage. Systems like that are what allow a person to lift loads many times their own
weight. In the same way, such a system can allow a relatively low-torque (but high-speed)
motor, like an electric motor, to handle high loads.
However, while some printers use mechanical advantage in their designs (especially for
the cold end), others keep power transmission at a 1:1 ratio. To move the print bed, for
example, a pulley is attached to the output shaft of a stepper motor and a second pulley is
mounted on the opposite end of the axis. A belt is looped around them and attached to the
print bed in the middle. As the output shaft of the stepper motor spins, it pulls the belt and
therefore moves the print bed along the axis.
As far as pulley systems go, this is a very simple setup. However, mechanical advantage
can be introduced by changing the size of the drive pulley. The bigger the drive pulley is,
the further it will move the print bed per revolution. If the speed at which the stepper
motor turned remained constant, the size of the drive pulley would determine the speed
and torque of the print bed movement. A large drive pulley would move it quickly but
with reduced precision and torque. A small drive pulley would move it slowly but with
higher precision and more torque. This allows the printer manufacturer to prioritize speed
or precision in their designs.

While the setup is pretty much standard, the physical design of the belts and pulleys on 3D
printers can vary. They can be as low tech as a fishing line acting as a belt, wrapped
around a drum acting as pulley. Or they can be high-tech parts designed specifically for
this purpose. Most commonly, though, 3D printer manufacturers use simple toothed belts
and pulleys.
These toothed belts and pulleys are fairly similar to a car engine’s timing belt. It’s a rubber
belt with teeth on one side that mesh with pulleys that also have teeth. This setup is ideal
because it doesn’t slip, the belt doesn’t stretch, and it’s affordable.
Belt and pulley systems are great for horizontal movement (the X and Y axes), where the
belt doesn’t have to bear any weight. All it has to do is pull one way, and then back the
other way.
This is a common GT2 belt and pulley setup.
Weight-Bearing Components for
Converting Motion
When rotational motion (for the vertical Z axis) needs to be converted into linear motion,
and there is a significant load on the system, lead screws or threaded rods (which are
inexpensive alternatives to lead screws) are the best option. There are two reasons lead
screws are ideal for such a situation: they can provide a significant mechanical advantage
without complicated pulley or gear systems, and the lead screw itself can bear the weight
of the components it’s lifting.

A lead screw drive system is a lot like a bolt and nut; in fact, that’s pretty much what it is
(physically speaking). When you rotate the bolt but don’t allow the nut to spin with it, it
pushes or pulls the nut along the rotational axis. A lead screw works in the same way: the
stepper motor turns the lead screw, which pushes or pulls the nut up and down on the Z
axis. The nut is attached to whatever components need to be moved in the Z axis, allowing
the stepper motor to lift or lower them as it turns.
Lead Screws
Lead screws come in all kinds of sizes to suit the requirements of the machine being built.
They come in various diameters and pitches (metric and standard) with one start threads,
two start threads, or even more. The diameter is factor in the strength and stiffness of the
lead screw and can help the smooth rods constrain movement to a single axis. The thread
pitch determines the mechanical advantage of the drive, because it is what controls how
far the nut is moved per rotation of the lead screw.
A lead screw and nut linear motion system for the Z axis.
DEFINITION
The pitch of a thread is the distance from one thread to the next. This is what determines
how far the screw and nut will move (relative to each) with one full rotation. For example, an M8
screw has a standard pitch of 1.25mm. So if you have a lead screw with an M8 thread, every full
rotation of the lead screw will move the nut 1.25mm.
Despite how common and utilitarian lead screws are, they are still very precisely made
parts. The complexity of the specifications of lead screws (they need to be smooth,
straight, hard, and stiff), along with the precision required when machining them, makes

them very expensive. Many 3D printer designs require two of them (one on either side of
the printer), which just adds to the bill. In fact, this cost is so high that lead screws can end
up being the most expensive parts on a consumer 3D printer.
With such a high price for such a basic part, 3D printer manufacturers and DIY builders
have tried to find another solution.
Threaded Rods
In an effort to reduce the cost of 3D printers, many designers have chosen to substitute
threaded rods for lead screws. A threaded rod is essentially a very long headless bolt. The
general purpose of a threaded rod is for fastening, which is done by threading a nut onto
either end.
Because threaded rods are only intended to be fasteners, the manufacturers put little
importance on the qualities that are considered necessary for lead screws. The result is a
part that isn’t particularly straight or hard and doesn’t have perfectly machined threads. A
threaded rod is just good enough to thread a nut onto while being sort of straight.
Manufacturers are able to make threaded rods at very lows costs while still maintaining
the required precision. That cost is so low that threaded rods are generally about 1/10 the
price of lead screws. At that kind of price, it’s easy to see their allure to a 3D printer
manufacturer trying to build an affordable consumer printer.
A threaded rod used in place of a lead screw.
But there is a pretty glaring problem here: if threaded rods work, why would anyone spend
the extra money on lead screws? From the point of view of those who use threaded roads,
there are a couple of different answers to that question.

One possibility is that lead screws are necessary for certain kinds of machines but not for
3D printers. The argument is that the loads being put on the lead screw by a 3D printer are
small, and the precision required is fairly low. If a real lead screw makes a difference at
all, it’s very subtle.
Another possibility is that there is a perceptible difference between lead screws and
threaded rods but that it can be designed around. The idea here is that lead screws are only
necessary if they’re firmly constrained, in which case they’re acting kind of like a smooth
rod to restrict movement perpendicular to the Z axis. But because there are already smooth
rods for this purpose, it is unnecessary for the lead screw to provide that function. Because
the threaded rod doesn’t have to restrict perpendicular movement, it’s not necessary for it
be perfectly straight. All that matters is that it doesn’t inadvertently introduce
perpendicular movement.
At this point, there is very little evidence for or against the effectiveness of threaded rods
that isn’t just anecdotal. The quality of a 3D-printed part is the result of the complex
interaction of many different pieces of hardware and many settings in software. It’s
difficult to control every other factor while only changing from lead screws to threads in
order to scientifically test this. However, the anecdotal evidence seems to suggest that
threaded rods can work well if the design is done properly.
Attachment and Connection
Components
Whether lead screws or threaded rods are being used, there always needs to be a way to
connect the stepper motors to them. And, once that stepper motor is spinning, there needs
to be a way to translate the turning screw into movement on the Z axis. Both of these
problems have specific parts designed to solve them: a coupler connects the stepper shaft
to the screw, while a nut attaches parts to that screw so they can be moved along the Z
axis.
Couplers
The job of the coupler is rather unspectacular: it’s just there to connect one shaft to
another. However, various kinds of couplers exist to serve all sorts of specific purposes.
There are couplers designed to flex and others that are designed specifically to minimize
flex. Some couplers are supposed to be springy to absorb shock in the shaft, while others
are designed to avoid this.
In the case of 3D printers, which type of coupler is ideal depends on whether lead screws
or threaded rods are being used. If a lead screw is being used, it’s reasonable to assume it
is both very straight and very stiff. If that’s the case, the coupler should be solid and stiff
as well, so that movement is smooth and constrained to that rotational axis.

FASCINATING FACT
In many RepRap 3D printer designs, the coupler is simply a small piece of flexible plastic
tubing that fits over the stepper motor shaft and the threaded rod. The tubing is then zip tied
on both ends to keep it tight. This low-tech solution is both very inexpensive and surprisingly
effective.
However, if a threaded rod is being used, it’s very likely it’s not straight at all. It’s
probably slightly bent and maybe a little bit flexible itself. In such a case, it’s preferable
for the coupler to be flexible in order to absorb the movement caused by the threaded rod
not being straight.
A standard coupler meant to allow some flexibility.
The coupler itself can be made from a variety of materials and in a variety of styles.
Aluminum, steel, and brass are all popular materials, and types of plastic can be used as
well. Designs can be a simple straight tube, can be cut in a helix to absorb forces along the
rotational axis, or can be cut with slots to absorb forces perpendicular to the rotational
axis. Most will have some sort of set screw or clamping apparatus to lock the coupler onto
both shafts, but even that may change in some specific circumstances.
Nuts
A nut is a simple part that is threaded onto a threaded rod or lead screw. It can be a basic
hex nut like the kind you curse whenever you have to do work on your car, or it can be a
specialized type of nut meant specifically for linear motion systems.
Like most other components, materials can vary. However, it’s widely considered to be
necessary for the nut material to be softer than the material of the lead screw or threaded

rod. The reason is basically the same as why bearings and bushings are made of softer
metals: so that they wear first. As expensive as lead screws are, it would be a real shame if
the threads got worn down by a 50-cent nut. It’s much better to replace the inexpensive nut
as it gets worn down.
With that said, nuts that are used on 3D printers aren’t often as simple as the kind you buy
in bulk at the hardware store. Because these nuts are meant for power transmission, not
fastening, they have two unique qualities:
They need to have some kind of mount on them.
They should resist backlash.
The need for a mount is pretty straightforward; there has to be way to attach the parts you
want to move. For this reason, there are nuts made with mounting flanges so the moving
parts can be connected. These mounting flanges come in various sizes, shapes, and hole
patterns, but those details aren’t really relevant to their operation.
What is relevant to the operation of a screw drive system is backlash. Backlash, in this
context, is when the nut slightly shifts when the rotation of the screw reverses. The
direction of movement suddenly changes and the nut moves slightly because of the space
between the threads. To be clear, this is a very small shift, comparable to the movement
you feel if you try to wiggle a nut that’s threaded onto a bolt. But I’m talking about a
machine that is trying to move with very high accuracy, so even a slight shift can affect
that.
The solution to this problem is the creatively named anti-backlash nut. A very basic
design for this consists of four parts: a housing, two normal nuts, and a spring. The
housing fits over the nuts and keeps them from moving independently of each other, while
the spring sits compressed between the two nuts. Because the spring is compressed, it’s
constantly pushing out on both nuts. This ensures that the top surface of one nut’s threads
is in contact with the screw, while the bottom surface of the other nut’s threads is in
contact. This effectively eliminates backlash, because when the direction is changed, one
of the nut’s threads will always already be in contact with the screw.

A simple anti-backlash nut design.
With all of this detail on the nuts and screws of 3D printers, it may seem like they’re very
complex machines. And in a way, they are. But the reality is that most machines are at
least this complicated when you really get into the details, and 3D printers aren’t an
exception.
The Least You Need to Know
Smooth rods, rails, and bearings are used to provide smooth, low-friction movement.
Stepper motors are unique types of electric motors that are perfectly suited for 3D printing because of their
precision.
Belts and pulleys are often used to drive the X and Y axes of 3D printers, while lead screws are used to drive the
Z axis.
Threaded rods can be used in place of lead screws, but there is some ambiguity about how well they do the job.
Couplers are used to attach lead screws or threaded rods to stepper motor shafts, while nuts (anti-backlash or
otherwise) are used to attach the moving parts to the lead screws.

CHAPTER
7
The Extruder
In This Chapter
How FFF extrusion works
Different types of cold ends and hot ends
Changing nozzles
When to use a print fan
The benefits of multiple extruders
Extrusion is the key to FFF (and FDM) 3D printing. It’s what separates the FFF printing
process that is so common in consumer printers from the other processes that are used in
more expensive 3D printers. Extrusion itself is used in many ways in manufacturing, but
the technique has been fine-tuned for 3D printing in FFF printers. In this chapter, I cover
how extrusion works and how it affects your prints.
What Is Extrusion?
In general terms, extrusion is any process used to eject material with a specified cross-
section. Extrusion in manufacturing can be used to create a wide range of parts, with the
major restriction being that the cross-section of the part has to remain constant.
With FDM/FFF 3D printing (see Chapter 2), extrusion is the process used to actually
deposit new plastic onto the print bed. It also refers to how the aluminum frame pieces that
are often used to build 3D printers are created.
Complex shapes are possible with extrusion in manufacturing, but the process is much
simpler on 3D printers. Plastic is extruded out of a plain circular nozzle, resulting in a very
simple cylindrical extrusion.
To extrude plastic, FFF printers use a system known as an extruder that feeds filament into
a hot end to be melted, and then deposits it on the print bed. How exactly this is done
varies a little bit depending on the particular 3D printer, but they’re actually all pretty
similar.
The Cold End
The system begins with feeding the filament, a task handled by a mechanism called a cold
end. The cold end pulls filament and pushes it into the hot end. As more filament is
pushed into the hot end, the melted filament is squeezed out through the nozzle for

deposition onto the print bed. So the purpose of the cold end is easy to understand; it’s just
there to feed the filament. But it’s more than just that; it needs to be able to feed the
filament precisely and consistently.
HOT TIP
The terminology used for various parts of 3D printers can often be a bit confusing.
Sometimes, different terms are used to describe the same part based on the manufacturer,
plus the hobbyist nature of 3D printing has led to parts being developed simultaneously by
independent designers.
The cold end is one example of this confusion. The cold end is what feeds filament into the hot
end, which in turn melts the filament. However, the cold end is often referred to as the extruder
instead. This is made even more confusing, because extruder is the term used to describe the
entire system (cold end and hot end). To try and avoid any confusion in this book, I’ll refer to the
individual mechanisms as the cold end and the hot end, and the system as a whole as the
extruder. But be aware that these terms may be used differently depending on the source.
It’s important that the printer be able to extrude exactly the right amount of filament in
order for the print quality to be good. As I mentioned in Chapter 3, the layer thickness is
determined in part by how much filament is being extruded. The slicing software knows
exactly how much filament is being pushed out of the hot end at any given time and
calculates the extrusion as needed.
In order for the slicer to be able to make usable calculations, the cold end has to be
capable of consistently feeding exactly the predicted amount of filament at all times. If the
filament is fed inconsistently, the calculations being made by the slicer software become
useless, resulting in either overextrusion or underextrusion (both of which will yield a
poor-quality print).
For this reason, the extruder has to be properly calibrated. Extruder calibration is
absolutely necessary to make sure the correct amount of filament is being extruded. This is
a simple matter of making sure the amount of filament being fed into the hot end matches
the predicated amount and adjusting the feed rate if it’s not right.
To do this, cold ends use stepper motors for precise control—the same type of stepper
motors that are used for moving the axes of the 3D printer. The stepper motor turns some
sort of hobbled bolt or drive gear that has serrations to grip the filament, and a bearing on
a spring provides tension. The filament is held tight between the bearing and hobbled bolt,
and as the stepper motor turns, it pushes the filament into the hot end.
The setup for this mechanism depends on what kind of cold end is being designed, and
there are two distinct types: direct feed and Bowden.
Direct Feed
The most common type of cold end is the direct feed style (not to be confused with direct
drive, which I discuss later in this chapter). It’s called a direct feed cold end because the
hot end is located right below it, and filament is fed directly from the drive gear into the
hot end.
There are two advantages to this direct feed style: it’s a simple setup, and it reduces the
chances of the filament binding or bunching before it enters the hot end.

The simplicity of the setup is probably the primary reason why direct feed cold ends are so
popular and why almost all consumer 3D printers use them. The motor and drive gear are
mounted right above the hot end, and the filament is pulled from a spool, which can be
mounted anywhere on or around the printer.
A direct feed cold end made by Printrbot.
But as consumer 3D printer technology has matured and our understanding of it has
improved, it has become apparent that the real benefit of a direct feed cold end is that it
lessens the likelihood of the filament bunching. As flexible filament (a material which
feels similar to rubber or silicone) and 1.75mm filament have gained popularity, it’s
become more of a problem for filament to bunch up and jam before it actually enters the
hot end. Having the drive wheel right above the hot end to push the filament doesn’t leave
any space for it to bunch up.
Bowden
Bowden-style cold ends are named after a mechanism called a Bowden cable. A Bowden
cable is a push/pull device that consists of a hollow tube with a solid or stranded cable
running through it that lets you transmit pushing or pulling force over a distance with a
flexible cable. This mechanism is used in all sorts of things, including airplane controls,
bicycle brakes and gear shifters, motorcycle clutches, throttle cables, and many other
things.

FASCINATING FACT
There is some debate over who Bowden cables are named for. The original Bowden
mechanism was invented and patented by Ernest Monnington Bowden, but Sir Frank
Bowden (founder of the Raleigh Bicycle Company) is often given credit for its invention. The two
men were not related, but their common last name is surely a factor in the confusion. Ernest
Bowden actually licensed his patent to Sir Frank Bowden for use in his bicycle brake systems,
which just further confuses things.
A Bowden cold end works on a similar principle. Instead of having the drive mechanism
right above the hot end on the extruder carriage, it’s located elsewhere on the 3D printer. A
hollow and flexible tube (usually made from a low-friction plastic like
polytetrafluoroethylene [PTFE]) runs from the cold end to the hot end, and the filament is
pushed through it. This setup serves one very specific purpose: to remove mass from the
extruder carriage.
A Bowden cold end on an Ultimaker 2.
(Courtesy of Ultimaker)
Having a smaller and lighter extruder carriage is advantageous for two reasons:
It reduces the overall size of the 3D printer.
It improves print quality.
It reduces the size of the printer because the extruder carriage doesn’t need as much room
to reach the ends of the print bed. How it affects print quality is a little more complicated.
Moving a large amount of mass around quickly is a difficult task. Every time the direction
of the moving mass changes, the printer has to overcome the inertia of that mass. But

unless you’re printing at slow speeds, the 3D printer never completely overcomes the
inertia and it slightly overshoots the intended stopping point. When it overshoots, it results
in uneven edges around features, making fine details impossible to print well.
A large, moving mass also creates vibrations as the extruder carriage moves back and
forth. This results in an effect called ghosting, where faint outlines of a feature show up on
the surfaces near those features. So the mass of the extruder carriage ends up having a
pretty significant effect on the output quality of a 3D printer.
Bowden style cold ends solve this problem by removing as much mass as possible from
the extruder carriage. It takes the weight of the stepper motor and drive gear and moves it
to a stationary location. But, of course, this setup does have its drawbacks.
In the previous section, I explained how direct feed cold ends reduce the chances of
filament bunching before it enters the hot end. And that’s exactly the problem with
Bowden cold ends. With such a long distance between the drive gear and the hot end,
there is a lot of room for the filament to bunch and jam. This makes it difficult to use
1.75mm filament and almost impossible to use flexible 1.75mm filament.
Direct Drive vs. Geared
Whether a Bowden or direct feed cold end is being used, there is still the option of
pushing the filament either with a drive gear connected directly to the stepper motor shaft
or with a hobbled bolt connected to a gear system. As I’m sure you’re sick of hearing by
now in this book, each has its advantages and disadvantages.
Direct drive extruders use a drive gear that is mounted onto the stepper motor shaft. This
is the absolute simplest way to design an extruder, which is always a good thing. However,
it takes a lot of force to push filament through a hot end. Because they are light and
compact, direct drive extruders have difficulty handling the force needed for 3mm
filament.
On the other hand, geared extruders use a pair of gears to gain mechanical advantage and
the torque needed to force 3mm filament through the hot end without difficulty. The
disadvantage, of course, is that the gears add size and weight to the extruder carriage,
although that’s not a problem for Bowden extruders since the cold end doesn’t move.

A Greg’s Wade Reloaded geared direct feed cold end.
The Hot End
As you’ve learned in previous chapters of this book, the hot end serves one very specific
purpose: to melt the plastic filament. It must melt the filament very quickly in order for the
3D printer to print at a reasonable speed. For that to happen, the temperature of the hot end
has to be very high.
Exactly how high the temperature needs to be depends on the material being printed, the
filament manufacturer, and even sometimes the specific batch of filament. For the most
common materials, however, the hot end needs to be operating at temperatures between
180°C and 250°C. To put that into perspective, that’s approximately the same temperature
as the hot oil in a deep fryer.

An Ubis hot end, which is used on Printrbot 3D printers.
Some materials, however, require much hotter temperatures. For example, polycarbonate
is an extremely tough plastic that requires temperatures of 300°C or more to print well.
With such high temperatures, it’s easy to see that some special hardware is required. In
order to heat up the hot end, two specific electronic components are needed: a thermistor
and a heating element.
Thermistor
A thermistor is a type of variable resistor similar to a thermocouple that changes based on
how hot it is. The term thermocouple is often used incorrectly to describe the thermistor
used in 3D printers, but they’re actually entirely different components. They work
similarly, but thermistors are generally more accurate and are better suited for 3D printers.
The thermistor is mounted onto the hot end at the point where the filament is supposed to
be melted. As the hot end heats up, the resistance of the thermistor changes. The control
board of the 3D printer monitors this resistance change and uses it to calculate the
temperature of the hot end. In essence, it’s basically just a very accurate thermometer that
can be read by the 3D printer.
DEFINITION
A thermocouple is a type of temperature-measuring device used in a wide range of
industries. It’s inexpensive and doesn’t require a power source, which makes it ideal for some
applications. However, thermocouples aren’t very accurate, which generally makes them
unsuitable for use in 3D printer hot ends.
Thermistors are accurate to within a fraction of a degree when properly set up. Because

thermistors are made by a variety of manufacturers, sometimes for slightly different
applications, the proper setup can vary. To solve this problem, 3D printer firmware comes
with information for many different thermistor models in order to make the temperature
reading as accurate as possible. With an accurate temperature reading, the 3D printer can
precisely control how hot the hot end is. This allows the user to set the temperature as
necessary for a specific type of filament.
But getting any accurate temperature reading is only half of the equation; the 3D printer
also needs to be able heat up the hot end to the desired temperature using a heating
element.
Heating Element
The heating element for a hot end is a much more general type of component than the
thermistor. Virtually all electronic heating elements work in the same way, whether it’s for
an electric space heater, an electric stove, or the hot end of a 3D printer. All of these
devices use a method called resistive heating.
Resistive heating is an extremely basic process, and is really just a fundamental property
of electronics in general. When current passes through a conductor, it heats the conductor.
If the voltage in a circuit remains constant, the heat of a resistor increases as the resistance
decreases. The current draw also increases along with the heat. So when the objective is to
heat something up, like a hot end, a heating element with a low resistance is used.
That low resistance draws a high current, and therefore a lot of power needs to be
dissipated by the source of the resistance (in this case, the heating element). That power is
dissipated in the form of heating up the heating element, and in turn the hot end.
Physical Design and Makeup
The combination of the thermistor and the heating element allows the 3D printer to set the
temperature of the hot end very accurately. When the 3D printer is first turned on and the
hot end is still cool, constant voltage is applied to the heating element to heat it up as fast
as possible. As it gets close to the desired temperature, that voltage is pulsed to slow down
the heating process until it reaches the correct temperature.
Once it’s at the correct temperature, the printer monitors the thermistor and turns the
heating element on and off as necessary to maintain the temperature. It does this with a
method called pulse-width modulation (PWM), which flips the voltage on and off very
quickly to average out into a specific voltage to keep the temperature constant.
So how is it designed to make this process happen? The design of a hot end is a reflection
of a few goals:
Maintain a constant temperature near the nozzle to melt the filament. This is
achieved with a heating block where the thermistor and heating element are located. The
block is heated and monitored, and has a hole running through where the nozzle is
mounted. As the filament enters the heating block, it’s rapidly melted into molten plastic
to be squeezed through the nozzle.
Heat up the heating block quickly. The heating block is generally made from a metal

with a high thermal conductivity. This allows the heat from the heating element to be
rapidly transferred to the heating block; therefore, it heats up quickly.
Get cool over a very short area so it can be mounted to the 3D printer. The mount is
often made of the same type of plastic that is being extruded, so the hot end needs to be
cool at that point in order to not melt the mount itself. To make that possible, a heat sink is
often located between the heating block and the mount. In some designs, there is a fan
located on the heat sink to cool it even more. This can lower the temperature from a very
hot 300°C to roughly room temperature over just a couple of inches.
HOT TIP
Hot ends are often interchangeable, depending on the type of mount they use. Progress is
rapidly being made in improving hot end designs, and new models are frequently being
released. So it’s probably not necessary to choose a 3D printer based on the hot end as long as it
uses a common or replaceable mount.
Traditional hot end designs incorporate a variety of materials, including some high-
temperature plastics. For common filament materials like polylactic acid (PLA) and
acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS), this is perfectly acceptable because the plastic can
handle the temperatures required for those materials. But for some materials that have
higher melting points (like polycarbonate), the hot end has to be heated to temperatures
that the plastic in the hot end can’t withstand.
For that reason, all-metal hot ends are becoming popular. A hot end made completely from
metal, instead of using some plastic parts, can be heated to much higher temperatures
without risking damage to the hot end itself. With an all-metal hot end, many more
material types can be printed successfully, allowing the user a wider range of possibilities.

This E3D V5 is an all-metal hot end and requires active cooling from a fan.
But making a hot end completely out of metal presents some design challenges that are
still being overcome. One of the biggest problems is that the heat from the heating block is
transferred more efficiently across the entire hot end, meaning the mounting point can get
too hot for the mount. To solve this problem, much larger heat sinks are needed, and a fan
is often required. But the versatility of all-metal hot ends can definitely make the
challenges worth the trouble.
The Nozzle
The nozzle is often considered to be part of the hot end, but it’s a replaceable part that I
think deserves its own section. Hot ends almost always come with a compatible nozzle,
but hot end manufacturers also generally sell additional nozzles in a variety of sizes.
Why would you want to purchase different-size nozzles? Because, as I’ve explained in
Chapter 3, the size of the nozzle is one of the factors that determines layer height—the
larger the nozzle, the more of an increase in layer height. Nozzle size isn’t the only thing
that determines layer height, so there is some wiggle room for each nozzle size. But if you
want to print a layer height that is significantly different, it can be worth changing nozzles.
Nozzles that come with hot ends are usually somewhere between .25mm and .50mm,
because that’s a general size that is useful for most printing. But nozzles can be much

smaller for specialized printing where very fine detail is required. Alternatively, some
prints can be done with larger nozzles in order to print large objects more quickly.
WATCH OUT!
Nozzles aren’t generally compatible between different hot end models. This is because hot
ends usually have nozzles that are made specifically for them. They use different threads, are
different sizes, and are sometimes even different shapes. For this reason, it may be a good idea to
check ahead of time what nozzles are available if you know you’re going to need a smaller- or
larger-than-usual nozzle.
Print Fans
In addition to the hot end fans that are used to cool the hot end for mounting, one or more
fans can also be used to cool the printed object itself. The fan is directed toward the
extruded filament as it exits the nozzle in order to quickly cool the plastic.
The purpose of cooling the plastic is to get from the high temperature needed for extrusion
to room temperature as quickly as possible. Plastic expands when it gets hot and contracts
as it cools. That contraction can result in warped parts, because the entire part cools and
contracts together. So a fan can be used to cool the filament quickly to avoid the entire
part contracting at once, which helps to reduce warping.
Some filament materials, like PLA, also require active cooling from a fan to combat
deformation. PLA is very soft until it cools, and the plastic can sag as its being printed if
it’s not cool. This is especially apparent when printing overhangs or bridges, which will
sag dramatically if the plastic is too hot.
Having a fan blowing on the plastic coming out of the nozzle allows you to print
overhangs and bridges without them becoming deformed. Just a fan blowing in the
direction of the nozzle can do a lot to help, but in order to cool effectively, fan shrouds can
be used. The shroud acts as a sort of funnel to direct air to a very small area just below the
nozzle where the filament is being deposited. This very quickly cools the filament as soon
as it exits the nozzle, so the plastic gets hard and doesn’t deform.
Whether you should use a fan is determined by the material you’re using. For PLA, a print
fan is virtually a necessity. For other materials, like ABS, a fan can actually be detrimental
to print quality. ABS isn’t as soft as PLA when it’s extruded, so a fan isn’t needed to keep
it from deforming. In fact, actively cooling ABS with a fan can make it solidify too much
and can keep it from sticking to the previous layer.
If the 3D printer is equipped with a print fan, it’s usually controlled via software. The
slicer software can turn the fan on and off (or even on at different speeds) throughout the
printing process. It’s common to have the fan on at different parts of the print (like for
overhangs) and off for others (like the first few layers). In later chapters, I’ll be going over
when and how to use print fans, but for now, you should just be aware of its purpose.
Using Multiple Extruders

All FFF 3D printers have at least one extruder, but it’s also possible to have multiple
extruders on the same printer. These are mounted right next to each other so the printer
can use all of the extruders at the same time. The most basic reason for doing this is so
you can print a single part in more than one color. But the possibilities introduced by using
dual extruders (or more) can be much more exciting than just making colorful parts.
The Kraken, also made by E3D, has four extruders built into a single unit.
(Courtesy of E3D)
For Support Material
One very useful way to take advantage of a dual extruder setup is to use one extruder for
regular filament and the other for support material. There are special kinds of filament
which are formulated specifically for this task. Some manufacturers, such as Stratasys,
have developed their own formulas for accomplishing this task, but in many cases patents
keep these from being available on printers from other manufacturers. When it comes to
the most common support material in consumer printing, people tend to use high-impact
polystyrene (HIPS). HIPS is a type of plastic that dissolves in a common solvent called
limonene. Limonene doesn’t affect PLA or ABS, so HIPS can be used for support material
and then dissolved away, leaving the printed part untouched.
Using a soluble support material like this in the second extruder eliminates the hassle of
having to manually remove support material made from the same material as the part. Not
only is it a lot of work to remove support material, it can be difficult to do without

damaging the part if there are fine details. In some cases, support material could be almost
impossible to remove if, for instance, it’s supporting internal geometry that can’t be
reached.
Dual extruders with a standard material and soluble support material completely solve this
problem. You can just print the part with the two types of filament, and when the print is
finished, you can soak it in a limonene solution. After a few hours, the support material is
dissolved away and your finished part can be removed.
For Filaments with Different Properties
Another use for dual extruders is printing two kinds of filament with different properties at
the same time. A single part could be printed with a hard ABS plastic and also a flexible
filament, for example. You could print a plastic tool with a soft rubbery handle. Or a part
could be made with flexible joints to allow movement.
With the wide range of filaments on the market today, there are a lot of possibilities for an
imaginative person. You can take advantage of the different melting points, coefficients of
friction, hardness, and flexibility of various filament types to create unique objects. This is
an area of 3D printing that is just starting to be explored, and a lot of unconventional
designs are possible.
HOT TIP
It doesn’t stop with just dual extruders either. You can already purchase a four-extruder
assembly meant for consumer printers that lets you print four different filament types
simultaneously. You could use this to print two different colors of ABS, a flexible filament, and HIPS
support material all at the same time. Or you could use it for any other combination of filament
materials that you think would be useful. Imagine the kinds of designs you could come up with!
The Least You Need to Know
An FFF extruder consists of a cold end that feeds filament into the hot end.
Direct feed cold ends feed more reliably, while the lower mass of Bowden cold ends can improve print quality.
In order to heat up the hot end, two specific electronic components are needed: a thermistor and a heating
element.
Multiple extruders can add a great deal of versatility to the kinds of prints a 3D printer is capable of.

CHAPTER
8
The Build Platform
In This Chapter
Materials commonly used for build platforms
The purpose of heated beds and build chambers
Different surface treatments to improve adhesion
When it comes to 3D printers, every part on the machine is important to its functionality.
That’s true even for things that seem simple and uncomplicated, like the build platform
(also called a print bed or build plate). The build platform is actually just as crucial as any
of the other parts and can be just as complicated.
The build platform is where the printer actually deposits the plastic to make the part. This
seems straightforward, but in order for the print to be successful, the plastic needs to stick
well to the platform. There are a few factors which determine how well the plastic will
stick: the flatness of the platform, how level it is, what material the build platform is made
of, and any surface treatments which are applied to the platform.
In this chapter, I go through all you need to know about the build platform, including what
it’s made of, the various parts that make it up, and the surface treatments used on it to
improve adhesion.
Build Platform Materials
There are a handful of materials that are commonly used for build platforms, such as glass,
borosilicate, aluminum, and copper. What all of these materials have in common is they
can be made very flat. The flatness of the build platform is essential for ensuring the
plastic sticks to the bed. This is because the nozzle has to remain at a very specific height
above the build platform for the extruded filament to adhere to the bed, and that height
wouldn’t remain constant if the platform weren’t flat.
DEFINITION
Borosilicate, also known as Pyrex (one of its trade names), is a type of glass that is
formulated to reduce thermal expansion. Because it’s much less prone to thermal expansion than
normal glass, it’s at a much lower risk of thermal shock. Thermal shock can crack traditional glass
if it’s quickly heated or cooled unevenly, a problem that borosilicate doesn’t experience.
In addition to being flat, the build platform has to be constructed from a material that the
molten filament can actually stick to. Some materials are too slick, and the extruded
filament simply won’t stick to it. An ideal material would let the filament stick very well

while it’s printing, and then allow it to come off easily when the print is done. If it sticks
too well after the print is done, it can be difficult to remove the part without damaging it.
For this reason, specialty build platforms are being developed just for 3D printers. This is
a brand new type of product, but the selection should increase dramatically in the coming
years. The platforms themselves are made from a variety of materials, depending on the
particular manufacturer. But the goal is the same for all of them: for the plastic to stick
well while printing and come off easily when the print is done. But in many cases, in order
for that to work, the build platform needs to be hot. This is where heated beds come in.
Heated Beds
Heated beds, as the name implies, keep material warm. A heated bed works pretty
similarly to a hot end in principle: a thermistor measures temperature, while resistive
heating is used to get the bed hot. In this case, though, the entire bed is a big resistor that
heats up instead of just a small heating element.
Conventional heated beds are large printed circuit boards (PCBs) specifically designed
with large copper traces that act as a very low-ohm resistor (due to Ohm’s law). When
voltage is applied, this draws a very large amount of current.
A large 12×12-inch PCB used for heating the build platform.

FASCINATING FACT
Recently, other types of heated beds have started to gain popularity in the consumer 3D
printing industry. This includes silicone heating pads, which have long been popular in other
industries. Unlike traditional PCB heat beds, these are flexible and are manufactured in a wide
range of sizes and shapes.
With all of that power flowing through what is basically a resistor, the heated bed gets hot
—anywhere from 60°C to 120°C is common. This, in turn, heats up the build platform.
And just like with the hot end, the 3D printer monitors the temperature using the
thermistor (see Chapter 7) and adjusts the voltage going to the heated bed to keep the
temperature steady.
One of the benefits of a heated bed is reduction in the warping of a part. As I covered in
earlier chapters, warping happens when the part contracts as the plastic cools. A heated
bed can help combat this problem by keeping the part warm as it is being printed. For
some materials, like ABS, a heated bed is basically a requirement. Other materials, such as
PLA, don’t need a heated bed but can still benefit from one.
This is the reason why some 3D printers include a heated bed and others don’t. Generally,
only inexpensive 3D printers come without a heated bed. Those printers can usually only
successfully print PLA. In order to print ABS (and many other materials), a heated bed is
a necessity.
In addition to reducing warping, heated beds also help filament stick to the build platform.
Heating the build platform gives the filament a nice, hot surface to stick onto, which is
true for all of the material types on the market. While it’s not absolutely necessary for all
materials, a heated bed does a lot for getting the first layer of the print to adhere well to
the build platform.
Heated Build Chambers and Enclosures
A heated build chamber is used to prevent warping. It contains the heat generated by the
hot end and heat bed, keeping the air warm and reducing drafts. Unlike an enclosure, a
heated build chamber includes active heating. This means a heating element and some
kind of temperature sensor (a thermistor, for example) are placed inside of the enclosure to
heat it up, almost like an electric oven. This can get the air inside very hot and can almost
completely eliminate warping with materials like ABS.
Unfortunately, not all 3D printers include heated build chambers. The main reason is that
Stratasys owns the patent for heated build chambers, meaning they use them extensively
on their professional FFF 3D printers but other manufacturers can’t add them to their
printers. If it weren’t for that patent, you’d surely see heated build chambers on a lot of
consumer 3D printers.

HOT TIP
Stratasys now owns MakerBot, a popular consumer 3D printer manufacturer. Because
Stratasys has the patent for heated build chambers, it’s likely that in the future the
technology could be used on consumer 3D printers made by MakerBot. If a heated build chamber
is important to you, it might be worth waiting for this to happen.
But that patent doesn’t keep manufacturers from adding an unheated enclosure to their
printers. Many consumer 3D printers have enclosures that can hold in the heat generated
by the hot end and heat bed, keeping the air warm and reducing drafts. Warm air around
the printer keeps the part warm, so even without active heating, this can do a lot to reduce
the warping that is common when printing with ABS.
Surface Treatments
Another way to reduce warping is to make sure the first layer of the print sticks very well
to the build platform. Most of the materials that build platforms are commonly made from
don’t work very well on their own. Even with a heated bed, the filament doesn’t always
adhere well. So to make sure that plastic really sticks, a variety of surface treatments can
be applied to the build platform. These treatments are usually some sort of tape, film, or
glue.
The 3D printing community has come up with a lot of novel ways to ensure the filament
adheres well to the build platform. A handful of these methods stand out as being
especially effective, and have come to be a sort of standard operating procedure for
hobbyists doing 3D printing. There are too many to cover all of them, but I’ll go over
some of the more popular ones here.
Painter’s Tape
One of the most popular surface treatments is painter’s tape. This is just the plain old blue
tape you put around your trim when you paint your walls. The tape is applied with the
adhesive on the build platform, so the entire build platform is completely covered. You
then print directly onto the nonadhesive side of the painter’s tape.

Printing a part on a build platform covered with painter’s tape.
The texture of the tape gives the filament good purchase so it sticks well. Some particular
brands seem to work better than others, but most of the commonly available types found at
hardware stores work pretty well.
Painter’s tape seems to work best for PLA on unheated beds. It can be used with ABS and
on heated beds, but there are usually better options. It’s also not a particularly durable
surface treatment, so you’ll probably need to replace the tape often (maybe even after
every print).
White Glue
Polyvinyl acetate (PVA)-based white glue (commonly referred to by the trade name
Elmer’s Glue) is also a popular way to get good adherence to the build platform. This is
the same glue you probably used throughout your childhood for various craft projects, and
it’s easy to find at just about any office supply store.
To apply it to the bed, mix a small amount with water at a ratio of about 1:1. Next, use a
small brush or paper towel to spread it around on the build platform; it can be applied on
top of blue painter’s tape or directly to the build platform. Ideally, you want a thin layer
left behind as the water evaporates, leaving a sticky residue. The water doesn’t have to be
completely evaporated for you to start printing, but the build platform shouldn’t be wet.
This glue helps the filament stick for obvious reasons—it’s glue, after all! When used in
conjunction with blue painter’s tape, it can almost completely eliminate warping when

printing PLA. However, ABS warps so much that you might not be able to completely
overcome it. Also, be aware that you’ll almost certainly need to replace the tape (if using)
and reapply the glue before every print.
Polyimide Film
Polyimide film is used in a handful of particular industries and applications, including for
superconductors and spacecraft. It’s very strong (even in thin sheets) and flexible and can
provide electrical insulation and thermal insulation. Polyimide sheets and tape are usually
referred to by the trade name Kapton (developed by DuPont).
Polyimide film, like blue painter’s tape, has a surface texture to which filament adheres
very well. Additionally, it can withstand very high temperatures, and there is virtually no
risk of damaging it with the heat generated by 3D printers. ABS also sticks very well to
polyimide film, which makes it especially useful when combined with a heated bed.
A 12×12-inch sheet of polyimide film.
One of the most desirable properties of polyimide film, however, is its strength. It can be
reused many times without damage, which is convenient of course. The only real
downsides to polyimide film are its availability and cost. It’s not usually available in local
stores and has to be ordered online. And, even when ordered online, it can be fairly
expensive.
PET Film
Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film is used similarly to polyimide film, although its
physical properties and traditional applications are quite different. PET film comes in

sheets and tape like polyimide film and can be applied in the same way.
In fact, in the context of 3D printing, PET film is really very similar to polyimide film.
However, it doesn’t have the same ability to withstand high temperatures that polyimide
film has. Polyimide film is often used to hold thermistors onto the hot end, for example,
and this is an application PET film isn’t well suited to. It just can’t hold up to the heat
from the hot end. But it works just fine for the build platform.
ABS Juice
Probably the most effective way to eliminate ABS warping is to use a sort of glue made
from ABS and acetone, commonly called ABS juice or ABS glue in the 3D printing
community. Because ABS dissolves in acetone, ABS juice is made by dissolving a large
amount of ABS filament (new or from failed prints) in pure acetone, which can easily be
found at your local hardware store.
DEFINITION
Acetone is a common household and industrial solvent. Acetone breaks down styrene,
which allows it to dissolve ABS.
When kept in a sealed container to keep the acetone from evaporating, this produces a
viscous fluid. It can then be applied to the build platform, either directly onto glass or onto
polyimide film or PET. This mixture is extremely sticky, and when a thin layer is applied,
the acetone quickly evaporates away. After the acetone is evaporated, a film of ABS is left
firmly stuck to the build platform.
Once you start printing, the molten ABS filament is deposited on top of this ABS film that
is stuck to the build platform. ABS adheres well to itself, and so it sticks extremely well to
the film (which remains stuck to the build platform). The result is a print that remains very
firmly attached to the build platform.
Using ABS juice can almost completely stop ABS parts from warping, making it very
useful. However, it can also be pretty messy to work with. It has to be made ahead of time,
kept in a sealed acetone-safe container, and has to be applied to the build platform. And it
works so well that it can be difficult to remove parts without damaging them.
Furthermore, the color of the ABS juice will coat the bottom of the printed part. So, for
example, if you printed a white part with black ABS juice, the bottom would end up at
least partially black. However, this can be counteracted by using a natural (uncolored)
ABS filament when making the juice.
Hairspray
One surprising surface treatment that has recently gained popularity is hairspray. The same
stuff that gave Farrah Fawcett’s hair its famous flip can help your parts stick to the build
platform. And, maybe even more surprisingly, it actually works very well!
As odd as it may sound, hairspray may just be perfect for 3D printing. It’s cheap, it can be
found in any grocery store or drug store, it’s easy to apply, it works well, and it doesn’t
damage or add color to your parts. What more could you want?

The kinds of hairspray that work best are the ones that are marked with words like extra or
super, or ideally extra super hold—the stronger the hairspray, the better. All you have to
do is spray a few coats onto the build platform, wait for it to dry, and then start printing!
However, it may help to remove the build platform from the 3D printer, if possible, in
order to avoid getting hairspray on any of the moving parts or mechanisms.
Hairspray is essentially just an aerosol adhesive, so you’re really just spraying a layer of
glue onto your build platform. This works very well to keep printed parts stuck well to the
platform, and when used on a heated bed, it can completely eliminate warping. Even large
ABS parts can be successfully printed, which is pretty good for a beauty product.
Hairspray being applied the print bed to help the part stick.
The Least You Need to Know
Build platforms can be made from a variety of materials, as long as they’re very flat.
Heated beds aren’t necessary for all materials but are required for some. However, they can improve print quality
for virtually all materials.
Heated build chambers can do a lot to reduce warping, but the technology is patented. Because of this, most
consumer 3D printers do not have heated build chambers; however, many still use enclosures.
There are many surface treatments that can be applied in order to improve the adhesion of the filament to the print
bed, such as painter’s tape, white glue, polyimide film, PET film, ABS juice, and hairspray.

CHAPTER
9
Control Components
In This Chapter
What end stops are and how they work
What the control board does
How LCD controllers and SD cards can help
Controlling a 3D printer is no easy task, because there is a lot of hardware to
simultaneously coordinate. The movement of three axes has to be coordinated, the
filament being fed by the cold end has to be controlled, the temperatures of the hot end
and heated bed need to be monitored and adjusted, and fans have to be turned on and off.
This all requires processing power, significant amounts of current being passed through
the control board, and the simultaneous control of multiple outputs and inputs.
In this chapter, I explain what hardware is commonly used to control consumer 3D
printers, some optional components you can use to help with the controls, and how they all
work.
In addition to the required components that have to be controlled, there are also a couple
of things that can be optionally used as well. An LCD screen and SD card reader, for
example, can be used so it’s not necessary to have a computer connected to the 3D printer
for it to run. There is also one other type of component I haven’t yet discussed, but which
is very important: an end stop.
End Stops
An end stop is a small and simple component with one very specific purpose: to tell the
3D printer when it has reached the end of each axis. This is a very important function,
because it’s the only way the printer can know where the zero point of each axis is.
Without end stops, you would have to manually position the hot end each and every time
you used the printer, which would be especially difficult for the Z axis (which has to be at
an extremely precise height above the bed).
FASCINATING FACT
End stops are also used on CNC mills for exactly the same reason. A CNC mill, just like a 3D
printer, needs to know where the zero point is for each of its axes in order to operate
properly. The only major difference is that CNC mills don’t have a constant zero point for the Z
axis; instead, they need to find the top of the material being milled. For this reason, the Z height is
either set manually or with a probe.

With such an important job to do, you might think that end stops would be expensive
components. But in reality, they’re actually generally very cheap parts. That’s because
they’re simply switches—just very sensitive switches. The key traits of an end stop switch
are sensitivity and repeatability. They need to be triggered by the faintest touch and at
exactly the same distance every time. This is usually done in one of two ways:
mechanically or optically.
Mechanical End Stops
Mechanical end stops are the simplest, cheapest, and probably most reliable type of end
stop. They are, quite literally, just a physical switch that is triggered when each axis gets to
its zero point. The switch consists of a small arm that sticks out from the body of the
switch. When the extruder carriage, build platform, or Z assembly reaches the end of its
axis, it pushes on the arm to temporarily trigger the switch.
The switch is either open or closed in its normal state, and the control board (which I’ll
discuss later in this chapter) monitors what state it’s in. When contact is made on the arm,
the state of the switch is reversed. So if it was open before, it’s switched to closed. If it
was closed before, it’s switched to open. When the control board sees the state change, it
knows that particular axis is at its zero point.
A switch wired to be normally open has a small amount of voltage applied to one contact
of the switch. When the switch is triggered, the connection is closed and the circuit has
voltage flowing through it. The control board sees the circuit has voltage flowing and
knows that the switch has been flipped.
Switches that are wired to be normally closed work in the opposite way. When the switch
isn’t triggered, the voltage is always flowing through the circuit. But when the switch is
triggered, it cuts off the flow. And, as expected, the control board sees that change and
proceeds accordingly.

This is a common mechanical end stop switch, wired to be normally closed.
It’s generally considered to be better to wire the end stop switch to be normally closed.
This is because a 3D printer can be damaged if the switch isn’t triggered and the axis
keeps trying to move past its end point. With the switch normally closed, any damage to
the circuit will result in the switch being triggered, so it acts as a sort of failsafe.
However, interference from the stepper motor wires can induce current in the end stop
wires. So it’s possible for the switch to be physically triggered but for the voltage to still
reach the control board. If this happens, that axis could continue moving when it’s not
supposed to and could cause damage.
HOT TIP
Interference can be a major problem for end stop switches, either causing false triggers or
failure to trigger. The interference is generally caused be stepper motor wires, which are
often run right next to the end stop wires. To protect against this interference, the end stop wires
should ideally be a shielded and twisted pair. A shielded and twisted pair is a type of wiring where
pairs of wires are twisted together and then electrically shielded to prevent interference.
When the end stop is wired to be normally open, any induced current caused by
interference would simply cause a false trigger, and no damage would occur. So both
setups have their pros and cons, and one isn’t necessarily objectively better than the other.
Optical End Stops
Optical end stops serve the same function as mechanical end stops. But instead of being
triggered by physical contact, they are triggered by changes in light. This is handled by a
component called a photo interrupter. No physical contact is necessary; instead, an optical

end stop is triggered when the light in the photo interrupter is interrupted.
A photo interrupter works very much like the sensors used on automatic garage door
openers. It consists of an emitter and a receiver (a phototransistor) that face each other.
Infrared light is output by the emitter, and the receiver senses that infrared light. When it
sees the light, the switch isn’t triggered; however, when that beam of light is broken and
the receiver no longer senses the infrared light, the switch becomes triggered.
This works almost exactly like your garage door sensors. When something is blocking
your garage door, the infrared light beam is broken and your garage door opener knows
not to close. The photo interrupters used in optical end stops do the same thing, just on a
much smaller scale.
In a photo interrupter used for optical end stops, the emitter and receiver are mounted right
next to each other. They’re generally only a few millimeters apart, leaving just enough
room for something to trigger the switch. This proximity makes them very sensitive,
unlike your garage door sensors. This sensitivity is what makes them desirable for use in
3D printers.
As I’ve previously discussed, it’s important for the 3D printer to know exactly where the
end point of each axis is (especially the Z axis). Mechanical end stops do this job well, but
because they’re mechanical, there is always going to be small amount of difference (even
if it’s only a fraction of a millimeter). Optical end stops have no moving parts and are
triggered as soon as the infrared light beam is broken. This makes them very precise, so
the 3D printer knows exactly where the end point is every time.
Of course, optical end stops do have some drawbacks. The most obvious of these is the
cost of the end stop itself. Mechanical end stops are just precise mechanical switches,
making them very cheap. On the other hand, optical end stops use electrical components
(namely the photo interrupter), which are more expensive. The cost difference isn’t huge,
but it is notable (though optical end stop prices have dropped significantly in recent years).
Optical end stops are also slightly more complicated to wire, as they require three wires
(while mechanical end stops only require two). This is because they need constant power
in addition to a signal wire. Mounting an optical end stop is also quite a bit more
complicated than a mechanical end stop, because some sort of tab has to be used to
interrupt the infrared light beam. This means the end stop has to be perfectly lined up with
the tab on that axis in order to function, while a mechanical end stop can really be
mounted in any way that lets it get pushed by something on that axis.
Other Kinds of End Stops
Because end stops are really just switches that get triggered when the axis reaches its end
point, there are a lot of mechanisms that can be used as end stops. Anything that can act as
a proximity switch could probably work, technically speaking. This means there are other
types of end stops out there, even if they’re not particularly popular.
One of these, for example, is a Hall effect sensor. A Hall effect sensor senses a nearby
magnet and varies its output voltage based on the how close or powerful the magnet is. So
a small magnet can be mounted on the moving part of a 3D printer axis, and when it gets
close to the Hall effect sensor, the end stop is triggered.

DEFINITION
The Hall effect, discovered by Edwin Hall in 1879, is the tendency for voltage in a circuit
to change when exposed to magnetism. It can be harnessed to create proximity sensors and is
sometimes used for end stops and probes.
Beyond Hall effect sensors, people have experimented with a wide range of different types
of devices to make end stops (everything from ultrasonic distance sensors to
accelerometers). But so far, mechanical and optical end stops remain the most common
types of end stops by a long shot. Their relatively low cost and reliability make them ideal
for use in 3D printers, and there just hasn’t been anything that works any better.
Control Boards
In order to monitor and control those end stops and all of the other components of a 3D
printer, a control board is needed. The control board is a small computer that’s essentially
the brain of the 3D printer. It is responsible for both interpreting commands from the
slicing software and signals from the 3D printer’s sensors and using that information to
control the operation of the printer.
Control boards come in a variety of different types and styles from many different
manufacturers. There are open-source boards meant to work with various types of 3D
printers, open-source boards meant to work with specific 3D printers, and proprietary
boards that only work with the particular printer they were designed for. But they all tend
to work in roughly the same way, with similar inputs and outputs.
Arduinos and Proprietary Control Boards
Every control board needs to be able to do basically the same things:
Take the commands outputted by the slicing software and use them as instructions for operating the 3D printer
Monitor and heat up the hot end (and probably a heated bed, too)
Simultaneously control four or more stepper motors—one for each axis, and a fourth for the extruder
Monitor at least three end stops
Doing all of this requires processing power, of course. But more importantly, it requires a
lot of inputs and outputs. Every component on the 3D printer needs to have its own input
or output (depending on its function), and they all have to be controlled or monitored at
the same time. For this reason, Arduinos are a popular choice as the base of most open-
source control boards.
Arduinos, by their very nature, are very well suited to this task. They’re programmable,
have onboard processing capabilities, and have native support for many inputs and
outputs. When used for 3D printing, Arduinos are generally equipped with a shield that
provides all of the connections for the steppers, hot end, end stops, and so on. Or, in some
cases, the Arduino and connections are all integrated into a single circuit board for
simplicity and ease of use.

DEFINITION
In the context of Arduinos, a shield is a circuit board designed to be attached to the
Arduino board. Shields are generally used to expand the capabilities of Arduinos by adding either
more connections or sensors. They are usually designed for a specific application (like GPS
tracking or to interface with another device), although plenty of general-use shields exist.
A RAMPS 1.4 control board, which is a shield for an Arduino Mega.
Proprietary control boards that are closed source and aren’t Arduino based still work in the
same way but are just developed by the manufacturer specifically for use in a 3D printer.
They still have to have all of the same capabilities for processing and input and output; the
only difference is they aren’t built on an Arduino. It’s analogous to internet browsers:
whether you’re using an open-source browser like Firefox or a closed-source browser like
Internet Explorer, they display web pages, and you can use them to surf the internet.
Changing or Upgrading Control Boards
In many cases, the control boards can be interchangeable. For example, if you decided you
wanted to add dual extruders to your printer but the control board didn’t have the proper
support, you could potentially remove the original control board and replace it with one
that supports dual extruders. This is possible because the other components of the 3D
printer all tend to be the same, regardless of who makes it, and they work in the same way.
However, complications can be encountered when it comes to firmware and software.
Firmware is made specifically for the control board; it can’t be transferred between
different kinds of control boards. And in some cases, only specific slicing and control
software can be used with a particular control board. This isn’t the case with open-source

control boards, which virtually always work with the common software programs, but it
can be the case with some proprietary software and control boards.
So when should you worry about the control board, if ever? There are generally two
instances where the control board used by the 3D printer might make a difference to the
user: when it comes to expandability, and if the software you can use is constrained.
WATCH OUT!
While it’s usually possible to replace the control board with a different type, you shouldn’t
count on it. Changing the control board can be complicated by the enclosure and connectors used.
It’s rarely a plug-and-play type of change, even when it is possible.
The expandability of the control board can be a pretty big deal if you ever want to upgrade
or modify your 3D printer. If you want to add dual extruders, a heated bed, an LCD
controller, or anything else, the control board has to be capable of supporting it. Some
control boards simply don’t have the connections necessary to add these things. Or, even if
the physical connection is present, there may not be firmware available that supports the
control of those parts.
Software compatibility can also potentially be a fairly major concern. Some software will
only work with specific control boards, and vice versa. This is usually only the case with
3D printers from manufacturers who want a complete 3D printing ecosystem under their
brand. They develop a control board specifically for the printers they manufacturer, and
then have slicing and control software which just works with those control boards.
In such a situation, it may be difficult or impossible to use any other software to slice 3D
models or to control the 3D printer. It also may not be possible to use the software if you
don’t have that particular 3D printer. The latter problem may not big a very big deal,
because there are plenty of software options that are free and work well. But the former
problem could be pretty serious. If you don’t like the software released by the
manufacturer, you’d still have to use it anyway. If the manufacturer went out of business
or stopped supporting the software, you may be stuck using outdated software.
If either of these things sounds like something that might matter to you, it’s a good idea to
do a little research ahead of time about what you’re getting. Does the control board allow
you to add upgrades later? Are you free to use whatever software you like, or are you
stuck with a particular program made by the manufacturer? Depending on your needs and
expectations, those could be major factors in your decision on which 3D printer to
purchase.
SD Card Support
One nifty add-on that many control boards can take advantage of is secure digital (SD)
card support. Normally, you have to have a computer connected to a 3D printer while it
runs. This is so the host control software can send the instructions to the printer, which
tells it what to do to create the part. However, those instructions are created ahead of time
by the slicing software. All the host software does is control the setup of the printer (like
homing the axes and heating the hot end) and then send the instructions via USB to the 3D

printer. At this point, the computer isn’t really doing any processing, other than what it
takes to run the computer itself and the software. All it’s doing is storing the instructions
on the hard drive and then sending each command to the printer.
Because no significant processing is being done, the computer really isn’t necessary after
the slicing has been done. Instead, the instructions can be saved to an SD card and the
control board can read the instructions directly without having to use a computer as an
intermediary. Some control boards have this functionality built in, while others can have it
added as an upgrade later. (Some control boards don’t have this ability at all, but luckily,
they’re in the minority.)
Using an SD Card
If the control board does come with SD card support, or it has been added, you can forgo
the use of a computer entirely during printing. You still have to use slicing software on the
computer to convert your 3D model into a series of instructions that can be read by the
control board. But once those instructions have been created, you don’t have to use a
computer at all; you can simply save the instructions from the slicing software on the SD
card and then insert it into a slot on the control board (or a separate board, if SD card
support is added).
HOT TIP
If your control board does support SD cards, make sure you do a little research on what kind
it supports. SD cards come in different physical sizes, and you need the right size for your
SD card reader. Additionally, they come in different storage capacities, and some might not be
compatible with the control board if they are too large.
When the 3D printer is turned on with an SD card inserted, the control board will
automatically look for the instructions created by the slicing software. If it finds the
instructions, it will proceed with running them. Generally, the instructions include
information on what temperature the hot end and heated bed are supposed to be and any
homing instructions. So the 3D printer will start with those things, and once it’s heated up
to the proper temperature and homing has been done, it can start printing.
From then on, it’s just like if you were printing from your computer, because it’s reading
the exact same instructions from the SD card that the computer would have been feeding
to it over USB.
Benefits of SD Cards
SD card support has a number of benefits that might prove very useful. There is the
obvious benefit of not having to leave your computer attached to your 3D printer
whenever a print is running. That way, you can use your computer for other things while
your 3D printing is printing. You don’t even have to have the computer in the same room
(or even building) as the 3D printer, because the printer only needs the SD card to run.
It also makes printing more reliable, because the computer is no longer part of the
equation. Anyone who has ever had a long print ruined because Windows Update decided
to restart the computer knows how valuable that can be. The same benefit applies for those
of us who have dogs that like to pull out USB cables.

For people who are eco-conscious (or budget conscious), having SD card support means
you don’t have to waste electricity running your computer. If you’re frequently doing long
prints, this can actually be pretty significant. Leaving your computer running for two days
while your 3D printer makes some big object can use quite a lot of power.
LCD Controllers
As beneficial as SD card support is, it does present a couple of challenges. Because it can
only read instructions that have already been created by the slicing software, that means
you still can’t manually control the printer without a computer. There is also no way to
choose from multiple instruction files, which means you can only store one file on the SD
card at a time to print.
Luckily, there is a solution for that: an LCD controller. An LCD controller combines an
LCD panel for displaying information, as well as some sort of control mechanism (or it
could be a touchscreen LCD). Many LCD controllers also integrate an SD card reader or
can be used with a separate SD card reader. In either case, the result is the same: you can
manually control the 3D printer and select specific files from the SD card to print.
An LCD controller with SD card support made by RepRapDiscount.
When a 3D printer is equipped with an LCD controller, you can manually move the
steppers (including the extruder) and heat up the hot end and heated bed without using a
computer at all. When an SD card is inserted, you can manually select which files you
want to print as well. So you can load up the SD card with many files and choose which
one you’d like to print.

This makes an LCD controller very useful in situations where you don’t have a computer
nearby. For instance, at trade shows and conventions, you could bring the 3D printer with
an SD card full of example prints. You could then have your 3D printer churning out parts
at a booth without even having to bring a computer.
It’s also useful in situations where a 3D printer is shared between multiple people, like at a
school. Students can use their own computers to slice models and then load the files onto
an SD card. The students can then load their files from the SD card without having to have
a computer dedicated to controlling the printer.
FASCINATING FACT
What if everything could be handled by the 3D printer without having to touch a separate
computer at all? This is territory that is just starting to be explored. A small touchscreen
computer can be mounted on the 3D printer, allowing you to download 3D models, slice
them, and print them without ever touching your computer.
This is still a pretty new technology, but many 3D printer manufacturers are working on integrating
it into higher-end 3D printers. It isn’t cheap, of course, but with the popularity of tablets, it’s not as
expensive as you might think. And the usefulness of such a setup is so high that it’s likely to
become commonplace in the next few years.
The Least You Need to Know
End stops are necessary for telling the 3D printer when each axis has reached its end point.
Mechanical and optical end stops are by far the most common, but any type of proximity sensor could technically
work.
The control board is responsible for interpreting the instructions created by the slicing software and for using
those instructions to control all of the components of the 3D printer.
Some additional devices, like LCD controllers and SD card support, can be added to control boards to improve
their functionality.

CHAPTER
10
Choosing a 3D Printer
In This Chapter
Open vs. closed source
Whether getting an assembled printer, printer kit, or DIY printer is right for you
What are your printing needs?
Designs beyond Cartesian printers
Now that you know the different parts that make up a 3D printer, it’s time to think about
what type of 3D printer is right for you. Deciding on what 3D printer to purchase can be
both overwhelming and exciting. The increasingly abundant number of manufacturers and
models on the market are sure to make anyone dizzy. Do you need a 1.75mm or 3mm hot
end? Is one company better than another? Should you care about whether or not it’s open
source?
There are a plethora of options and factors to think about, but if you can make a few early
decisions, you’ll gain a lot of focus in your search. Most people already have an idea of
what they want and expect from their printer, so it’s just a matter of consciously deciding
what’s important to you.
In this chapter, I take you through some things you should consider when purchasing a 3D
printer. Once you’ve narrowed your list down to a few models, the choice will become a
simple matter of picking which has the best reviews and price.
Open or Closed?
Do you care if the printer is open source? For many people, this is the most important
factor in their purchase. For others, it’s largely irrelevant. The consumer 3D printer market
is divided roughly 50/50 between open-source and closed-source printers, so choosing
which kind you want initially can cut down your options by half.
What Does It Mean to Be Open Source?
Let me first explain what I mean by “open source.” If you recall from Chapter 2, the basic
open-source concept is simple: intellectual property is shared freely so others can modify
it, use it, and share it themselves. This is in direct opposition to the practice of controlling
intellectual property via patents and copyrights (otherwise known as closed source). Open-
source data can still be patented and copyrighted, but to be considered open source, it has
to be licensed to allow sharing.

DEFINITION
Intellectual property is any idea that is legally protected. Providing legal protection for
intangible things like ideas is a complicated matter, and the laws vary from country to country. But
in the United States, intellectual property like inventions, music, copywriting, patents, and so on
are legally protected property.
In the early days of the internet, many people believed that patents and copyrights of
technology, especially software, were counterproductive and inhibited progress. Both
individuals and corporations pushed the idea you could share your ideas while making a
profit and fueling innovation.
In 1985, the Free Software Foundation (FSF) was created to support and promote this
movement. At the time, the primary goal was to ensure people’s freedom to use their
hardware as they pleased without being restricted by proprietary software. Over time, this
ideology evolved to encompass a broader idea of open software. Then, in 1998, the Open
Software Initiative (OSI) was created with very similar goals in mind. Together, these
organizations (and others) have helped to create the many free and open software options
we enjoy today.
But it doesn’t stop with just the software. A more recent trend is the open hardware
movement. The ideals are similar, but instead of developers making their source code
public, engineers are making their designs public. In the same way you can download
Linux source code under the GNU License created by FSF, you can download blueprints
and design files from open hardware companies. The entire RepRap project is based on
that idea and has been completely open source from the very beginning. In fact, many of
the 3D printers on the market today are RepRap designs or derivatives.
Additionally, other manufacturers have developed their own designs independently of the
RepRap project but also have made them open source. For example, Aleph Objects makes
the only 3D printer to carry a hardware certification from the FSF. That printer, the
Lulzbot, is the printer featured in the photos throughout this book. The kind of information
most companies keep under lock and key, such as design files and documentation, is made
freely available by Aleph Objects.

The Lulzbot TAZ 4 is the only 3D printer available that is certified by the FSF.
Many other manufacturers stay true to the open-source ideology as well. Like Aleph
Objects, they make their design and engineering documents available to the public. The
key is they share their designs, make their printers compatible with open-source software,
and allow customers to use their printers however they wish.
Why It Might Matter to You
You now know what it means to be open source, but why should it matter to you? What
difference will it make, practically speaking?
The biggest argument for the purchase of an open-source printer is freedom. You’ll have
the freedom to use whatever software you please and to modify your printer however you
like. You won’t be restricted in what you can and can’t print, where your files come from,
or how you use them. If you decide you don’t like the software recommended by the
manufacturer, you can just switch to another program. You won’t be required to use
proprietary filament cartridges or be restricted to approved accessories.
HOT TIP
Many 3D printers with closed-source hardware are still capable of using open-source
software for slicing and control. Open-source software may even be recommended by the
manufacturer. When you’re looking at printers, be sure to check which software the manufacturer
recommends and whether you’re free to use other software.
With all of that said, there are many great 3D printers on the market that are not open
source. You may decide the printer for you is closed source. There is absolutely nothing
wrong with going that direction. After all, the vast majority of things we buy on a day-to-

day basis aren’t open source. Most completely closed-source manufacturers strive to make
their systems seamless and easy to use, and you may find that you prefer one of those
systems. But be sure to consider the decision carefully, since closed source is more
restricted.
Assembled, Kit, or DIY?
The next factor to consider is how you want to receive your printer from the manufacturer,
or if you want to skip the manufacturer altogether and build your own 3D printer. This
choice shouldn’t be taken lightly, so I’m going to explain the advantages and
disadvantages of each option.
Assembled 3D Printers
If you are unsure what you want to do, this is absolutely the safest choice. Purchasing your
printer already assembled from the factory is the easiest and most reliable way to start
printing. You won’t have to worry about assembly; you can just unbox it, do a few setup
steps, and be printing your first model in an hour or two. And most assembled printers will
come with a warranty of some kind in case anything goes wrong, which may not be the
case with the other options. It’s also likely that you’ll be able to receive some technical
support if you run into any problems.
Cost is the biggest downside here. Someone had to be paid to assemble the printer, and
that results in a higher price. Shipping costs may be higher as well, as the box will usually
be bigger than that of an unassembled printer. And, although it’s assembled, you’ll
probably still need to do a little bit of adjustment to get it actually printing.
3D Printer Kits
Kits are a great way to save some money and an opportunity to learn about your printer as
you’re building. The knowledge and experience you gain building the printer can help
tremendously in the future with troubleshooting and modifications.
Generally, a kit will include all of the parts and hardware you need to build your own
printer. It should come with the frame pieces, fasteners, electronics, motors, and anything
else you’ll need to build a working 3D printer. Most kits on the market today are based on
RepRap designs, but there are some that were independently designed. Like with an
assembled printer, your decision should be based on your needs, but you’ll also need to
take into account build time and difficulty.
What it takes to build a kit can vary quite a lot. Some kits come partially assembled and
just require that you fit the pieces together. Other kits will require that you assemble each
and every part on your own, so you may need special skills (like the ability to solder). You
may also have the option of ordering a partial kit that includes everything except 3D-
printed parts, which can be a good way to save some money if you know someone who
can print those parts for you.
The downsides to kits are that they can be very time consuming to assemble, they require
tools, and assembly can be difficult. Therefore, make sure you’re confident in your ability

to assemble the printer before you purchase it.
Building a DIY 3D Printer
Another option is to build your own do-it-yourself (DIY) printer using designs published
by individuals or open-source companies. Most of these designs are based on the RepRap
project, and many are tried and true. Building your own printer can save you a significant
amount of money and gives you the opportunity to modify the design to build the exact
printer you want. (See Appendix B for some helpful links on how to do this.)
My DIY 3D printer, based on the open-source TAZ design.
The downside, of course, is that it’s completely up to you to source all of the parts and put
them together. This is a very difficult task, and I wouldn’t recommend it for your first
printer. But for a second printer, or for the adventurous, it can be very rewarding and a
great learning experience.
Determining Your Needs
At this point, your choices should already be considerably narrowed, and hopefully a few
manufacturers and models are starting to stand out. When looking at these remaining
models, consider what your needs are and what you need your printer to do for you. What
kind of models will you be printing? What will their use be? What kind of filament will
you use? What should everything cost? The following are a few specific things you’ll
want to pay attention to.

HOT TIP
3D printer manufacturers will sometimes publish specifications in inches, millimeters, or
both, so you may have to do some unit conversions when comparing printers. However,
metric units (millimeters specifically) are generally the standard when exporting and importing STL
files and when configuring parameters in software and firmware. Be sure to check what units are
used and required when working with different 3D printers.
Print Volume
Print volume is the specification that tells you how large a model (or models) you can
print. In most cases, this will be rectangular, and is calculated by multiplying the print
width, length, and height. However, for some printers (particularly Delta-style printers),
the print volume is cylindrical and calculated by multiplying pi by radius squared and
height (πr2h). If you do choose a Delta printer, be sure the circular base is suitable for
your needs.
While looking at the print volume is certainly a useful way of comparing printers, it
doesn’t quite tell the whole story. Two printers with the same print volume could have
vastly different dimensions that might affect your decision. For example, Printer A has
print dimensions of 8×8×8 inches, while Printer B has print dimensions of 16×16×2
inches. Both printers will have a print volume of 512 cubic inches, but how useful would a
printer be that could only print a model 2 inches tall, as in the case of Printer B?
For that reason, it’s a good idea to look at the actual dimensions. What is the print size in
the X direction? How about Y and Z? Determine the largest size you’ll be likely to print,
and make sure the printers you’re considering can handle it.
You may be tempted to just buy the printer with the largest print volume, just in case. But
keep in mind that both cost and print time increase with print volume. Therefore, there is
little sense in paying a lot of money for a big print volume you won’t actually use. Plus,
print time increases exponentially with size (you can thank the square-cube law for that).
DEFINITION
The square-cube law is a scientific principle that describes the mathematical relationship
between size, surface area, and volume. Its relevance to 3D printing is the way that volume (and
therefore print time) increases exponentially with size. For example, a cube 10mm to a side has a
volume of 1,000mm3. Doubling the dimensions of the cube to 20mm to a side results in a volume
of 8,000mm3. Because the larger cube is 8 times the volume, it will take 8 times longer to print
than the smaller cube.
Print Resolution
Print resolution is essentially a measure of the potential quality of your printed models.
Smaller is better here, similar to how smaller pixels result in better image quality on your
computer monitor. A smaller resolution means you can print finer details, and the overall
surface finish of the model will be smoother. But determining the print resolution that a
printer is capable of can actually be a tricky task. There is currently no practical way of
specifying the actual effective print resolution of a 3D printer in the real world.
Theoretically speaking, print resolution should be the result of two factors: nozzle size and

movement precision. The nozzle size determines how fine the filament thread being
ejected from the hot end is. Because nozzles are replaceable, this isn’t something you
should be too concerned with—you can always change the nozzle to one with a smaller
opening. However, movement precision can’t be altered without significant modification
to the printer’s hardware, making it an important consideration.
This can be calculated with the “steps per mm” information, which should be provided by
the manufacturer for use when configuring your slicer and firmware. For instance, if your
X axis is 200 steps per mm, your movement precision on that axis is 0.005mm (1mm
divided by 200). But no matter how precise the movement is, the nozzle size will restrict
how detailed your prints can be. If the nozzle is too big, it won’t be able to print very fine
detail. It’s analogous to trying to write small text with a marker—the marker is just too big
to write fine details.
There are other concerns that factor into the resolution of a 3D printer though. Just
something that seems relatively minor, like flex in the printer’s frame, can reduce the
effective resolution of the printer. This means that the resolution specified by the
manufacturer might only be achievable at slow speeds under the best circumstances.
Filament
There are many filament materials on the market, and the choices are rapidly increasing.
Different 3D printers are capable of utilizing different filament materials, and it’s worth
paying attention to this when choosing a printer.
If you remember from Chapter 7, the two most common filament materials in use today
are PLA and ABS. PLA is widely considered to yield higher-quality prints, while ABS
parts are generally stronger and more durable. ABS is also easier to work with postprint
(for sanding, drilling holes, and so on). Virtually all FFF 3D printers are able to print with
PLA, while ABS requires a heated bed to print successfully. If you purchase a printer with
a heated bed, you’ll be able to print the two most popular materials. However, 3D printers
that don’t come with a heated bed included will often have that as an accessory
specifically to allow you to print ABS.
Other more exotic materials may require specialized hardware. For example, if you’re
interested in printing flexible filament, a printer with a Bowden extruder will not work.
The filament simply bends too much in the feed tube and won’t be able to feed reliably. So
you should only consider direct feed extruder types if you want to print flexible filament.
DEFINITION
Flexible filament is an umbrella term for any filament material that is flexible, rubbery,
and squishy. This can be used as an alternative to the hard and rigid plastic that is more commonly
used for 3D printing. The exact composition differs depending on the manufacturer, but the
resulting material is fairly similar with all of them.
Other materials, like polycarbonate, require special hardware to print. In Chapter 18, I’ll
go into a lot more depth about what other materials are available and what kind of
hardware you’ll need to use them. It’s worth skipping ahead to that chapter if you’re
curious about some of the more unique materials and want to know what you’ll need to
print with them.

Besides filament material, you also need to decide on what filament size you’d like to be
able to use. Currently, 3D printer filament comes in two sizes: 1.75mm and 3mm.
Originally, most filament came in 3mm. As nozzle sizes decreased, however, it took more
force to push 3mm filament through the nozzle. For that reason, 1.75mm has become the
more popular choice, with a wide range of manufacturers and color options. However,
flexible filaments generally feed more reliably in 3mm because the thickness increases the
stiffness, making it less likely to bend and jam. Some filament manufacturers only sell
their flexible filaments in 3mm due to that.
With all of that said, both 1.75mm and 3mm 3D printers will have a very wide selection of
filament to choose from. Don’t put too much weight on this factor; rather, first find a 3D
printer you like. If that printer has an option of 1.75mm or 3mm, decide on a size based on
your needs.
Prices
Until just a few years ago, the high cost of 3D printers meant that usually only
corporations could afford to purchase them for prototyping purposes. Luckily for both
hobbyists and small companies, 3D printer prices have recently dropped dramatically. In a
very short amount of time, the least expensive printers have gone from being tens of
thousands of dollars to just a few hundred. Even better, a current midrange consumer
printer is capable of rivaling the quality and print volume of professional 3D printers from
only a few years ago.
So what can you expect to pay for a consumer 3D printer for personal use? Obviously,
price will vary depending on size and features, but proven and well-reviewed printers
range from about $400 to $3,000. At the bottom end, you have very basic printers with
small print volumes that are often constructed out of inexpensive materials like wood. As
prices rise, print volume generally increases, more features are added, and frames are
made of higher-quality materials. At the high end of the consumer market, you have 3D
printers that would even be suitable for an engineering or prototyping environment.
Simply put, this is an exciting time to purchase a 3D printer! Prices are low enough that
it’s realistic for an average person to purchase one for home use. The market is very
healthy, and there are options out there to suit a variety of needs.
HOT TIP
When thinking about cost, remember to keep room in your budget for tools, accessories,
and filament as well. Filament prices range from about $25 to $50 per kilogram for ABS and
PLA, and a kilogram should be enough for you to get started with. It’s also a good idea to have a
basic set of hand tools available—such as wrenches, pliers, and screwdrivers—along with various
glues and tapes.
Printers with Unusual Designs
For the purposes of simplifying this guide, I’ve been talking primarily about Cartesian 3D
printers that use FFF technology for printing. Cartesian printers are set up with a
rectangular build area with movement in three axes, and are by far the most common type

of printer on the market (see Chapter 5).
However, there are other kinds of printers out there which you might come across. One
type that has gained a lot of popularity recently is the Delta-style 3D printer. These use a
unique method of movement where the build platform is stationary and the hot end is
moved on three arms attached to vertical rails. Delta printers are advantageous because
they’re capable of printing at higher speeds. However, being a newer design, there is less
information and support available. They also have a circular build platform as a result of
their unique geometry, which might not suit your needs.

This is a Delta-style Rostock 3D printer, a RepRap design.
Another design that has recently started to enter the consumer market is digital light
processing (DLP). Traditionally, these types of 3D printers were expensive and the
technology was only used in professional printers. But prices have dropped low enough

that they could be worth considering. DLP printers work by shining light onto a vat of UV-
curable resin. As the light hits the resin, it cures and hardens, eventually resulting in a
plastic part.
DLP 3D printers are capable of producing high-quality parts with very fine detail, but they
also have significant drawbacks that make them unattractive options outside of specialized
uses. The resin used is much more expensive (per kilogram) than traditional filament, and
the selection is much smaller. Plus, color and material options are only a small fraction of
what is available to FFF printers. They’re also unable to print hollow parts, as the uncured
resin is left inside the part.
In addition to Delta and DLP 3D printers, there are a number of other more exotic designs
out there. However, they are all fairly experimental at this point and probably wouldn’t be
a good choice for your first 3D printer. In fact, it’s probably best to stick to a Cartesian
printer unless you have a specific need for one of the other types. The popularity of
Cartesian printers ensures that you’ll have access to a wealth of information and support,
as well as a wide range of choices.
The Least You Need to Know
Make sure you consider your present and future needs when determining what printer to buy.
Choosing an open-source 3D printer provides benefits for support, flexibility, and modifications.
Prices have dropped dramatically in recent years, but 3D printers are still a hefty investment. Kits offer savings
and an opportunity to learn the ins and outs of your printer.
If you’re new to 3D printers, it’s best to stick with the popular Cartesian printer. That way, you’ll have access to
plenty of support and information.

PART
3
Setting Up and Printing
Now that you’re familiar with how 3D printers work, it’s time to get into their actual
operation. In this part, I go over how to set up your 3D printer’s hardware when you
receive it. I also teach you how to configure your software and connect to your printer.
You also learn important things like how to level the bed and how to adjust the height of
the Z axis. I then finish this part with some basic printing projects to get you started.

CHAPTER
11
Software Setup and Printer Control
In This Chapter
The purpose of firmware and host software
How slicing software works
Common host control commands and useful G-code
Before you can actually print anything, you have to set up the software to slice models and
control the 3D printer. There are many options for these programs, and it’s possible that
your 3D printer may be restricted to one particular software package. However, the
settings and setup process tend to be fairly similar between all of them.
In this chapter, you learn about your printer’s firmware, as well as how to choose host and
slicing software. I then discuss how you use this software to connect to and control your
printer.
Firmware Explained
Firmware is basically a program that is stored on a device. I know that sounds terribly
vague, but that’s because the specifics vary quite a bit depending on the device. For
example, on your computer, the operating system is not firmware, but the Basic
Input/Output System (BIOS) is. On a cell phone, however, the entire cell interface may run
on firmware, or the firmware could just be used to load an operating system like your
computer.
The key characteristics of firmware are the following:
It’s always the first thing to run when the device is turned on.
It’s not stored in mass storage. Instead, it’s stored on an onboard chip that’s always present, since devices can’t
function without it.
It’s almost always set up for only one specific device.
DEFINITION
The Basic Input/Output System (BIOS) is the firmware interface used on most
computers. It’s the first thing to load as soon as your computer starts up and controls how the
operating system (Windows, for example) is booted.
Firmware is different from software, though in a very general way they appear similar.
Think of it as being as series of layers built on top of each other: the firmware loads first
and directly controls the hardware, and then the software loads and only controls the

hardware indirectly via the firmware. Because the firmware controls the hardware directly,
it has to be written for the specific hardware being used. This allows the software to be
much more generic (and to work with a wide range of devices), because it’s not directly
interfacing with the hardware.
In 3D printing, the firmware is stored on the control board and is used for the complete
operation of the 3D printer. No software is needed on top of the firmware, and all of the
functions of the 3D printer are controlled by the firmware running on the control board.
Despite the complexity of 3D printers, the software needed to control them is still small
enough to be loaded as firmware onto the read-only memory (ROM) of the control board.
Because firmware has to be small enough to fit in ROM, it’s generally written to be as
small as possible. The small size combined with the base-level operation of firmware
usually means it can only work with the specific hardware it was designed for. If the
hardware is changed, the firmware has to be rewritten for that hardware.
In the case of 3D printers, there are many types of printers, with many types of control
boards. Luckily, they’re designed similarly enough that the same basic firmware can be
used for a lot of them. The firmware just has to be properly configured for the control
board it’s loaded on. That configuration can be performed by the printer manufacturer or
even by the user. However, other control boards—especially ones that aren’t open source
—can only be loaded with firmware released by the manufacturer. If that’s the case, the
user has to rely on the manufacturer to provide adequate firmware.
FASCINATING FACT
There are only a few basic firmware systems that are used for the majority of 3D printers
(especially open-source 3D printers). This is possible because the hardware used for 3D
printers is so similar for most models. As long as the control board is compatible, the firmware just
has to be configured for the specific hardware being used.
Still, 3D printer control boards almost always have firmware that is somewhat
configurable even after it has been loaded. This is so the user can adjust the settings for
things like the size of the printer, how many steps it takes to move each axis 1mm, and so
on. This information is stored in the electrically erasable programmable read-only memory
(EEPROM) and can be changed and overwritten.
If new firmware is flashed (essentially installed) on to the control board, the data stored in
the EEPROM is still kept, so the settings remain. This is good for when you’re just
updating firmware, but keep in mind that if the EEPROM settings are incorrect, they will
still persist. If you notice some problem doesn’t go away even after flashing new
firmware, you’ll probably want to make sure it isn’t some EEPROM setting that is causing
the problem.
Unless you have a problem with it, though, there is usually no reason why you need to do
anything with the firmware unless you want to. Occasionally, manufacturers will release
new firmware versions that either fix a bug or add a feature, but for the most part, the
firmware isn’t something you need to worry about as a user.
Choosing Host Software

Unless you have an LCD controller (see Chapter 9), you need host control software to
manually control the printer and run prints. The host software is what controls
communication between your computer and your 3D printer.
The host software connects to the 3D printer’s control board via USB. When you start a
print, the host software takes the commands generated by the slicing software and sends
them over the USB connection to the 3D printer. The number of individual commands can
easily number in the thousands, and each command is sent one at a time. Once the
command has been performed, the 3D printer’s control board returns a confirmation to the
host software, which then sends the next command. These steps are repeated over and
over again until the print is finished.
Some 3D printer manufacturers require specific host software to control their printers.
In most cases, however, you can choose from a variety of host software, including
Repetier, Cura, ReplicatorG, and Pronterface. All of these perform the same general
functions: manual control of the 3D printer, sending commands to run prints, and usually
integration of slicing software. You can also modify EEPROM settings via the host
software.
HOT TIP
Because each command is sent one at a time, the USB connection has to remain
established throughout the entire printing process. If the USB cable is unplugged, the host
software is closed, or the computer is turned off, the printing will stop and the part will be ruined.
For this reason, you should make sure your computer is running throughout the entire print. More
than one part has been ruined by a Windows Update restarting the computer halfway through the
print.
Repetier host software, with Slic3r integrated.
Choosing Slicing Software

Even if your 3D printer has an LCD controller and host software isn’t needed, you’ll still
have to slice your 3D models for printing. That’s what slicing software is for: to convert
your 3D models into a series of G-code commands. This is a complex task that requires a
lot of processing power, so for now it’s necessary to do the slicing on a computer.
DEFINITION
G-code is the programming language that 3D printers and other computer-controlled
machine tools can use for instructions. The G-code is what is used to give most 3D printers the
commands they follow to produce parts. I’ll go into more detail on G-code later in this chapter.
Unlike host software, the slicing software you use can actually make a pretty big
difference in how your prints turn out. This is because the slicing software is what
determines how the 3D printer actually moves to create the part.
Slicers use algorithms to break down a 3D model into a series of steps for the 3D printer
to follow. Those algorithms are all programmed differently, so one slicer will produce
different commands than another slicer would. This can result in very different prints,
depending on which slicer you choose to use. Some may produce higher-quality prints,
some may print faster, and some may handle special tasks (like generating supports)
better.
Because the slicing software can make such a big difference in how parts are actually
printed, it can certainly be worthwhile to try multiple slicers. For example, some slicers
might handle the curved surfaces of artistic models better, while others might be better
suited to engineering models that have flat surfaces and require a lot of supports. You
might even find that some slicers work better with your particular 3D printer than others.
Experimenting with some of the popular slicers can help you find the one that suits your
priorities, the 3D printer you’re using, and the kinds of models you’ll be printing.
You can find slicing software integrated with host software in the same package. Repetier
and Cura are two examples of host software that include slicing software with them.
However, slicing software that’s separate from host software is also available, such as
KISSlicer, Simplify3D, and many others.
Connecting to Your Printer
Once you’ve chosen which host software and slicing software to use (or at least to try),
you need to actually connect the host software to your 3D printer. How you do this
depends on your printer, your control board, and the host software you’re using.
If you’ve purchased a printer that requires the use of proprietary software, I can’t give any
real specifics on how to connect it. The good news is that 3D printer manufacturers
usually choose to use proprietary software in order to make the user experience friendlier,
so connecting your printer should be a simple process. The manufacturer should also
provide you with instructions on how to do so.
However, if you purchased a printer with an open-source control board, there are some
steps you can follow to get your 3D printer connected:

Get the proper drivers installed for your control board. The drivers give your
computer the information it needs to establish a USB connection with your 3D printer.
These are drivers just like you’d have to install when you connect any other new device to
your computer, like a camera or an inkjet printer.
Which drivers you need to install not only depend on your operating system, but also
control board you’re using. Arduino-based control boards, for example, need Arduino
drivers that can be downloaded from the Arduino website (arduino.cc/en/Main/Software).
Check with the manufacturer of the 3D printer or control board for the specific drivers
needed for your printer.
HOT TIP
If your control board is Arduino-based, you’ll probably want to go ahead and install the
complete Arduino software package. This will allow you to modify and update the firmware
in the future if you choose to, along with providing the drivers needed to connect the 3D printer to
the computer.
Connect a USB cable from the 3D printer’s control board to your computer. Your
computer should give some indication that it sees the USB connection but shouldn’t try to
install anything. If it tries to install drivers, the drivers might not have been installed
properly before; go back to the first step to get your drivers in order and then try
connecting again.
Open your host software and choose the COM port. Somewhere on the interface, you
should see a way to change the printer setting and a button to connect the printer. In the
settings, choose which COM port your 3D printer is on. This should correspond to which
USB port the cable is plugged into, but there is generally no physical indication of the
numbering used for the USB ports.
Connecting to the correct COM port using Pronterface.
You can check your device manager to determine which COM port is being used by the
3D printer, but sorting through the device manager can be difficult, as the devices aren’t
always named as you might expect. Instead, it might be easier to try each of the COM
ports if you don’t have a lot of devices connected via USB. If you don’t see the COM port

which corresponds to the USB connection with your 3D printer, refresh the list of
available COM ports.
Once you’ve found the correct COM port, it should only take a few seconds for your
printer and host software to connect.
Controlling Your Printer
Once the connection between the host software and the 3D printer has been made, you can
manually control the printer. Your host software should have an interface for doing this,
usually called something like manual control. This is for manually sending G-code
commands to the 3D printer’s control board, which then follows the command. (I’ll go
over G-code more later in this chapter.)
Most host software have a few basic manual control functions, the most common of which
are the following:
Jog axis: This command is used to move an axis by a set amount in a particular direction.
The movement distance is usually set in increments—like .1mm, 1mm, 10mm, 50mm, and
100mm—in both the positive and negative directions.
WATCH OUT!
If you don’t have end stops on your 3D printer, do not use the homing functions. Without end
stops to tell the 3D printer when the axis is at its end point, they will keep trying to move even
when they can’t physically move any further. This could potentially damage your printer.
Home axis: Homing moves the extruder, print bed, or Z axis assembly to its end point.
When this function is used, the printer moves the selected axis until its end stop is
triggered. Once the end stop has been triggered, the printer sets the current position for
that axis to zero.
Home all: This function simply homes all of the axes with one command. Generally, it
homes each axis one at a time, not all simultaneously.
Extrude: This command is for extruding a set amount of filament. You’ll generally only
need to use this command when loading new filament or when calibrating your extruder.
Retract: This is the opposite of the extrude command. It runs the extruder stepper motor
in reverse in order to pull the filament out of the hot end. Often, the extrude command and
retract command are combined, as retraction is really just negative extrusion.
Stepper motor power: Normally, once you’ve started manually controlling the 3D
printer, the stepper motors are given power. Even when they’re not moving, the stepper
motors use power to hold their positions. If you want to physically move anything
connected to a stepper motor, you have to turn off the power to the stepper motors, which
is what this command is used for.
Hot end power: This provides the obviously necessary function of turning the hot end on
and off and setting the temperature of the hot end. If you’re going to be manually
extruding filament, you have to first heat up the hot end to the proper temperature.

Heated bed power: As you might expect, this turns the heated bed on and off and allows
you to set its temperature. There really aren’t many reasons why you’d need to manually
turn on the heated bed, but it can be useful for preheating the bed before you start a print.
Fan power: I’m not sure why you’d want to manually turn on the fan (other than to test
its functionality), but if you did, you could do so using this command.
The Repetier manual control interface.
G-Code
In addition to these commands which usually have buttons, the host control software also

has a way to send your own G-code commands. This is just a simple command line that
allows you to send a command and receive a return (if applicable).
If you recall from earlier, G-code is what the 3D printer’s control board actually uses for
instructions. It is a long series of commands that call out a particular function along with
coordinates, if necessary.
The commands are very basic, and the functionality comes from stringing many
commands together. Each individual command is something simple, like trace a line from
point A to point B or draw an arc with a specified radius between two points. But when
these simple commands number in the thousands, they can produce very complex parts.
Printing with G-Code
When you use slicing software to slice a 3D model, that software’s algorithms analyze the
3D model to determine what G-code commands it can use to reproduce the model. After
the model has been sliced in thin layers, the slicer is then left with essentially a two-
dimensional drawing, which it needs to trace with G-code.
HOT TIP
Technically speaking, 3D printers don’t have to use G-code. They can use other instructions,
if that’s what they’re programmed to use. In fact, some 3D printer manufacturers do build 3D
printers that use proprietary languages for instructions. However, that’s rare; most 3D printers
today, especially in the consumer market, operate using G-code.
The software generates G-code based on rules determined by the values you set, along
with the algorithms written by the programmer(s) of the software. Things like filament
size, extrusion width, movement speed, and so on are all used to generate that G-code.
Once a complete set of G-code instructions is generated, the G-code can then be fed to the
3D printer from the host software.
Performing Functions Manually with G-Code
Aside from when you’re actually printing, you can also send G-code commands to
perform functions manually, such as changing EEPROM values, auto-leveling the bed,
checking the status of the end stops, and so on.

G-code commands can be entered manually in the host software and sent directly to the 3D printer.
G-code commands have a very simple syntax; all you have to do is enter the command
name (for example, M212) followed by the required values, if necessary. If you’re just
requesting information, no additional values are needed most of the time. If the command
allows you to enter multiple values, you can enter any combination of them. If, for
instance, you were doing a homing command, you could specify if you wanted to home X,
Y, Z, or any combination of the three.
There are hundreds of possible G-code commands, although not all of them will work with
3D printers (and some of them may even have different effects, depending on the
particular firmware). While the vast majority of them aren’t very useful or practical to use
manually, the following are a handful of them that might prove to be helpful to you:
G20 (units to inches): You can use this command to change the current units from the
(generally) default millimeters to inches.
G21 (units to mm): This sets the current units to millimeters, which is generally the
default.
G28 (homing): This is used to home an axis or axes. If just “G28” is entered, all three
axes will be homed. However, you can enter “G28 X Z,” for example, and it will just
home the X and Z axes and skip the Y axis.
G29 (auto-leveling): If your 3D printer has a probe, you can use this to auto-level the bed
by probing three points. This uses the probe to measure the height of three corners of the
bed in order to calculate the plane of the bed. This, in turn, can be used to raise and lower
the Z height throughout the print to keep the nozzle at a constant distance from the bed.
G92 (setting coordinates): If you need to manually tell the 3D printer what its current
coordinates are, you can use this command. G92 alone sets all three axes to zero. It can be

appended with a number to set an axis at that coordinate without changing the others; for
example, “X52.3” would set the X axis to 52.3 without changing the other axes. Any
combination can be used to specify individual axes.
M92 (setting steps): If you need to change how many steps are needed per millimeter of
movement—such as when you’re calibrating your printer—you can do so with this
command. For example, “M92 Y200” would set the steps per millimeter to 200 on the Y
axis.
M119 (end stop status): This tells you if each of the end stops is currently reading high or
low, which should let you know if they’re triggered or not. You can try pushing an end
stop switch with your finger when you run the command to test if the end stop is working
(the state should change).
M500 (storing EEPROM values): If you have modified any of the EEPROM values (like
steps per mm) using G-code commands, this command stores them permanently in the
EEPROM. Be careful with this, as it’s easy to accidentally overwrite your settings with
unusable values.
M503 (reading EEPROM values): This command displays all of the values currently
stored in the EEPROM. The command name at the beginning of each returned value can
also be used to change the particular values on that line. So if a returned line reads “M92
X200.0 Y200.0 Z802.2,” you can change any of those values by entering something like
“M92 Z820.3”
While you may not ever have to actually send any manual G-code commands, it’s a good
idea to become at least vaguely familiar with these in case you ever need them.
WATCH OUT!
If you were so inclined, you could technically print an entire part by manually sending G-code
commands to the 3D printer. Of course, doing so would be hugely impractical, and there really
wouldn’t be any point in doing so.
The Least You Need to Know
Firmware is base-level software that runs on the control board and is stored in ROM. It’s written specifically for a
particular control board and hardware setup.
Host software is what allows your computer to connect to your 3D printer. It also sends commands to run prints.
Slicing software generates the G-code instructions that are sent to the 3D printer by the host software. It’s often
combined into a single package with the host software.
G-code is the programming language used to issue commands to most 3D printers. This is what the slicing
software generates to print parts, but you can also enter G-code commands manually to perform some useful
functions.

CHAPTER
12
Leveling the Bed and Adjusting the Z
Height
In This Chapter
Why your bed needs to be level
Manually leveling or auto-leveling your bed
How to set your Z height
You’ve already learned how important it is for the first layer of a print to stick well to the
bed. The material the build platform is made from is important, as are the surface
treatments you apply to it. But the filament will never stick well to the bed if it’s not level
or if your Z height isn’t set properly.
The Z height is how far the nozzle is from the print bed. It’s important, because it
determines how much the filament is pushed onto the bed as it is extruded. The bed being
level is equally important, because otherwise the Z height will change depending on what
area of the bed the nozzle is over. In this chapter, I go over how to get the bed and Z
height where you need them to be.
Why Does Your Bed Need to Be Leveled?
When I say the bed needs to be level, I don’t mean it needs to be level relative to Earth;
you don’t even want to touch a bubble level for this. Instead, the bed needs to be level
relative to the axes of the 3D printer. Basically, the Z axis needs to be perpendicular to the
build platform, and the X and Y axes need to be perfectly parallel to the build platform.
Why does it matter? A level bed ensures the nozzle is always a consistent height above the
bed. The first layer of a print is very sensitive to how far the nozzle is from the bed. Too
high, and the filament won’t stick well; too low, and the nozzle will drag through the
filament.
The acceptable height is a very small window (usually only one tenth of a millimeter or
so). So even if the bed is only slightly off level, it could easily make parts of the bed too
high or too low.
For example, imagine you had a 150mm-wide bed and had your Z height set at .25mm at

one end. If the bed were just 1° off from level, the Z height at the other end of the bed
would be more than 2.8mm. That could easily cause your print to fail, because the
filament wouldn’t adhere well at the far end.
Even at just 1° from level, the print would be ruined.
This makes leveling virtually a necessity in order to print successfully. It should be the
first thing you do when you first set up a 3D printer, and then fairly frequently to make
sure the bed stays level. There are two ways to level a print bed: manual leveling and auto-
leveling.
Manual Leveling
Most consumer 3D printers out right now require that you manually level the print bed.
It’s virtually impossible to manufacture a printer with a perfectly level bed that stays level,
so most manufacturers include some sort of leveling mechanism in the design.
The build platform is generally attached to three or four screws with springs, and you
tighten or loosen the screws in order to adjust the height of the bed at each point. Other
mechanisms are used in some printers, but all of them have to provide some way of
adjusting the height in at least three places in order to keep the bed level relative to both
the X axis and the Y axis.
HOT TIP
Leveling a build platform also requires it to be completely flat. If the bed is warped or bent at
all, it will be impossible to level. There will always be part of the bed that isn’t completely
parallel to the X and Y axes. This is why glass and borosilicate are so commonly used for build
platforms; those materials are easy to make and keep flat. Other materials, like aluminum, are still
used for build platforms but can pretty easily become warped. Still, even with a perfectly flat build
platform, the bed still has to be leveled.
To level the bed, all you’ll need is a piece of paper. The idea here is that you’ll set your Z
height at one corner so the nozzle just barely touches the bed. You then place the piece of
paper between the nozzle and bed and pull it out. Pay attention to how much force it takes
to pull the paper out and how much resistance there is.

Manually leveling the build platform by using a piece of paper to measure resistance.
For the first corner, you’ll just want a small amount of resistance that can be overcome
easily with a little force (without tearing the paper). You then raise the nozzle and move it
onto to another corner (preferably the one diagonally across the bed) and lower it on the
paper there. Pull the paper out and pay attention to how much resistance it takes. If takes
more resistance to pull the paper out on the second point than it did on the first, you’ll
need to lower that corner a bit. If it takes less resistance, you’ll need to raise that corner.
Fine-tune it until it takes approximately the same amount of resistance as the first corner.
Next, repeat the process for the third and fourth corners. The resistance it takes to pull the
paper out should be equal between all four corners. Once all four corners have equal
resistance, the bed will be level.
One thing you should keep in mind is that this process isn’t quite as simple as it seems in
theory. It takes some time to do and can be fairly frustrating. It might take you a few tries
to get a sense for how much resistance you need to feel in the paper, and once you start
printing, you may notice that filament adheres better in some places than others. If that’s
the case, you can just make some fine adjustments, like a quarter turn of the screws.
Auto-Leveling
As you can imagine, manually leveling the print bed isn’t exactly a fun process. It can be
time consuming and frustrating. For that reason, many 3D printer manufacturers have
released printers that include auto-leveling.

The auto-leveling probe on a Printrbot Simple.
So how does auto-leveling work? It doesn’t physically adjust the bed at all. In fact, auto-
leveling systems don’t have any moving parts at all. Instead, they work completely in the
firmware of the 3D printer.
Auto-leveling systems essentially work by virtually leveling the bed. They do this by
raising and lowering the nozzle depending on what point of the bed it’s at. They do this to
keep the nozzle at a consistent height above the bed, no matter what point it’s at.
For this system to work, the printer’s firmware has to know how much to raise or lower
the nozzle depending on where it is at in the X and Y directions. This is done with either a
physical probe (basically just a switch), an inductive probe (which is triggered when it
senses metal), or an optical probe (which is triggered when it gets close enough to see the
bed). The firmware controls the process and moves the probe to three corners of the bed to
measure their heights relative to each other.
FASCINATING FACT
The probes used in auto-leveling systems can either be triggered by physical contact or by
sensing the bed without touching it. In this way, the probes work similarly to end stop
switches.
Once the firmware has the height information for each of the three corners, it can use that
information to determine how far off level the bed is. It basically constructs a flat plane
from the three points, which represents the actual bed. It then knows how far to move the
nozzle up and down at different points on the bed.
For example, if one corner is 1mm lower than another corner, the printer knows to lower
the nozzle by 1mm when it’s at that corner. Of course, it doesn’t just suddenly lower or
raise the nozzle when it reaches a corner. It will move the nozzle up or down gradually as
it approaches each corner as necessary to keep the nozzle at a constant distance from the

bed.
This makes auto-leveling a very convenient feature; however, it does have a couple of
drawbacks. The first is that it relies on the accuracy of the probe, which may not always be
perfect. The second is that it has no way to compensate for warped beds. For instance, if
one corner of the bed was warped, you could still manually level the bed and just avoid
printing in that corner, which can’t happen when you use auto-leveling.
However, those are relatively minor drawbacks. For most people, the convenience of auto-
leveling far outweighs the potential problems. And for that reason, auto-leveling is rapidly
becoming more popular and common.
How to Adjust Your Z Height
Once your bed has been leveled, you can work on setting your Z height. The Z height is
how far the tip of the nozzle is from the surface of the print bed. This will be just a
fraction of a millimeter and needs to be set very precisely.
Unfortunately, setting it isn’t just a matter of whipping out a ruler and measuring a specific
distance. The necessary gap between the nozzle and the bed can vary dramatically
depending on a number of factors, such as the following:
Filament size
Nozzle size
Layer height
Other print settings
All of those factors have one result: how much plastic is being squeezed out of the nozzle.
That, in turn, determines how much of a gap needs to be between the nozzle and the bed.
Technically, you could probably calculate what the ideal height is. But even if you did
calculate it, it would be difficult to manually set it to that height.
So how do people go about actually setting the Z height then? It’s mostly a matter of trial
and error that goes like this:
Set the nozzle close to the bed with just a tiny gap, and start printing.
If the filament doesn’t stick, lower the nozzle.
If the filament is getting smashed into the bed by the nozzle, raise the nozzle.
You can go back and forth like this a few times until you get it right.
Setting the Z Height Manually or Automatically
On most 3D printers, you’ll be setting the Z height manually. There is some sort of screw
mechanism to raise or lower the Z stop (where the end stop switch makes contact), so you
just make small adjustments with the screw to change the Z height.
However, on printers with auto-leveling, the probe usually acts as your end stop switch. In
that case, either the probe itself is physically adjusted to change the Z height, or it’s done

in software. If it’s done in software, the idea is to specify how much the nozzle needs to be
raised back up after the probe is triggered.
Both systems work well, though manual adjustments usually tend to be quicker. That’s
because you don’t have to fiddle with any settings in the firmware—all you have to do is
make a quick turn on the adjustment screw.
Knowing the “Correct” Z Height
Knowing what the “correct” Z height is takes a little experience. As I said, you’re looking
for how the extruded filament sticks to the bed. If it’s just barely clinging on (or worse,
doesn’t stick at all), it’s obviously too high. This will usually look like a thread just lying
on the bed. When the Z height is too high, it’s obvious why there is going to be a problem:
the filament just won’t stick well.
Noticing when it’s too low is a bit more difficult though. In that case, it will look like a flat
line, almost like it’s being drawn onto the bed. Unfortunately, the reason this is a problem
isn’t always a problem until later.
HOT TIP
Always pay close attention to your first layer. It’s the most important part of the print, and is
vital to the success of the print. Even if you’ve leveled your bed and set your Z height
properly, it’s possible that it could need to be recalibrated (it’s normal for 3D printers to need
recalibration occasionally). Watching the first layer is the best way to make sure it’s correctly
adjusted.
What happens is that the filament still has to go somewhere, so it tends to expand out. As
each new line of filament is added next to the previous one, waves start to develop in the
lines from the nozzle dragging through it. Eventually, this adds up and the nozzle will be
bouncing all over the place on these waves, ruining your accuracy in the first few layers.

The first filament lines on the first layer should adhere well without be squished by the nozzle. As you can see with this
layer, the nozzle was too low and squished the filament on the corner.
So what should it look like? You want a nice three-dimensional shape, but not so much so
that it’s just a thread of filament lying on the bed. If the filament naturally comes out in a
circular cross-section, you’re looking for it to have a sort of squished oval cross-section on
the bed.
Learning what the perfect Z height looks like will take some experience. You’ll need to
see the effects of it being too high and being too low. Luckily, it doesn’t take long to get it
right. It should also be apparent pretty soon in the printing process if it’s not right.
In the end, leveling the bed and setting the Z height are all about getting that first layer
right. If you get that first layer right, you can usually count on the print turning out well.
The Least You Need to Know
It’s imperative that the bed be level in order to successfully print a part.
Manually leveling the bed isn’t a fun process, but it can be done with just a piece of paper.
Many manufacturers are now including auto-leveling systems, which are more convenient than manual leveling.
They tell the printer to either raise or lower the nozzle based on readings from a probe.
Properly setting your Z height is as important as leveling the bed. It needs to be set so the filament adheres well
without being smashed by the nozzle.

CHAPTER
13
Slicing and Printing
In This Chapter
Explanations of all of the slicer settings
How to prepare your object for printing
How to get a print started
So you’ve got your printer all unpacked and set up. Your bed is leveled and your Z height
is set up. You know practically everything there is to know about the history of 3D
printing and how different kinds of 3D printers work. Now it’s time to actually start
printing!
To do that, you need to get your slicing software configured. You also need to learn about
how to set up a new print and how to run it. In this chapter, I go over both these things.
Don’t worry, you’re in the home stretch. Soon you’ll be in 3D printing bliss!
Configuring Your Slicing Software
If you’ve followed Chapter 11, you have already set up your host software, and most
likely the host software had slicing software bundled with it. (If you took my
recommendation, you’re using Slic3r, which is bundled with Repetier.) You have also
entered 3D printer-specific settings in the host software. However, you still need to do the
same for your slicing software.
Why? Because they’re still separate pieces of software, even if they were bundled
together. Technically, both pieces of software can be used independently of each other. So
each has its own settings and needs to be configured individually.

The Slic3r configuration can be found within the Repetier software.
If you’re using Repetier, configuring Slic3r is pretty easy. From the Slicer tab in Repetier,
you can just click the Configuration button to begin. If you’re using another software
combination, you can find similar settings within the particular slicing software you’re
using.
However, you shouldn’t lament if you’re using something other than Slic3r. It’s all pretty
much the same, and similar settings will be found in all slicing software (maybe with a
slightly different name). For that reason, I’m now going to cover what each of the slicer
settings actually does. Once you understand what the settings actually do, you’ll have no
trouble using them regardless of what they’re called.
Slicer Settings Explained
In general, the slicing settings you’ll be configuring can be roughly divided into three
different types: printer settings, filament settings, and print settings. In the Slic3r
configuration window, these are helpfully divided up into three separate tabs for your
convenience.

The settings in the Slic3r configuration window are divided into three types: print settings, filament settings, and printer
settings. This shows the different tabs for them in the window.
In other slicing software, they might be divided up differently (or not divided up at all).
Still, it’s a good idea to think of them as separate kinds of settings. This will help you
mentally organize them into those settings you’ll need to tweak frequently, occasionally,
or rarely.
HOT TIP
Most software will allow you to save multiple configurations. This lets you quickly switch
between predefined settings that you set up for specific types of prints, specific filaments,
and even for multiple 3D printers. I advise you to take advantage of multiple configurations, so you
can reuse settings without constantly tweaking them.
Printer Settings
The printer settings are the settings you should rarely have to modify. Ideally, you’ll just
set them up once and then never touch them again—or at least not until you get a new 3D
printer. These tell the slicing software a little bit about the printer itself, so it knows what
it’s working with.

The printer settings, which you’ll rarely change, give the slicing software info about the printer.
Printer settings are the first thing you should configure. Luckily, there isn’t a whole lot to
set up here. The following are the settings you’ll encounter (keep in mind that these may
be in separate sections of the Printer Settings tab):
Bed size: This is an easy one to start with! All you have to do is enter the size of your
print bed in the X and Y directions.
Print center: As you might expect, this is just the X and Y coordinates for the center of
the bed. Generally, you just divide the bed size by 2 and enter those numbers here. But
you can modify this if you want it to center your prints in another spot.
G-code flavor: Here you’ll specify what kind of G-code your printer uses. This might be
a head-scratcher at first, but different control boards can actually interpret G-code slightly
differently. If you don’t see your specific printer or control board listed, it’s usually safe to
use “RepRap.”
Use relative E distances: You can check this box if you want to use relative G-code
distances (as opposed to absolute coordinates). Unless your manufacturer says you need to
check this, just leave it unchecked.
Extruders: The number of extruders your 3D printer has can be entered here. Normally
it’ll be just 1, but if you have multiple extruders, you can specify that here. If you do, it
will add sections to set up the additional extruders.
Use firmware retraction: This lets your firmware handle the retraction settings (as

opposed to having your slicing software do it manually). In most cases, you’ll want to
leave this off unless you have a reason not to. However, if the software retraction settings
don’t work properly, you can use the firmware settings.
Vibration limit: You can attempt to reduce printer vibration problems with this setting.
However, it’s difficult to get it to work right, and the vibrations usually aren’t substantial.
I recommend you leave this at 0 to disable it.
Start G-code: Whatever you enter here will be added to the beginning of every G-code
file the slicer outputs. So these G-code functions will be performed at the beginning of
every print. Usually, people use this for things like homing all the axes (G28) or auto-
leveling (G29).
End G-code: This works like the starting G-code, except it goes at the end (crazy, huh?).
This is most often used to turn off everything on the printer, so it doesn’t stay hot when
you’re away. For now, you can just leave the default commands there.
Layer change G-code: This also adds G-code, except it puts the G-code in between every
layer. You can add code here that you want to be executed every time the layer changes
(for instance, you could add a pause to let the previous layer cool before starting a new
one).
Tool change G-code: G-code entered here will be inserted anytime the printer switches
from using one extruder to using another. You can completely ignore this if you only have
one extruder.
Nozzle diameter: This is where you need to enter the physical diameter of the nozzle
opening on your hot end. If you don’t know it, don’t just guess! This is an important
setting, so look up your nozzle diameter if you’re not sure.
Position: If you have more than one extruder, this setting specifies how far apart the two
nozzles of the extruders are.
Retraction length: Retraction reverses the extruder to pull the filament back out of the
hot end slightly. This improves print quality by reducing blobs when line segments are
completed. For this, 1mm or 2mm is usually a good setting to try.
Lift Z: This actually lifts the nozzle up (by the specified amount) when a line segment is
finished and the printer is moving to another position. This can help keep the nozzle from
dragging across your print.
Speed: This is just the speed the extruder will retract filament. Whatever the default is
should work fine (usually 20 to 40 mm/s).
Extra length on restart: If you’re having problems with filament not extruding
immediately after a retraction, you can use this setting to extrude a little extra. However,
you will have to experiment with the length to use.
Minimum travel after retraction: You can use this setting to skip retractions on moves
that only cover a short distance. That distance can be adjusted to your liking.
Retract on layer change: This forces a retraction when you move up to the next layer of
a print.

Wipe while retracting: To further reduce blobs and stringing, you can use this setting to
physically wipe the nozzle on the print between moves. Personally, I recommend that you
turn this off, because it has a tendency to mess up the surface as it wipes (as you might
expect from dragging the hot nozzle on the plastic).
Filament Settings
These are settings you shouldn’t have to modify often but that you will have to adjust
occasionally. Basically, they’re settings that define the specifications of your particular
filament and how it should be used by the printer.
The filament settings are there for you to enter the specifications of the filament you’re using.
You’ll usually need to modify these whenever you put a new roll of filament on (at least
slightly). This is because every material, manufacturer, color, and even specific roll is
slightly different. The diameter of the filament, ideal extrusion temperature, bed
temperature, and cooling settings will all vary.
The following are the different filament settings you’ll deal with:
Diameter: This setting is easily one of the biggest causes of print quality problems. While
you can just set it to 1.75mm or 3.00mm, the actual filament is rarely actually that size.
Instead, for every roll of filament you get, you should measure the diameter in a few
places with calipers and enter the average measurement here. This ensures that the slicing
software accurately calculates how much filament to extrude.

DEFINITION
Calipers are a common measurement tool used in a wide range of fields and industries.
They come in both analog and digital varieties and are used to measure lengths, distances, and
depths. Calipers are capable of very high precision and commonly come in 6- to 12-inch sizes
(though larger and smaller ones exist).
Extrusion multiplier: You can use this setting to fine-tune how much filament is being
extruded. For example, if you notice the printer is overextruding, you can set it to .95 so it
only extrudes 95 percent of what it normally calculates is necessary.
First layer extruder temperature: This is where you set the temperature for the filament
you’re using. The first layer can be set independently because some people like to make
the first layer hotter in order for it to stick better.
Other layers extruder temperature: This is the filament extrusion temperature for the
rest of the layers (after the first one).
First layer bed temperature: If you have a heated bed, you can set its temperature for the
first layer here.
Other layers bed temperature: This is where you set the bed temperature for the rest of
the layers.
Keep fan always on: If you have a print fan you want to run all the time, check this.
However, I recommend you don’t do so for ABS, as it causes warping problems.
Enable auto cooling: This lets the slicing software decide when to turn the fan on,
depending on what you specify in the other settings.
Fan speed: This is the minimum and maximum fan speed used at any time during the
print. Different fans respond to this differently (for example, some won’t even turn on at
all below a certain number). Pay attention to how your fan acts and sounds, and fine-tune
it with these settings.
Bridges fan speed: Bridges are parts of the print where the filament has to be extruded
across an empty space with no other material below it. To keep these from drooping, it’s
recommended that you cool it quickly with a fan. So if you have a fan, enter a number to
turn this up.
Disable fan for the first: As I mentioned previously, some people like their first layer to
be hot to help it stick. With this setting, you can turn off the fan for a specified number of
layers in the beginning to help with adhesion.
Enable fan if layer print time is below: If a particular layer of the print is very small,
there may not be adequate time for it to cool before the next layer is added. You can use
this setting to force the fan to come on to cool those small layers.
Slow down if layer print time is below: In extreme cases (very small layers), the fan
isn’t enough to cool the layer before the next is added. This can cause the layers to sort of
melt and deform. This setting forces the printer to slow down on these layers to give them
time to cool.
Min print speed: This is slowest the printer is allowed to move on those small layers.

Setting this too low can make small parts take a very long time to print.
Print Settings
So you’re at the final tab of the slicer settings. Do you want the good news or bad news
first? Let’s start with the bad news: this tab has the most settings by far. The good news is
that a lot of these settings are for advanced usage. For the time being, it’s best to just leave
those at the defaults or automatic setting.
HOT TIP
A lot of the print settings are for really fine-tuning specific areas of the print, meaning they’re
really for advanced users. So if you don’t see a setting listed in this chapter, don’t fret! Just
leave it at the default or automatic setting and move on. You can always look up the specific
setting if you’re really curious about it.
The Print Settings tab can be a scary place, but many of the settings can (and should) be left on their defaults.
The following are the various print settings you’ll encounter:
Layer height: If you purchased your printer, the manufacturer probably gave you a
recommendation for this setting. If not, you can safely set this to about 65 to 75 percent of
your nozzle diameter.
First layer height: Often, it’s good to make your first layer bigger to improve adhesion. A
good number to start with is 125 percent.
Perimeters (minimum): In order to give the walls of the part a nice, solid structure, you

need to specify a minimum number of solid perimeters. Two to four are good starting
points.
Spiral vase: This nifty feature allows the entire part to be created from one continuous
layer that slowly rises. However, it really only works with a single perimeter and no infill.
So you should only use this for tall, hollow objects (like a vase), meaning you should
normally leave this black or unchecked.
Solid layers (top): This is how many solid (noninfill) layers are on the top. It’s similar to
perimeters, just for horizontal walls. Again, 2 to 4 should work well.
Solid layers (bottom): This is same thing as the previous setting, just for the bottom
layers.
Fill density: Infill is used on the interior of the part to avoid having to make it solid. This
reduces weight, filament usage, and warping. For parts that need to be strong, use 50 to 80
percent. For parts that don’t need to be strong, use 20 to 50 percent.
Fill pattern: This indicates what kind of pattern will be used for the infill. Honeycomb
and rectilinear normally work the best (with rectilinear usually the fastest).
Top/bottom fill pattern: If you want a different pattern for the top and bottom layers, you
can specify it here. However, I’d recommend sticking with rectilinear.
Speed settings: Unfortunately, I can’t make recommendations for these settings, as
they’re very highly dependent on your specific printer. Start with the manufacturer’s
recommendations or with the defaults.
Skirt loops: In order to get the extruder flowing well before you actually start printing the
part, you can have it print a couple of loops around the part. This has the dual purpose of
allowing you to make sure it’s completely on the print bed. You can just enter the number
of loops you want the printer to make before it starts printing the actual part.
Distance from object: This is how far the loops will be printed from the edges of the part.
This needs to be farther than the brim (if you use it), which I’ll go over in a moment. If the
part is very large and barely fits on the bed, you may need to reduce this to make the
overall print smaller.
Skirt height: You can use this to make the skirt very tall to build a sort of wall around
your part. This can help reduce drafts on the part in order to avoid warping.
Minimum extrusion length: You can set this if you want to make sure the skirt uses a
certain amount of filament. Usually, you can just leave this at 0 unless you have extrusion
issues (such as underextrusion in the beginning).
Brim width: A brim is a sort of base that’s printed around your part. This can be useful
for making sure the base of the part stays stuck to the bed and for keeping tall, thin parts
upright. You can specify the width of the brim around the part, and the brim can easily be
removed after the print is finished.
Support settings: If the part has overhangs and will require supports, you can turn on the
support generation here. However, I recommend using the default and/or automatic
settings for the best results.

Raft: A raft serves a similar purpose to the brim, except it’s printed underneath the part.
You can specify the thickness of the raft, as well as the interfacing layers with the part.
Multiple extruders: If you’re using multiple extruders, this section is for you. Essentially,
it allows you to specify which extruders are used for different operations. For example,
you could use one extruder for supports and the other for the actual part.
HOT TIP
When setting up multiple extruders, the settings that tend to be the most confusing are the
offset settings. These are important, because they tell the slicing software where the second
extruder is in relation to the first extruder. The nozzles of the two extruders must be at the same
height, so this will specify how far the center of the second nozzle is from the first (in both the X
and Y directions). If these are even a little off, the filament extruded by the second extruder will be
deposited in the wrong place.
Preparing for and Running a Print
After you’ve put in your filament, printer, and print settings, it’s time to get down to
preparing for and running a print. This is where you’ll spend most of your time when
you’re printing things. Because you’ll frequently be modifying your print settings for
specific kinds of parts, you’ll always need to do the preparation and running steps to make
sure your part comes out correctly.
Host Preparation
Preparing your print is a pretty simple but important process. I’ll go over each specific
step in more detail in the project sections of this book, but let me cover the general idea
here.
I recommend that you begin by connecting to your printer and heating up the hot end and
heated bed (if you have one). This will give it time to warm up while you’re doing the rest
of the steps. You can then load the part or parts you want to print.
With the parts loaded, you’ll be able to view them in the Object Placement tab in Repetier.
Here, you can move them around, rotate them, duplicate them, delete them, and so on.
You should also take a moment to make sure everything fits on the bed and that they’re all
oriented properly. (Trying to print a part upside down will usually result in failure.)
If everything looks good, you can move over to the Slicer tab. If you’re in Repetier and
using Slic3r, make sure Slic3r is selected under the Slicer drop-down box. Below that,
you’ll notice drop-down menus for your Print Setting, Printer Setting, and Filament
Setting configurations. Make sure the ones you’re intending to use are selected. Once
you’ve verified those, you can click the Slice with Slic3r button.

After loading your part(s), make sure they fit on your bed and are oriented properly. As you can see, this model of an
elephant fits on the bed and is right side up.
Running a Print
Slicing your object or objects can take anywhere from a few seconds to hours depending
on the complexity of the part, how powerful your computer is, and the settings you chose
(for example, supports take more time to process). But once it’s finished slicing, you
should be presented with a preview of the print.
Look over the preview, which shows you where the slicing software is intending for the
printer to actually extrude plastic. It should look like your original part but broken down
into lines. If you’re using supports, those will be shown as well. This is your chance to
catch any serious setting problems that might cause the printer to do unexpected things.

The preview shows the part to be printed broken down into lines.
If everything looks good, you can go ahead and push Start Print to start printing the part.
Your printer must remain connected to the printer throughout the entire process (and it
must be turned on, of course). It might take your printer a minute or two to start moving if
it still needs to reach the required temperature.
Once it starts printing, don’t go running off quite yet. Stick around for a few minutes while
it prints the first layer. Your first layer is by far the most important one, because it’s the
foundation for the entire part. Make sure it sticks well to the bed and that the filament is
extruding well. Then, in anywhere from a few minutes to a day or two, your part will be
done!
The Least You Need to Know
Most of the filament, printer, and print settings are important, so take the time to learn what they do. But when in
doubt, stick with the defaults.
Make sure your objects are placed and oriented correctly and that they fit on the bed before slicing.
Always take a quick look at the preview to make sure everything looks right before starting a print.
The first layer of a print is always the most important one. It’s well worth your time to stick around for a few
minutes to make sure that first layer goes well.

CHAPTER
14
Troubleshooting Your Prints
In This Chapter
How to identify print problems
Extrusion, temperature, and adhesion issues
Fixing other common print quality issues
3D printing is pretty complicated, and that means there are a lot of problems you can run
into. A few small tweaks in your settings can easily make the difference between a high-
quality print and one that’s going to get thrown away. But because there are so many
factors, it can be difficult to figure out what the problem is. In this chapter, I walk you
through some common issues and what you can do to fix them.
What’s the Problem?
Obviously, there are a whole lot of things that can go wrong in the course of your 3D
printing journey. If you’re familiar with Murphy’s Law, you know that anything that can
go wrong will. These problems can be as minor as poor surface quality (like ripples) to
major problems that cause your entire print to fail.
FASCINATING FACT
You can hold on to your failed prints for use in the future. They can be used to make ABS
glue and even your own filament. If you do make your own filament, however, keep in mind
that you shouldn’t use more than 10 percent recycled plastic. If you don’t have the ability to make
filament yourself, you can drop the used ABS off at your local hackerspace or makerspace for
them to use.
Most people will spend a great deal of time fine-tuning their settings to get really high-
quality prints. But what if your parts are coming out terribly? It can be very frustrating if
this is happening and you can’t even achieve mediocre results.

Complete failures of prints like this are not uncommon.
Luckily, these issues can usually be identified fairly easily by comparing your bad print to
known problems. Once you’ve figured out what the primary cause of the problem is, you
can adjust your settings to fix it. Actually getting the settings right might take a little trial
and error, but at least you’ll know where to focus your attention.
Extrusion Problems
Extrusion problems are those caused by improper filament extrusion. As you’ve learned
multiple times in this book, extrusion is the key to FFF 3D printing. However, the slicing
software has to make a lot of calculations based on many parameters in order to determine
how much filament needs to be extruded. For the most part, the slicing software is good at
these calculations, but with so many parameters, it’s easy for one small error to result in a
failed print.
Overextrusion
Overextrusion is when too much filament is pushed through the nozzle. It usually causes
the surface of the print to look lumpy, uneven, and sloppy. This is almost always caused
by a setting that was entered incorrectly though, in some very rare cases, it could be a
hardware problem.

Overextrusion causes surface quality problems, like the bubbling around the octopus’s eye.
The most common setting that causes this problem is the filament diameter. In order to fix
this, you have to actually measure your filament’s diameter (preferably in multiple places)
in order to get an accurate number. Other settings that can cause this: the extrusion
multiplier being set too high, the nozzle diameter being set too small, manual extrusion
settings (try changing them to auto), and the extruder steps per mm (your extruder should
be calibrated).
Underextrusion
The opposite of overextrusion is underextrusion, which is when too little filament is
extruded. The effect of underextrusion is usually visible gaps between lines of filament. In
extreme cases, this can cause a complete failure of the part, because layers don’t adhere
well enough to each other.

Underextrusion makes the filament strands too thin, causing gaps, as you can see in this printout of an octopus.
The causes of underextrusion are pretty much the same as overextrusion. It will just be in
the opposite direction. For example, if you set your filament diameter too low, it will
cause overextrusion. But, if you set it too high, it will cause underextrusion. The solution
is simple: measure your filament’s diameter and enter that.
Jamming
The most drastic (and obvious) extrusion problem is jamming or clogging. Either the
printer will stop extruding altogether, intermittently stop extruding, or extrude thin and
uneven lines of filament. This usually ends up completely ruining the part.
Jams usually happen when the filament gets twisted up in the cold end. This is easy
enough to fix by just pulling it out, cleaning out the cold end, and starting over. Clogs in
the nozzle are more difficult to deal with. They usually happen when the hot end
temperature is too low, dust or dirt gets into the hot end, or the quality of the filament is
low.

Jammed extruders and clogged nozzles can cause the printer to stop extruding completely. This will cause surfaces to be
thin instead of solid, as you can see with this part.
WATCH OUT!
Low-quality filament, especially in dark colors, is often difficult to melt and extrude properly.
There is just too much nonplastic junk in the filament, and it causes the nozzle to clog.
When your nozzle becomes clogged with ABS, the best solution is to remove it and soak it
in acetone in order to clean it out. For PLA or other materials, you can heat up the hot end
and stick a piece of filament into it. Allow it to cool to about 150°C, and then pull the
piece of filament out. You may need to repeat this a few times, but you can usually pull
out the clog.
Poor Dimensional Accuracy
You may notice that your parts are coming out with the dimensions slightly off. Or you
might try to fit two printed parts together only to find they don’t fit. There are usually
three possible culprits:
Your steps aren’t calibrated.
Some part of your drive system is loose.
The slicer isn’t handling the slicing correctly.
When it comes to the first issue, each axis has to have the number of steps per millimeter
calibrated. If it’s not right, the lengths on that axis will be too short or too long. Most
people notice this when circular features (like holes) end up coming out as ovals. That’s
because one axis is moving too far (or not far enough), causing the circle to become

elongated. You can find the information for correct calibration from the manufacturer of
your 3D printer or on community forums (see Appendix B).
In terms of the second issue, the drive system becoming loose can cause unintended
movement, resulting in poor accuracy. Fixing this is usually a simple matter of tightening
up all of your screws and making sure your belts are nice and taut.
And finally, the most frustrating cause is the slicing software itself. The shape of the
filament as it’s deposited is fairly difficult to account for mathematically, and many slicers
don’t quite get it right. This can make your part slightly too big (usually by a fraction of a
millimeter). The only real solution to this is to try another slicer or to turn down your
extrusion multiplier setting in order to slightly underextrude and make the part smaller.
Temperature Problems
The temperatures of the hot end and heated bed both play important roles in the quality of
the printed part. Pretty obvious, right? But it’s not always obvious when a temperature
problem is the culprit for a particular problem, so I’m going to cover what common
temperature-related problems look like.
Hot End Is Too Hot
The filament has to be melted just enough to flow freely out of the nozzle but still has to
be able to quickly cool once it’s been deposited. If the hot end is too hot, the filament
won’t cool quickly enough. The effect is that the part tends to look slightly melted (though
it may only look this way in certain spots). The same problem can occur if the layer is
small, because it doesn’t have time to cool before a new layer is added.
If it’s consistent (not just on small layers), you can turn your hot end temperature down. If
it’s just on small layers, you can use a fan for cooling or slow down small layers in your
settings.

If the hot end is too hot or the layers are small without adequate cooling, the part will develop a melted appearance like
the top of this one.
HOT TIP
Extreme hot end temperature problems are often caused by problems with the thermistor.
This is usually either because the thermistor has failed or has come loose. If it’s loose, it can
be affixed with Kapton tape. If that’s not the problem, the thermistor can be replaced. (They’re
usually only a few dollars.) Contact the manufacturer for information on replacing the thermistor
and to see if it will be covered under a warranty.
Hot End Is Too Cold
If the hot end is too cold, it tends to produce results similar to nozzle clogs. Either filament
won’t extrude at all or it will extrude inconsistently. All you have to do is simply turn the
temperature of the hot end up.

When the hot end temperature is too low, it results in inconsistent extrusion. This part shows how messy this issue can
look.
Cracking of Part Due to Cooling
A part cracking is a common problem when you print large parts in ABS. This is because
the ABS cools and contracts, splitting the part horizontally between layers. While this is a
difficult problem to overcome, there are a few potential ways you can try to avoid this.
Because print fans and even drafts in the room can cool a part and cause contractions that
lead to cracks, one solution is to keep the part from cooling off as much as possible.
Enclosures (especially heated enclosures) are the best way to overcome this. However, if
that’s not feasible for you, you can try using a tall skirt to act as a shield around the print.
Another option to avoid cracks is to design the part itself so it doesn’t have any long, tall,
horizontal surfaces in order to reduce the stress from contraction.

The contraction of the plastic as it cools can cause a part to crack horizontally between the layers.
Discoloration of Filament Due to Heat
If you’re using a light-colored filament (especially white), you may notice the part
becomes discolored. This is caused by heat, either from the heated bed or the hot end.
If it’s just on the bottom of the part, it’s the heated bed; if it’s everywhere, it’s the hot end.
In both cases, it could signal the temperature is dramatically too high, meaning you should
turn down the temperature. Sometimes with the hot end, however, your extrusion speed
may be too slow and the filament could be sitting in the hot end too long. If that’s the case,
try speeding up your prints.
Adhesion Problems
You’ve learned in previous chapters how important it is for the filament to stick well to the
bed. Those times when it doesn’t can be a big headache for you. For most people,
adhesion problems are the biggest source of frustration in 3D printing. This is because
there are so many potential causes and so many potential solutions. Here, you learn what
the results of poor adhesion are and what to do about them.
Warping
The same contraction that causes cracking also causes the part to warp. This is usually

made evident when the bottom of the part curves (especially at the edges). This can be
solved the same way as cracking—enclosures and designs that limit long, horizontal
surfaces—but you can also dramatically reduce it by increasing bed adhesion.
The contraction on this ABS part caused extreme warping.
To increase adhesion between the first layer of filament and the bed, take a look at the
surface treatment options mentioned in Chapter 8. Heated beds help a lot, as well as tapes,
films, glue, and even hairspray.
Part Comes Loose
If your surface adhesion is really poor, the entire part might come off the bed during the
print. Usually, this happens when your Z height is too high, or when you don’t have any
surface treatments at all. If you’re using the proper surface treatments, try lowering your Z
height a little bit to fix this issue.
FASCINATING FACT
Auto-leveling systems do a very good job of alleviating problems caused by improperly
adjusted Z heights, because they allow you to set exactly how high it should be in the
software. Even if your 3D printer didn’t come with auto-leveling, it’s possible that it could be
available as an upgrade. If you’re having frequent problems with setting the Z height on your
printer, it might be worth checking to see if that’s an option available to you.
Part Breaks During Removal
Sometimes your part might actually stick too well. This can cause the part to break during
removal or even to break glass beds in extreme cases.

This particular problem is often caused by overuse of ABS juice/glue—a case of going a
little overboard with a surface treatment. You should only use a thin layer of ABS juice to
avoid this. However, good adhesion isn’t a bad thing, so another option is to try using a
flat tool to pry the part off without breaking it.
Other Printer Problems
Some problems just don’t fit neatly into a predefined category. These are the issues that
tend to come out of left field and often throw you for a loop. Most of these won’t result in
a complete failure of the print, but they’re still irritating and affect the quality of the part.
Blobs
If you notice little blobs of plastic on the surface of the part, it’s usually caused by either
lack of retraction, overextrusion, or a hot end that’s set too high.
I’ve already covered solutions for the latter two causes, and the first one is easy enough to
fix in your settings. Simply turn on retraction in your slicer settings (1mm to 2mm usually
does the trick).
Stringing
Stringing looks like you’d expect: thin strands of filament between features on the part.
The causes for this are lack of retraction or the hot end’s temperature being set too high.
This can be solved by turning on retraction or lowering the temperature of the hot end.
Turning on retraction will usually fix stringing problems like what’s shown on this robot.
Drooping

Bridges are features where a new layer is placed over empty space. For these features, the
printer has to extrude filament across the chasm from one solid to another. Ideally, these
should turn out nice and flat. But if you notice they’re drooping, it’s usually caused by a
lack of cooling. You might also see this same problem happen on other overhanging
features.
Using a print fan will do a lot to reduce drooping on bridges and overhangs similar to this.
To fix this, you need to make sure your print fan is turned on. If you don’t have a print fan,
you’ll have to add one. If the fan is on but the problem still occurs, you should make sure
it’s turned all the way up. If it’s still occurring even after that, you should look into
printable fan shrouds for your 3D printer, which more effectively direct the air from the
fan to the part.
Ghosting
Ghosting is when faint lines appear on the surface offset around features, something
usually only visible on fairly flat surfaces that are next to perpendicular features. It’s
caused by vibrations from the weight of the extruder carriage as it’s moving back and
forth.

Ghosting like you see on this pencil holder can usually only be fixed by reducing print speed and/or acceleration.
The only way to fix this without modifying your printer’s hardware is to slow down the
print speed or to experiment with the acceleration settings. The acceleration settings might
be hidden in an advanced area of your slicer’s settings, but they determine how fast the
printer can speed up and slow down as it moves an axis. Lowering the acceleration will
allow the printer to still move quickly on long stretches but will make the changes in
direction less abrupt.
The Least You Need to Know
Incorrect settings can easily introduce many different kinds of print quality problems.
Most print quality problems can be fixed by tweaking the print settings.
In extreme cases, bad print settings can result in a complete failure of the print.

PROJECT
1
Carabiner
Project Time: 30 minutes
In this project, you’ll be getting hands on and printing your very first part. For your first
print, let’s start with something quick and easy: a one-piece carabiner. This model should
print quickly, and most printers will have it finished in under 20 minutes.
Before you begin, make sure you’ve downloaded the model pack from the Idiot’s Guides
website (idiotsguides.com/3dprinting) and have unzipped the folder so you can access the
files. For this project and the subsequent projects, I’ll be using Repetier Host and Slic3r,
because both are free and popular programs. However, if you’d prefer to use other
software (or your printer requires it), the steps should still be pretty similar.
Preheat the Extruder and Heated Bed
Start by opening Repetier (or whatever host software you’re using) and connecting to your
3D printer. Once the connection has been made between your host software and your
printer, click on the Manual Control tab to get to the temperature settings for the extruder
and heated bed, which you’ll now begin preheating. If you’re printing in ABS, the
extruder should be set at about 230°C and the heated bed should be somewhere between
80°C to 100°C. For PLA, the extruder should be 200°C and the heated bed (if you have
one) should be between 50°C to 70°C.
Preheat the extruder and heated bed to the appropriate temperature for the material you’ll be using.
Load the .STL File

While the extruder and heated bed are heating up, go ahead and load the .STL file for the
carabiner and slice it (found at idiotsguides.com/3dprinting). To do this, look for a button
in your host software that says Load or Open. Push that button, and then find and select
the carabiner.stl file. Slic3r, which runs within Repetier, will display the 3D model in the
Object Placement window.
The Object Placement tab will display the loaded 3D model.
The gray box in the viewer window corresponds to your 3D printer’s print area and is
based on the settings you entered when you set up the host software. The carabiner is a
small part that is only a few inches long, so it should be printable on virtually every 3D
printer on the market.
WATCH OUT!
If the model shows up very large (compared to the gray box), either your printer settings for
the print area are wrong or you have your units set to inches (it should be in millimeters).
Slice the Model
With the model loaded, you can go ahead and slice it. With a simple part like this, the
particular settings you use won’t be crucial. However, make sure you have at least two or
three perimeters (including top and bottom) and at least a 50 percent infill. This can be
modified by going to the Slicer tab and clicking on Configuration. Once there, click the
Print Settings tab and fill in the information if necessary under the Layers and
Perimeters and Infill subsections. Your print temperature settings should be the same as
what you preheated the extruder and heated bed to.

Check to be sure you have at least two or three perimeters (including top and bottom) and at least a 50 percent infill.
With your settings entered, you can start slicing the model by clicking Slice with Slic3r.
How long it takes to slice depends on your computer and the slicer you’re using, but it
shouldn’t take more than a few minutes.
Slicing a small model like this should only take a few minutes.
Load the Filament
A lot of people keep the filament loaded all the time and only change it when they run out
of filament or switch to a different material or color. But if you haven’t loaded any

filament yet, load it into the extruder now, while the slicer is running.
How you load the filament depends on the specific extruder your printer is equipped with.
Some of them, like the Greg’s Wade Reloaded I’m using, have thumb screws and a latch
that needs to be opened up. Others have a lever that needs to be pushed to release tension
on the bearing. Or it could be a completely different mechanism altogether.
However, no matter what kind of mechanism it is, the process is about the same once you
have it open:
1. Trim the end of your filament with scissors at an angle, so there is a point (this helps it
slide into the hot end).
2. Push the filament into the hole below the hobbled bolt or drive gear. With the hot end
heated up, you should be able to push it in until melted filament starts coming out of the
nozzle.
Load the filament by opening the mechanism and sliding the filament into the hot end.
Extrude Some Filament
Once you’ve closed the mechanism, switch back over to the Manual Control tab in your
host software. There should be a button to extrude a specified amount of filament, which
you can see in the following figure. Extrude 10mm or 50mm of filament in order to verify
the filament has been loaded properly and to build up some pressure in the hot end (which
helps improve flow while you’re printing). This isn’t absolutely necessary to do, but it
helps to make sure everything is working.

Extrude a small amount of filament to make sure it’s loaded properly and to build pressure in the hot end.
When you extrude, you should have filament come out of the nozzle steadily in a
consistent size. If it’s erratic or comes out at an angle, something may be wrong. (If you
run into this or any other problems, be sure to check Chapter 15, which covers
troubleshooting.) Once you’ve determined that the filament is extruding correctly, you can
pull off the pile of filament with a pair of pliers, being careful not to burn yourself on the
hot end.

Make sure that the filament extrudes consistently, and then remove the plastic.
Start the Print
Now it’s time to go ahead and start the print! Go over to the Preview tab, which gives you
estimates on the print time and how much filament is needed (in millimeters). The viewer
window shows you the G-code paths the slicer generated, so you can get an idea of what
the printer will actually be doing from layer to layer.

Check the Preview tab to make sure everything looks right, and then start printing.
If everything appears to be correct, push Start Print. Depending on the software and
settings, the printer may not do anything immediately. Sometimes it will wait to make sure
the temperature is steady before it begins. Once that’s done, though, it should home each
of the axes and start printing.
Watch the First Layer
Pay very close attention to the first layer being printed. The first layer is the most
important one, because it’s the foundation for the rest of the part. If the first layer is right,
the chances are good the part will turn out right. You’re looking to make sure you have
good adhesion, without squishing the filament too much. You also want to make sure the
flow of the extrusion is steady and consistent.

Pay close attention to the first layer, because it’s the most important one.
HOT TIP
I have my slicer set up to do a couple of loops around the part before it actually starts
printing the first layer of the part. The purpose of this is to get the hot end flowing before it
actually gets to the part, so I can see that the filament is adhering nicely all the way around
(meaning the bed is level) and that the part actually fits on the bed. I recommend doing this for
your prints as well.
After you’ve ensured the first layer is good, you can sit back and relax. However, it’s still
a good idea to check on the print every now and then to make sure there are no problems.
Let the Part Cool
Ten to 20 minutes later, your carabiner should be done! I know it’s tempting, but resist the
urge to immediately yank off the part. You want to give it five minutes or so to finish
cooling off to make sure the plastic has finished hardening.

Your first print is done. Take a minute to admire your work!
Remove the Part
Once you’ve tested your patience by letting the part cool off, it’s time to remove it. If you
can’t get a grip on the part, you can use a flat tool to pry it up from the bottom. Be careful,
though; it’s easy to break the part if the adhesion is good. You may need to work at it from
different sides to get it off the bed.

A flat tool can be used gently to remove the part if it’s stuck on the bed.
If you’re having a really hard time getting it off, give it some more time to cool down.
Once the bed and the part have cooled down to room temperature, it should be a lot easier
to remove.
Enjoy your first print, and spend some time contemplating the fact you just had a robot do
your bidding to create a physical object from scratch!

Congratulations on your first part! The future is now!

PROJECT
2
Pencil Holder
Project Time: 4 hours
In this project, you’ll be stepping up the difficulty a bit. Printing a pencil holder requires a
couple of tricks to accomplish. As you’ll notice once you open the file, the model is solid
and doesn’t open like a cup. In order to use it as a pencil holder, the Slic3r settings must be
modified to remove the top and make the inside hollow. This should give you an idea of
how powerful the slicing software is and how it can be used to customize the model.
Load the .STL File and Resize the Model,
If Necessary
In Repetier, click Load and select the pencil_holder.stl file, which is included in the
model pack at the Idiot’s Guides website (idiotsguides.com/3dprinting). Next, check its
size on the Object Placement tab, which should already be up. This model is a lot larger
than the last one, so you should make sure it fits on your 3D printer.
If it doesn’t fit, you can try resizing the model. On the Object Placement tab, you should
be able to select the loaded model. You have the option to do basic modification, like
repositioning, rotating, and resizing the model.

You can resize the model, if necessary, in the Object Placement tab.
WATCH OUT!
While you can resize to fit on your printer, keep in mind that it can’t be too small. Otherwise,
it won’t be very useful as a pencil holder.
Preheat the Extruder and Heated Bed,
and Load the Filament
Make sure Repetier is connected to your 3D printer. Just like in project 1, you may want to
start by getting the extruder and heated bed warmed up. If you recall, ABS requires
settings of 230°C for the extruder and between 80°C to 100°C for the heated bed, while
PLA requires settings of 200°C for the extruder and between 50°C to 70°C for the heated
bed (if you have one). Both ABS and PLA work well for this model, so you should be fine
using whichever you have on hand or prefer.
Once the extruder is up to temperature, load the filament into the hot end, if you haven’t
already. The steps for doing this are exactly the same as in project 1, so check that out if
you need a refresher.
Modify the Slicer Settings to Make the
Model a Cup
For this model, you have to make a couple of changes to the Slic3r settings in order to

remove the top of the model and make it hollow; otherwise, it won’t function very well as
a pencil holder.
In Repetier, go to the Slicer tab and click the Configuration button. (See project 1 if you
need a refresher.) Once the configuration window opens, under the Print Settings tab,
locate and click on Layers and Perimeters. Here, you want to change the number of
horizontal and bottom perimeters to 4. Then change the number of top perimeters to 0.
This gives the bottom and sides of the model a solid thickness of 4 layers and removes the
top of the model entirely.
Turn off the top perimeters.
Next, click on Infill, which is located below Layers and Perimeters, and change the fill
density to 0%. This makes the inside of the model hollow.

Set the fill density to 0%.
Slice the Model
With your Slic3r settings modified to make the model cuplike, you can go ahead and slice
the model. Go to the Slicer tab and click Slice with Slic3r. This print should take 2 to 4
hours at the standard size, depending mostly on how fast your printer moves.
HOT TIP
The actual slicing process might take a few minutes, so be patient here, especially if your
computer is a bit older.
Start the Print
After the slicing has been completed, click on the Preview tab. You should see that the
projected extrusion paths make a pencil holder instead of just a solid model. This is
because the preview window shows you what is supposed to be printed, not the original
model.

Check the preview to verify if the print looks right.
If you’re happy with preview and the extruder and heated bed are up to temperature, you
can start printing by clicking Start Print.
Watch the First Layer
As you should do with every print, stick around to watch the first layer. The first layer is
the most important, so make sure it turns out right. You want good adhesion, but you don’t
want the hot end so close to the bed that it squishes the plastic.

Printing the first layer. Always check the first layer to make sure it looks correct.
Remove the Part
Once the print has finished, give it at least five minutes to cool off, so it can completely
harden. Letting the heated bed cool down to room temperature makes it more likely that
the part will just pop right off. But if you’re eager to start storing your pencils in style, you
can use a tool to remove the pencil holder. Just be sure to do this gently to avoid damaging
the bed or the part.

You can use a tool to carefully remove the part from the bed.
With the part removed, you can admire your handiwork. To test it and make sure it works,
place some pencils (or even pens) in it. If they don’t fall out, then congratulations, you
have a pencil holder!

It holds pencils!

PROJECT
3
Robot
Project Time: 4 hours
For this project, you’re going to be printing a robot figurine modeled by Nathan Deas.
What makes this a bit trickier than the previous projects is the print will require the use of
supports. This model has a lot of overhanging features, so removable support material has
to be used to hold up those features during printing. After the print has finished, however,
you can remove the supports.
Load the .STL File
As usual, start by loading the model. In Repetier, click Load and select the robot.stl file,
which is included in the model pack at the Idiot’s Guides website
(idiotsguides.com/3dprinting). The model should load with the robot’s back facing down,
but if it’s not, you can rotate it using the circular rotate button in the top-left corner.
HOT TIP
You also have the option of printing the model with the feet down. Printing it with the feet
down will reduce the amount of the model that comes into contact with the support material,
which should improve the surface quality of the overall print. However, because the feet are small,
it will be less stable. To combat this, you’d want to print with a thick brim in order to ensure the
model stays upright throughout the entire print.
Preheat the Extruder and Heated Bed,
and Load the Filament
With the model loaded, it’s a good idea to set the extruder and heated bed to the
temperatures you’ll use when you print. This model should turn out well in both ABS and
PLA, so feel free to use either one. Just keep in mind that the extruder and heated bed
need to be set at different temperatures depending on which material you use (see project
1 for the temperatures necessary for ABS versus PLA).
If your filament isn’t already loaded, you should load it once the extruder is up to
temperature; project 1 can give a refresher on the steps to do this, if you need them. If
you’re changing filament materials or colors, be sure to extrude at least 100mm of
filament. Doing this will basically flush out the old filament.
Modify the Slicer Settings for Supports

Because this model requires supports, you need to change a few settings from the previous
prints. The most important of these is turning on support generation. This tells the slicer to
create supports where necessary.
Depending on the particular slicer you’re using, the support settings may vary. If there is a
simple automatic setting, start with that. Otherwise, you want to tell it to generate supports
for overhangs with an angle over 45°. For now, leave the rest of the support settings at
their defaults. Getting good supports takes a lot of experimentation, so start with
something simple and then refine the settings on future prints.
In Repetier, generating support settings is just a simple click of Generate support material.
Other than the support settings, you also want to make sure your filament diameter is set
correctly in order to make sure the supports connect just well enough to the part. Filament
is rarely exactly the right diameter, so it’s best to use a pair of digital calipers to measure.
Even better, measure in three or four different places on the filament spool and then
average the numbers. You can then change your filament diameter setting by clicking
Configuration and then going to the Filament Settings tab to match the actual diameter
of the filament.

The Filament subsection of the Filament Settings tab has a place where you can adjust the filament diameter.
Also, if you’re using PLA, make sure you turn on your print fan. You’ll find the settings to
turn on the fan in the Cooling subsection of the Filament Settings tab. This is always a
good idea when printing PLA, but it’s especially important when using support material.
Without a fan running, support material might stick too well to the model when printing in
PLA.

The Cooling subsection of the Filament Settings tab allows you to turn on and adjust the fan settings.
Slice the Model
Once you’ve updated your settings, you can slice the model. Go to the Slicer tab and click
Slice with Slic3r. This particular model could take anywhere from 2 to 4 hours to print at
its default size.
HOT TIP
If you don’t want to wait that long (who does?), you can scale down the model to something
smaller. However, if you do scale the model, keep in mind that smaller features may not
show up well on some printers. Luckily, this figurine doesn’t have many fine features, so you
should be able to scale it to 50 percent or so without any issues. The eyes may not show up well,
but everything else should.
Start the Print
After the slicing has been completed, click on the Preview tab. You should see the model
of the robot on its back, as well as the supports. If you’re satisfied with the settings,
support generation, and print time, go ahead and click Start Print.

After slicing the robot model, the preview window should show you where supports will be generated.
Watch the First Layer
As always, pay close attention to the first layer to make sure you’re getting good adhesion
between the filament and the bed.
The first layer for this print may look a little different than the previous two. I’m using a
brim on this print to increase the surface area of the first layer to help with adhesion,
which is why there is a large, flat area around the model. (For more information on brims,
check out the “Print Settings” section of Chapter 13.) But you may also notice a lot of
small, jagged lines of filament around. These lines are the base of the support material the
slicer generated, which is normal.

With this first layer, you can see the base of the support material.
Remove the Part
Once the print has been completed, you may notice it doesn’t really look like a robot. This
is because the model is partially surrounded by support material, which has to be removed.
But first, the print has to be removed from the bed.
WATCH OUT!
While the full-size model should be done after roughly three hours, you should check on how
it’s doing once or twice every hour. Especially for long prints like this, you don’t want to wait until
the end to discover there was some problem.

The finished print with supports should look something like this.
You can use your hands or a tool to remove the part from the bed, which should be easier
to do once the part has cooled. Because there is so much support material, don’t be too
concerned if parts of it break off. The support material is designed to do that, so it’s not a
big deal (as long as the actual model stays intact).

Wait for the print to cool, and then remove it from the bed.
Remove the Supports
After you’ve wrestled the print loose from the bed, it’s time to go through the somewhat
tedious process of removing the supports. The supports are connected to the model, but
the slicer attempts to make that connection as fragile as possible. Ideally, the supports will
just pop right off. But unfortunately, the reality isn’t usually quite so simple. Instead,
you’ll probably need to use some pliers to grab the supports and work them off.

A pair of pliers can help you remove the supports from the model.
It can take some time to remove all of the support material from the model. Be careful not
to damage the model, and resist the urge to use a hammer and chisel. Be patient and take
your time here. Eventually, you should be able to pull off all of the support material.

The robot figurine with all of the supports removed.
HOT TIP
With the supports removed, you may notice that the surface quality isn’t nearly as good in
the areas where the supports contacted the model. This can be improved by fine-tuning your
settings, but there will always be some loss of quality here. For this reason, designers generally try
to reduce the dependence on the supports.
Now enjoy your freshly printed robot, which was printed by a robot! Maybe you can print
a whole robot army to defend your cubicle from invading coworkers?

The finished robot figurine, ready to follow your orders.

PROJECT
4
Storage Box with Drawers
Project Time: 1 day
It will take quite some time to print all of the parts for this project. That’s because you’re
going to be printing four parts in total: the body of the storage box and three drawers.
Each of these parts will take a few hours to print, so printing them is going to be an all-day
affair.
But it will all be worth it in the end. This handy storage solution will give your nuts, bolts,
and any other tiny items a comfy new home.
HOT TIP
In a later project, you’ll learn how to design and print your own custom drawers, so you’ll be
able to store whatever your heart desires (so long as it’s small).
Open Your Host Software and Load the
Storage Body .STL File
Start by opening up your printer host software. As usual, I’ll be using Repetier for these
photos. But if you’re using other software, the process should be pretty similar. You can
also preheat the hot end and heated bed, if you have one (project 1 provides a refresher on
the temperatures necessary for ABS versus PLA, if you need it).
Next, click Load and select the storage_body.stl file, which is included in the model pack
at the Idiot’s Guides website (idiotsguides.com/3dprinting). The storage body should be
lying on its end by default, but if it’s not, you can use the rotation tools in the Object
Placement tab to orient it properly.

The part should be oriented this way to avoid the use of supports.
The purpose of orienting the model this way is to avoid having to use supports. The slots
in the sides can be printed without supports because the ends are circular. Overhangs that
are more vertical than 45° can usually be printed without supports. Because circles never
get less than that, you can safely assume they’ll print without supports.

Circular features, like holes and slots, can be printed without supports. This is because the angle is never less than 45°,
as you can see here.
Slice the Storage Body
Now it’s time to slice the model. This model won’t require supports or any special
settings. However, you should make sure the infill is set fairly high, at least 50 percent
(see project 2 if you need a reminder of how to set the infill percentage). In order to reduce
warping, I also recommend you print this in PLA and with a brim.
Once you’ve got your model oriented properly and your settings tweaked, go to the Slicer
tab and click Slice with Slic3r. This could take a while, especially on slower computers.

Slicing the model can take quite a while, so be patient!
Print the Storage Body
The next step is pretty predictable: you’re going to print the part. But before you start the
print, click on the Preview tab and take a moment to check the model to see if it looks like
it’s supposed to.
If it is right, go ahead and push that Start Print button! As I always do, I recommend you
stick around to watch the first layer. If that one prints correctly, the part will probably turn
out well.

If it looks right, print it.
Load the Drawer .STL File and Slice It
After your first print has finished, you can pull it off the printer and get started on the
drawers. Most likely (though it depends on your settings), your printer’s hot end and
heated bed turned off after the print finished. If they did, you need to preheat them again.
While they’re heating up, you can load the storage drawer model by clicking Load and
selecting the storage_drawer.stl file, which is included in the model pack at the Idiot’s
Guides website (idiotsguides.com/3dprinting). This one needs to be oriented with the
bottom down, so it’s pretty straightforward; any adjustments can be made using the tools
in the Object Placement tab. This print will also use the exact same settings as the last
one. Once you’re ready to slice it, go to the Slicer tab and click Slice with Slic3r.

Orient the drawer with the bottom down.
HOT TIP
You may want to use a different color for the drawers for some lovely contrast. If you do, be
sure to adjust the filament diameter settings to match the new filament.
Print the Drawer
If everything looks good after the slicing in the Preview tab, you can start the print by
clicking Start Print. Just like with the storage body, you’ll want to watch the first layer to
make sure there are no obvious problems. You should then let it cool a few minutes before
removing.

As always, make sure the preview looks right before the print, and watch the first layer after.
Print Two More Drawers
If the storage body and drawers turned out well, you’ll probably want a couple more
drawers to put in the other two sections of the storage body. To do this, you can just repeat
the previous two steps to print two more drawers. Or, if you’re feeling really adventurous,
you can hop over to project 6 to learn how to design your own custom drawers! Either
way, once each is done, allow to cool before removing.

The printed parts. You can go to project 6 to learn how to make your own custom drawers to use with this body.

PART
4
3D Modeling
Once you’ve learned how to 3D print, you’ll be eager to print all of the cool models you
find online. But it won’t be long before you want to design your own models to print. In
this part, I teach you how to do just that. You learn how to use CAD software to create
your own models, and how to optimize them for 3D printing. You also learn about basic
reverse engineering techniques, so you can print useful parts that work with existing
products.

CHAPTER
15
Introduction to CAD
In This Chapter
How CAD differs from other kinds of 3D modeling
Common CAD modeling and sketching commands
Why units and scale are important in CAD
Computer-aided design (CAD) is how virtually all new products are designed these days.
CAD software is used to create 3D models of the parts of a product, which can be used to
make every step of the development and production process more efficient. Over the past
30 years or so, CAD has literally revolutionized product design and development.
To really take full advantage of 3D printing, you’ll want to learn 3D CAD modeling. It’s
not an easy skill to learn, but it’s necessary if you want to create your own designs.
And learning the basics shouldn’t be too difficult. In this chapter, I take you through all
you need to know about CAD for 3D printing.
Why CAD Came About
Before the introduction of CAD, developing a new design was a very slow and error-prone
process. If someone had an idea for a product, the design had to be drawn by hand. Just
creating the drawing introduced the possibility of mistakes, and that’s assuming the design
would work. It wasn’t until the parts were actually made that the designer could know for
sure whether they would even fit together, much less work.
FASCINATING FACT
Most modern professional CAD systems have add-ons for running simulations. Engineers
can use these simulations to test heat transfer, stress analysis, load capabilities, and so on.
With the proper use of simulations, the development process in many industries has been made
significantly more efficient.
Modern CAD systems change all of that and drastically improve the process. 3D models
can be created and used to test how the parts fit together. Those models can even be used
in physics simulations, which can tell the engineer if the individual parts will hold up to
the stresses involved, and if the assembly as a whole will work.
Once the 3D models have been created, they can be used to quickly create accurate 2D
technical drawings for manufacturing. Because those drawings are based on the models,
there is little risk of inaccuracy. Creating those drawings is a lot faster than drawing them
by hand, and they can be automatically updated if the 3D model is revised.

In many cases, like when the parts will be 3D printed or CNC milled, the drawing isn’t
even necessary. Instead, the 3D models can be sent straight to the 3D printer. This makes
drawings unnecessary in the prototyping stage (although most companies still use
drawings for manufacturing).
Basically, CAD has made every step of the engineering process better. But it’s not just
engineers and designers who can take advantage of the benefits of CAD. As a 3D printer
user, you, too, can use CAD software to create designs to print.
A simple flat pattern designed in 2D CAD.
Artistic 3D Modeling vs. CAD Software
Technically speaking, CAD is not synonymous with 3D modeling (though it is often
improperly used that way). A great deal of CAD work is done purely in 2D, in which case

it’s similar to traditional drafting by hand (just using a computer to draw instead of a
pencil). And conversely, not all 3D modeling is CAD.
DEFINITION
Drafting is the process of creating technical drawings of parts and assemblies. A person
who does this is a drafter (or draftsman or draughtsman). Traditionally, this was done with a pencil
and paper, but it is now done almost exclusively with CAD software.
CAD is a term usually used in the context of engineering. CAD software is generally used
to design functional parts and assemblies. This is in contrast to 3D modeling software
that’s used to create artistic models like sculptures and characters.
So why the differentiation? It’s not just the usage that makes them unique; the software
itself is vastly different as well. Because artistic 3D modeling and CAD modeling serve
completely separate purposes, the respective software is optimized for those purposes.
Artistic 3D modeling software, or sculpting software, is made to make it easier for artists
to do their jobs. Exact dimensions are rarely important to them; instead, they need to be
able to freely form the models visually. Their goal is to create a model which is aesthetic
in nature, so their 3D modeling tools reflect that.
CAD modeling, on the other hand, is all about creating models with very specific
dimensions and a defined form. CAD designers don’t approach this from a visual
perspective, but from a mathematical one. The aesthetics of the part being designed can
certainly be important, but they still have to be specifically defined.
The differing goals between artistic and CAD 3D modeling result in a fundamental
difference in the way the software works. Artistic 3D modeling software is free form and
allows the artist to create and modify shapes, points, and faces without necessarily
defining any parameters. The artist can just sculpt the model based on how he thinks it
should look.
3D CAD software is parametric, which means that every shape is defined with specific
parameters (or dimensions). Technically speaking, some shapes can be created without
explicitly defining parameters, but doing so is generally considered to be bad form. And
whether the user defines the parameters or not, they are still created by the software and
can be modified later.
HOT TIP
If you’d prefer to use an artistic 3D modeling program instead of a CAD program, Blender is
a good option. It’s also free and open source, and has a huge user base and plenty of add-
ons. It’s a very high-quality program, so much so that it competes with the professional
alternatives. However, it has a very steep learning curve and is difficult to learn.
The ability to modify existing parameters is probably the most important function of CAD
software. Because every feature you create is defined by parameters, those parameters can
be modified to change the model. Even if it’s the very first feature you create, you can still
change it, even after the rest of the part has been modeled.
From a design perspective, this trait of CAD software is invaluable. You can easily adjust
the dimensions of the parts as needed during the design process. Parameters can also be

linked together with math formulas, so that adjusting one dimension automatically updates
others. Using that functionality, you can create a single model that can be used to produce
parts in a variety of sizes (for example, nuts and bolts in different sizes).
CAD Software Options
When it comes to CAD software, the best programs you’ll find are the ones made
specifically for engineering. The three most popular parametric engineering CAD
programs today are Solidworks, Autodesk Inventor, and Pro/Engineer (which has been
renamed to Creo). These are all great programs, but because they’re meant for
professional use, they’re very expensive. However, they often have student versions
available, so that can be worth looking into if you’re a student.
However, if you’re not a student and don’t want to spend a small fortune on software,
there are still some options available. In recent years, a number of open-source and/or free
CAD programs have been released, such as FreeCAD, Tinkercad, and Autodesk 123D.
These are all usable, and free is a hard price to beat, but I’ve found them to be pretty
lacking in comparison to the professional options. That said, they should be adequate for
hobby use, especially when you’re just getting started.
Aside from CAD applications, there are some other 3D modeling programs you may find
useful. These won’t be parametric like the others, but many people still find them useful.
SketchUp, Blender, and Wings 3D are some good examples you may want to try if you
find the CAD workflow doesn’t work for you.
Another free (and open-source) option is OpenSCAD, which is very unique among CAD
programs. The developers advertise it as “The Programmer’s Solid 3D CAD Modeler,”
because you build the model by writing a script which defines the model instead of using a
graphical user interface (GUI). It may sound strange, but it’s proven to be very popular
with people who are comfortable with code.
HOT TIP
Try using a variety of different programs to get a feel for what each offers. Even the
programs that aren’t free will usually have free trials available. This software is difficult to
learn, and it’s a good idea to try different ones to determine which makes the most sense to you.
An Overview of Common CAD Program
Commands
I don’t have room here to cover all of the commands used in all of the various CAD
programs, but I will cover some of the more common ones. Bear in mind that the
command names will vary depending on the specific software you’re using, but the basic
functions of the commands will remain the same. The specific method for using the
commands will also differ between programs, so I’ll really just be explaining their
functions here.

I’ll break these up into two sets of commands: modeling commands and sketching
commands. The modeling commands are used to add new features to the model, while the
sketching commands are used to define 2D drawings to use with those features.
Modeling Commands
Extrude: This is almost definitely going to be the most common command you’ll use. Its
name is derived from the extrusion manufacturing process, which might help you
understand what it does. (See Chapter 3 for a refresher if you don’t.) When using this
command, you sketch a 2D cross-section, which is then extruded (perpendicular to the
cross-section) to form a 3D feature.
Extruded cut: In some CAD programs, this command is combined with the extrude
command (you just specify that it’s a cut). This works in the same way as the extrude
command, except it removes material from an existing solid body (to create a hole, for
example).
An example of the extruded cut command in a CAD program.
Revolve: This command allows you to create a feature by spinning a 2D cross-section
around a central axis. You define how many degrees it will spin, and a solid body is
created based on that. So, for example, to create a sphere, you could rotate a half-circle
360°.

An example of the revolve command in a CAD program.
Revolved cut: Just like with the extruded cut, this command does the same thing as the
revolve, except it removes material instead of adding material.
Sweep: A sweep is a little more complicated than the extrude and revolve commands. This
creates a solid by taking a 2D cross-section and sweeping it along a 2D or 3D trajectory
(the path). This requires a sketch for the cross-section, as well as another sketch for the
trajectory. The sweep command is often used to create pipes and tubes but can be used for
a variety of purposes.
Swept cut: You may be noticing a trend here. Most commands that can create a new solid
also have a counterpart for removing material from an existing solid, so sweep has a
counterpart in swept cut. This command has many uses, like cutting channels into a part.
Loft: This command is similar to the sweep command, except you sketch two or more
cross-sections (instead of single cross-section and a path). This means the cross-sectional
shape of the solid can vary along its length (for instance, from a circle to a square). If, for
instance, you wanted to transition from a square tube to a round tube, you could use this
command.
Lofted cut: As usual, the loft command has a material removal counterpart. If you’re
familiar with a Venturi (like in a carburetor), this is the command that could be used to
create such a feature.
Hole: Many CAD programs also include some kind of hole command. You could really
make the same feature with the other commands, but this often simplifies the process.
Often, specifications for a number of standard fasteners will be automatically loaded,

allowing you to quickly create holes for those fasteners. However, the fastener threads
aren’t usually physically modeled; instead, a visual representation (usually a graphic) is
added along with the specifications. This means the threads made with this tool won’t be
3D printed.
Fillet: Use this command to create rounded edges. It can be used on both interior and
exterior edges. It is defined based on the radius of a circle, which is tangent to both faces
that intersect to make the selected edge.
An example of the fillet command in a CAD program.
DEFINITION
In geometry, a tangent line touches a curve at a single point and continues straight on
from that point. The easiest way to visualize this is to picture a circle. A tangent line touching the
far-right side of the circle will continue on vertically (up, down, or both), touching just a single point
of the circle. The actual mathematics of defining a tangent line are fairly complicated, but luckily
the CAD software handles all of that—you only need to be concerned with the practical effect.
Chamfer: This is similar to a fillet, except it cuts the edge instead of rounding it. It’s
useful for making edges less sharp without rounding them. It’s defined based on the
distance it’s cut in on each face, or one distance and an angle (commonly 45°).

An example of the chamfer command in a CAD program.
Shell: You can use this command to make a solid body hollow. For example, you could
use it to make a cube into a hollow box (with one side removed and the others given a
thickness). The shell command requires that you select a face to remove and define a
thickness to give to the other faces. This is very useful for creating parts like project
enclosures.
Mirror: The function of this command is pretty straightforward: it allows you to take a
feature and reflect it across a plane. You use this to create symmetrical features like bolt
holes.
Helix/spiral: This really isn’t a modeling command on its own but is more of an
intermediary. The helix command can be used to create various kinds of spiral paths,
which can in turn be used to create things like springs and threads.
Plane: This is a command for creating a reference plane in 3D space. It can be used as a
mirroring plane, as a plane to extrude from, or simply as a dimension reference.
Axis: Like a plane, this is used for reference. It can be used for dimensioning, as an axis
for the revolve command, or for creating other references (like planes).
Point: Another reference, this one is used to create a single point in 3D space. For
instance, you could create a point at the intersection of a plane and an axis. It’s useful for
creating dimensions, and to use as a reference for other features.
Sketch: Most features will require a 2D sketch to define their cross-sections, and this
command allows you to create that sketch. A sketch can be made on any plane; once
you’ve selected a plane, you’ll have a whole new set of commands that are used

specifically for drawing.
Sketching Commands
Line: The most basic of all of the sketching commands is the humble straight line. It’s
pretty self-explanatory: you use it to make lines. Draw four lines in a square, and then
extrude that, and you’ll have a cube.
Circle: Again, this one is pretty obvious: you use it to make circles. They can be defined
in a number of ways, such as by radius, diameter, center point, tangent lines, and so on.
Ellipse: As you’d expect, this is used to draw ellipses. You specify the height and width
separately as needed.
Arc: Both circles and ellipses can be trimmed to make arcs, but you can skip that extra
step and draw an arc from the get-go. Just like circles and ellipses, arcs can be defined in a
number of different ways that are useful in different situations (such as by their end points
and radii, three points, and tangencies).
Rectangle: If you don’t want to bother drawing four lines manually, you can use this to
quickly create squares and rectangles.
Polygon: To create a polygon (like a hexagon or octagon), you could manually draw it,
but that would take a significant amount of time to properly define the angles and lengths
of each line segment. So many CAD programs include this command to quickly create
polygons with a specified number of sides.
Text: The text command is useful for engraving or embossing letters onto a face or for
creating cut-out text.
Fillet: Just like you can round edges when working with the 3D model, you can also
round corners when sketching. The command works in the same way by defining a radius.
Chamfer: You can also chamfer corners while sketching. Again, this works in the same
way as when you’re using it on the 3D model.
DEFINITION
A chamfer is a simple beveled edge that connects two surfaces. If the surfaces meet at
90 degrees, a standard chamfer will cut across at 45 degrees for symmetry. However, a chamfer
does not have to be symmetrical and can cut across at other angles as well.
Trim: This command is used to trim a line, circle, ellipse, and so on before or after an
intersection (or between two intersections). This is an extremely useful tool, as it allows
you to combine primitive overlapping shapes into complex cross-sections.
Extend: The opposite of the trim command. This extends a line along its current path until
it intersects another line.
Offset: The offset command is used to create another line that is offset from an existing
line. For example, to create a hollow tube, you could draw a circle and offset it by the
thickness of the tube wall. When you extrude that, it will create your hollow tube.
Mirror: This is for mirroring lines across a mirror line. It’s very similar to the mirror
feature used in the 3D modeling area.

Pattern: How exactly the pattern features work depends on the CAD software you’re
using, but they all have the same goal. Its job is to take a part of your sketch and create
copies of it in a specified pattern. This is useful for creating things like vent holes.
Dimension: Dimensioning your sketches is extremely important. If your sketch isn’t
completely defined, it can easily be accidentally distorted. It’s also essential that you add
dimensions everywhere on your sketch to make sure it’s the correct size. How can you
create a true cube if you don’t ensure that every side has equal dimensions?
Constraints: Constraints serve a similar purpose to dimensions; they’re used to keep a
sketch defined exactly as you intend. They can be used to keep lines parallel,
perpendicular, equal in length, and so on. Some CAD programs attempt to automatically
create constraints, while others require that you add them all manually. Either way, it’s
important to make sure they’re there when necessary.
The Importance of Units and Scale
Before you start modeling anything using the commands I’ve just taught you, it’s essential
that you understand the concepts of units and scale. Both of these are basic factors in CAD
design, which makes them critical to the proper use of your CAD software.
Choosing Units
The first thing you should do when you create a new 3D model is choose your units so the
CAD program knows what you want. Do you want to work in inches or millimeters?
Pounds or kilograms? For example, when you type in “1.25,” does that mean 1.25mm,
1.25cm, 1¼ inches, or 1 foot 3 inches? It’s not just a question of whether you want to use
the metric system or not; rather, it’s about the specific units you’ll be using for dimensions
and for other information like volume and mass.
The units you use for length are the most important thing to specify by far. That’s because
everything you dimension while you’re modeling will be in lengths and angles; while the
angles are universal, the lengths are not.
However, you can also change the units for volume, weight, and even time. Volume and
weight are useful for determining things like the weight and volume of the part, density of
materials, and so on. Time is really only used for simulations, though, so you shouldn’t
worry too much about it.
FASCINATING FACT
The proper use of units will allow you to do a lot of useful things. For example, you can
determine the weight of the part you design, its volume, and its center of gravity. This can
help you figure out how much filament you’ll need and how the part will perform.
So what units should you use? If you’re American, you’re probably the most comfortable
with inches. However, there is a strong case to be made for using millimeters instead. First
of all, the math is just a lot easier when you use the metric system. Fractions of an inch
can get pretty cumbersome, and 12 inches to a foot doesn’t make for easy math.
But it’s not just the math that makes the metric system better for CAD modeling. When

you export the model into the .STL format for 3D printing, the units you modeled it in
aren’t saved. So they have to be specified by the slicing software when you import the
.STL. Most slicing software uses millimeters by default, and most people export their
models in millimeters as well. The .STL file doesn’t store what kind of unit was used in its
creation, so it’s necessary to make sure the exported unit type matches the imported unit
type.
While the model can be converted to millimeters when you export it, that’s just adding
another step. Personally, I think it’s best to use the metric system from the beginning so
you’re comfortable with it. However, if you really want to stick with using inches, you
certainly can.
Specifying units in Solidworks.
Scaling in CAD
Once upon a time, when engineering drawings were still created\ with a pencil and paper
by drafters, scale was a practical concern. If you wanted to draw a building on a piece of
paper that would fit in your briefcase, you obviously couldn’t draw it at its actual size.
That’s where scale came in.

In order to draw something large at a practical size, the drafter would draw it at a fixed
scale. For a building, he might draw it at a scale of “⅛ inch = 1 foot 0 inches,” meaning
that every ⅛ inch on the paper represented 1 foot on the actual building. So a wall 10 feet
long would be drawn as 1¼ inches long on paper. The drafter had to take this into account
while creating the drawing in order to keep the entire drawing at the correct scale.
However, with the introduction of CAD, this was no longer necessary. In 2D CAD, the
drafter could draw the building at a full 1:1 scale and simply rescale it as needed for
printing. CAD software could handle rescaling the drawing automatically, so the drafter
would only ever have to draw things at a 1:1 scale and let the software do the rest.
But some habits die hard. For people who learned drafting with a pencil and paper, the
idea that things had to be scaled tended to stick. So many people continued to carry on
with that habit and still drew things at different scales even in CAD programs where it
wasn’t necessary to do so. That continues even to this day, despite the fact that it’s entirely
unnecessary (and even causes confusion).
Even more bizarrely, that habit has even managed to make its way into 3D modeling in
some cases. It’s not common, but some people still make the mistake of defining the
dimensions at a scale other than 1:1. It’s important that you learn from the very beginning
not to do this, because it’ll cause a lot of headaches if you do.
When you’re using CAD software, always create dimensions at a 1:1 scale. If something
is supposed to be 100mm long, give it a dimension of 100mm. This shouldn’t be hard to
do, because it’s the natural thing to do anyway if you’re new to CAD and drafting.
If for some reason you need to create a drawing and the model doesn’t fit on the page at
1:1 (or it’s too small), scale the drawing itself instead of the model. If you want to 3D print
a miniature version of something you modeled, you can scale it in slicing software (unless
it’s intended to always be miniature). Basically, the best way to approach this is to just not
think about it and dimension everything at its actual size.
The Least You Need to Know
CAD software is designed for creating models with specific dimensions, while artistic 3D modeling software is
useful for sculpting free-form models.
Specific CAD commands depend on the software you’re using, but most have similar sets of commands.
Units are important, and my recommendation is to use the metric system, because it’s what the 3D printing
community tends to use.
Always create all CAD dimensions at a 1:1 scale. If any scaling needs to be done, it should be done separately in
the drawing or the slicing software.

CHAPTER
16
Modeling Techniques and
Best Practices
In This Chapter
Designing assemblies
Tips for successful 3D modeling
How to create models for 3D printing
Just knowing the CAD commands isn’t enough if you want to have an enjoyable 3D
modeling experience. It’s also important to get a good grasp of the workflow used by
CAD designers. With a good workflow, you’ll be able to design anything with enough
patience. Everyone has their own modeling style, and you’ll develop your own. But with
this chapter, I give you a good starting point to get you on your way.
Premodeling
Before you actually start modeling anything, you want to have a good picture in your
mind of what it is you want to model. You can’t just start modeling if you don’t have a
clear idea of what the finished object should look like. (Well, technically I suppose you
could, but it would be a frustrating experience.) In fact, it’s not uncommon to spend more
time thinking about what you’re going to model than actually modeling it.
Take your time with this process, and don’t just jump right into the modeling. If you start
before you’re ready, you could easily spend more time fixing the model than if you had
just been patient and done it right from the beginning.
Once you’ve come up with a clear idea of what you’re going to model, it’s time to open
your CAD program and get started. There are a million ways to model the exact same part,
and how you go about modeling it is part of your style. Everyone will take different
approaches to the same model, and there isn’t necessarily any right way.
That said, there are some basic techniques which most people use. The idea is to start with
large features to create a rough shape, and then add features to refine it. As you’re
modeling those features, be sure to add dimensions and constraints to fully define the
sketches you create.
In order to add those dimensions, you should already have an idea of what they should be
before you start modeling. That’s part of the premodeling thought process and helps to
speed up the actual modeling.

Tricks of the Trade
When I’m not writing delightful books on 3D printing for you to read, I work as a
mechanical designer and drafter. This means my job is to do 3D CAD modeling and to
create technical drawings. In my time doing this, I’ve picked up a few tricks to make the
modeling process more efficient, and I’m going to teach them to you!
HOT TIP
To determine if a particular feature is essential, ask yourself if the part could still function
without it. In most cases, a particular part will only have a handful of essential features. The
rest are really only there to improve the aesthetic and feel of the part.
Separate the essential features from those that are mostly just cosmetic. Start with getting
the functionality of the model right before you start in with those features that are really
just there to make the part look finished. Things like fillets and chamfers are usually just
added to make edges less sharp, so save those for last. On the other hand, things like bolt
holes and mating surfaces are essential to the functionality of the part, so concentrate on
getting those right first.
If you can, try to prioritize the features based on how “hard” they are. By that, I mean
features that have strict requirements should come first. If, for example, you’re designing
a replacement bracket for a shelf, you’ll want to model the screw holes as soon as possible
to make sure they’re right. After that’s done, you can move on to adding things like
supports, and then finishing touches like fillets.

Start with important features, like mounting holes.
Get comfortable with the commands that are designed to speed up the modeling process. If
your part is going to be symmetrical, there is no sense in modeling the entire thing.
Instead, just model one half and then mirror the features to the other side. That has the
added benefit of ensuring that both sides are exactly the same and reduces the chances of
making a simple mistake (like entering the wrong dimension).
The pattern tools included in most CAD programs can also be very helpful in this regard.
If identical features (like holes or slots) will be used in regular intervals, that’s the perfect
situation to take advantage of the pattern tool. This isn’t just for linear or rectangular
patterns either; most CAD software has the ability to create circular patterns, which is
great for modeling things like gear teeth.
In order to take advantage of all of these tools, you should take the time to explore your
CAD software every now and then. Most CAD designers tend to get comfortable with
certain tools and will often use those even when another tool would work better. So don’t
be afraid to experiment with different commands, so you’ll be familiar with them when
the right situation arises.

Keep things simple. It’s better to use two simple features than one complex feature. Doing
so will make errors less likely and will make the features easier to modify later if needed.
If you ever share the model, it’ll also make it easier for other people to follow your work.
If you have any experience with programming, you’ll probably recognize the importance
of this. Complex formulas and statements may take up less space, but they’re also difficult
to decipher and modify. The features in a 3D model can be similar. You could draw a
really complex sketch to do as much as possible in a single feature, but there really isn’t
any benefit in doing that. Instead, you could just break it up into a few simple sketches
that will be easy to understand and modify later.
You’ll probably need to modify your model. Relating to my “keep things simple” tip, it’s
rare to get the model exactly right on your first try. The chances are good that you’ll need
to change some dimensions at the very least, and possibly remodel some things
completely.
To be able to make those modifications without a lot of trouble, you’ll want to use good
technique while modeling. Set up all of your constraints properly and define all of your
dimensions. Don’t get sloppy, because you’ll just be making it harder on yourself when
you have to modify the model later. CAD modeling isn’t a race; take your time to do it
right, and you’ll save yourself some trouble later.
Sometimes it’s best to just start over from scratch. This tip may be the hardest to swallow.
If you’ve spent a lot of time modeling something, it can be difficult to just give up on it,
but that’s often the best choice. As I’ve mentioned, there are a million ways to model
something. You may not realize until you’re finished that you chose the wrong way to
model a particular part; it happens to all of us.
If you modeled the part in a way that is less than ideal, it can be difficult to make
adjustments. Trying to make adjustments to a bad model will often take more time than
simply remodeling the entire thing. One of the best skills you can learn is how to know
when to just start over with a clean slate.
Assemblies and Fitting Parts
Modeling a single standalone part is usually a relatively simple matter. But things get
significantly more complicated when you design assemblies. An assembly is simply a
group of parts that are designed to fit together. For example, a car engine is an assembly.
And, technically speaking, the car itself is an assembly, too.
But the terms aren’t really important. What’s important is the idea that assemblies are
systems of parts that are designed to fit together.
As an example, picture a regular old pair of scissors. Think of the all-metal kind, not the
kind with plastic handles. A pair of scissors like that is a very simple three-part assembly,
made up of one blade and handle, the second blade and handle, and the rivet holding them
together. But even a simple assembly like that takes some planning.
Each blade and handle has to be designed as you’d expect: to have a sharpened edge and
comfortable handle. But it also has to be designed to fit with the other piece to make a

functional pair of scissors. That means the blades have to be designed to line up properly,
at the same time that the two handles touch.
As you add more parts to an assembly, things get exponentially more complicated. A
mechanical wrist watch, for example, is one of the most complex mechanical assemblies
ever devised. There are a bunch of parts that all have to fit together perfectly in a very
small space. Designing something like that is mind-bogglingly difficult, because there are
just so many interfacing parts to plan.
FASCINATING FACT
As complicated as mechanical wrist watches are, they’re even more impressive when you
consider the times in which they were designed. The parts and assemblies were all sketched
with a pencil and paper, and the parts were mostly made with basic hand tools. Even with our
modern software and tools, replicating a mechanism that complicated is very difficult.
As you can see, designing assemblies is no easy task; I’m not talking about just putting
Legos together. Each part has to be designed to perform its function, and also to connect
with the other parts in the assembly.
Planning an Assembly
So how should you go about designing an assembly with multiple parts that need to fit
together? The answer is careful planning, and unfortunately there is no quick and easy
trick to this. This is what mechanical engineers and designers are paid to figure out, so
don’t let it bother you if you find the process difficult.
This planning stage is one area where 2D CAD programs can come in handy, even if the
actual parts will be modeled in 3D. You can draw out a representation of the parts in the
assembly to get an idea of the dimensions of the individual parts.
To illustrate this, imagine you had a 100mm-long belt and two pulleys with diameters of
10mm. You want to determine how far apart the pulleys need to be mounted in order to
keep the belt taut.
Trying to figure this out while modeling the parts would be fairly difficult, but you can do
it quickly and easily in 2D CAD. You can draw one pulley as a circle, with another half-
circle around it to represent that part of the belt. You can then measure the length of that
half-circle (in this case, 16.4934mm). We know that there are two pulleys, so you multiply
that by 2 and get 32.9868mm. Subtract that from 100mm, and you get 67.0132mm, which
is the rest of the belt. Divide that by 2, and you get 33.5066mm.

Sketching in 2D to come up with dimensions for modeling a belt and pulley system.
HOT TIP
If the pulley example is a little difficult to wrap your head around, try thinking about why it
works. The belt is wrapping around two pulleys, so it will be in contact with half of each one.
So you take half of the perimeter of each pulley and add that. You know the belt is 100mm, so you
subtract the perimeters from that. You then divide the result by 2 in order to get the distance
between the pulleys (since the belt is a loop). Drawing this just saves you from having to do the
math manually.
So you now know the pulleys need to be mounted about 33.5mm apart in order to keep
that 100mm-long belt taut. With that information, you can design your assembly knowing
exactly where your pulleys need to be mounted. This removes the guesswork from the
process, which is key to successfully designing assemblies.
This illustration, of course, is a very simple example of the kind of thing you’ll need to
plan for. In the real world, assemblies are usually much more complicated. That’s why
you’ll need to take the time to carefully plan out the assembly before you start modeling it.
Fitting Parts Together
But what about just designing two parts that need to fit together? Anytime you design an
assembly, you’ll have to think about how you’re actually going to connect the various
parts to each other. Are you just going to bolt them together? Do you want to design some
kind of clip system? What about parts that need to fit together like puzzle pieces? You can
generally break this down into two basic types: parts that will be fastened together and
parts that need to fit together.
Fastening parts together is actually a surprisingly complicated topic. Take a stroll through
the fastener aisle at your local hardware store and just look at how many different kinds of
screws, bolts, nuts, clips, nails, and so on there are. The reason there are so many types of
fasteners out there is because there are all kinds of different requirements when it comes to
putting parts together.
But for our purposes it’s best to keep it as simple as possible. Here are some different
ways to fit parts together:
If you’re just attaching two parts together and there won’t be a lot of stress, you can just use undersized holes and
screw some machine screws into them. Because the plastic is relatively soft, it will basically just cut its own
threads.

If your assembly requires a bit more strength, you can use heat set inserts. These are little metal tubes with threads
on the inside and ridges on the outside. You heat them up and push them into a hole in the plastic. As you push it
in, it will melt the plastic around the insert, and then it will cool to lock the insert in. You’ll then have some nice
metal threads for your screws.
It’s possible to avoid using screws altogether in some situations. The battery cover on the back of your TV’s
remote control is a good example of this. Instead of screwing the battery cover on to the body of the remote, a
small, springy tab is used to hold it in place. You can design similar tabs to hold your 3D-printed parts together.
FASCINATING FACT
There are many such techniques like the springy tab that can be used to connect parts
together without having to use fasteners. Woodworking is full of these ingenious joinery
methods that don’t use fasteners, so that may be one area you can look into for inspiration. You
can also just look at the products around your home for ideas. You may be surprised by how many
techniques have been developed over the years.
Fitting parts together without fasteners is a whole other skill. It’s one thing to simply bolt
two pieces of wood together, while it’s something else entirely to join them together with
something like a tongue and groove. When it comes to 3D printing, how parts actually fit
together can be a little frustrating. Say you wanted one part to fit inside other, like a piston
in a cylinder. To get a tight fit, the piston has to be just slightly smaller than the inner
diameter of the cylinder. The question is: how much smaller?
That question is a major one in the engineering world, and it really depends on what
you’re trying to accomplish. If the parts will be moving (like a piston), it can’t be too tight
or the friction can be a problem. On the other hand, if the parts aren’t supposed to move
(like a dowel pin), it needs to be very tight.
But 3D printing throws in another curveball. Because the tolerances involved with FFF 3D
printing are so loose (easily +/-0.1mm, but often much more), it’s hard to get a precise fit.
So you’ll need to do some experimenting to determine how much of a gap to leave
between parts for different applications. This will depend on your printer, the type of fit
you’re trying to get, and even on the particular part you’re printing.
Modeling Successful 3D Parts
When you’re modeling parts for 3D printing, there are a few things you should do to
ensure they can be printed successfully:
Avoid supports, if possible. You can really design the part however you want, if you plan
on using supports. But ideally, you’d want to design the part so you can print it without
supports. Printing without supports generally yields higher-quality parts.
Make sure the part isn’t too big for your printer. That includes anything that’s added in
the printing process, like rafts, brims, or supports. Those can easily add 10mm to all sides
of the part, so take that into account when designing the part. If it’s a tight squeeze, you
may not be able to use brims or rafts, which could affect how well the part prints.
Take steps to limit warping. Warping can be a very difficult problem to overcome, and it
gets worse as the part gets larger. That’s because warping is caused by the contraction of
the plastic as it cools. The longer and taller the part is, the more material there is

contracting and the more warping there is.
Slots were added to this electronics enclosure for ventilation and to limit warping.
There is something you can do to limit that warping, though. Because warping is caused
by the contraction in long pieces of plastic, you can fight the warping by interrupting those
long, solid pieces of plastic with holes or slots. The idea is just to break up any long, solid
stretches, so the contraction only occurs in short areas to reduce the effect.
Of course, that’s not always possible. If that’s the case, you may have to use a material
that is less prone to warping (in other words, materials that don’t contract as much). PLA
is a good option, because it’s significantly less susceptible to warping than ABS.
HOT TIP
These challenges can sometimes be difficult to overcome, but it shouldn’t take long for it to
become second nature. Compared to other manufacturing processes, 3D printing actually
has very few design constraints. Just keep in mind how the design of your part will be printed.
Exporting Files
Once you’ve finished modeling your part, you’ll need to export it for 3D printing. As
you’ve learned in previous chapters, you need a .STL file for the slicing software to work
with. Luckily, all CAD software can easily export models into the .STL format.
When you export the model, you will then need to specify a few things for the .STL file.
The first thing you’ll need to set is the units. I’ve mentioned previously that .STL files do
not store unit information, so that has to be set when you export the file from the CAD
program and when you import it into the slicing software. The exported and imported
units have to match. Most slicing software uses millimeters by default, so you should

export the file in millimeters (unless you have a reason not to).
You’ll also need to specify the quality you want in the .STL file. This essentially
determines how many triangles will be used to make the surfaces of the models. More
triangles mean higher-quality surfaces. This is especially apparent with models that have
curved surfaces.
The .STL export settings in Solidworks, including the options to set the resolution (for the quality of the model).
If a model with curved surfaces is exported with a low number of triangles (resulting in a
small file size), those curved surfaces could come out looking faceted. Instead of a nice,
graceful curve, you’ll have a series of flat segments making up the curve.
In order to make sure your printed parts come out at the highest quality possible, I
recommend you turn the quality settings all the way up when you export the .STL file.
This might create an .STL file that is very large. So, if you’re planning on sharing the file
online, you may need to turn the quality down. Otherwise, there is no real reason not to
use high-quality settings on a modern computer.
The Least You Need to Know

Always plan your model out ahead of time, especially if you’re modeling an assembly.
Sometimes it’s better to just start over than to try and salvage a bad model.
3D printing has some unique considerations when it comes to modeling. This is especially true when it comes to
reducing warping, which happens when the material contracts as it cools.

CHAPTER
17
Practical Reverse Engineering
In This Chapter
Why you’ll want to learn reverse engineering
Measurement tools that are useful and affordable
Techniques for determining part dimensions
The two ways you can model a part
In the context of 3D printing, reverse engineering is the practice of duplicating the design
of a part or assembly. It’s easy to see why this is a useful skill to learn for the 3D printing
enthusiast. If you want to reproduce a part or interface with an existing part, you’ll need to
know how to reverse engineer it.
Luckily, reverse engineering simple parts probably isn’t quite as difficult as you’re
expecting. It’s a relatively simple process of taking measurements and 3D modeling the
part based on that. However, actually taking accurate measurements can be a little tricky
in some cases, so I’ve given you some helpful tips and hints in this chapter to help you
out.
Why You Should Learn Basic
Reverse Engineering
One use for 3D printing that many people are interested in is the ability to replace broken
parts they come across. Broken shelf brackets, car parts, and really anything made of
plastic can be replaced with a 3D-printed part. Spending 50¢ on filament is sure better
than buying overpriced replacement parts from the manufacturer (if they’re even
available).
In some cases, you may be able to find some of those parts online that someone else
modeled. But most likely, the majority of the things you’ll want to replace haven’t been
modeled yet. For that reason, you’ll need to learn how to do it yourself.
Reverse engineering a part may sound a bit overwhelming, but it’s not as bad as it sounds.
All you’ll be doing is 3D modeling a part as closely to the original as possible. You’ll just
be taking measurements and making sure the important measurements are as accurate as
possible.

DEFINITION
Reverse engineering, in a general sense, is the process of determining the function
and/or design of a man-made object or system. This can be anything from reverse engineering
software to complicated mechanical systems.
So which measurements are the important ones? They’re the ones for things like screw
and bolt holes, the overall shape and size of the part, and any functional features. For most
things you’ll probably want to replace, there will probably only be a few features that have
to be exact. This means there is almost always some room for inaccuracy on the
unimportant features.
Finding the Right Measurement Tools
There are a wide range of tools used to measure parts for reverse engineering. Professional
engineers use some expensive tools like comparators, go/no go gauges, or thread gauges.
These are precision tools (with the gauges needing to be bought in sets) and are usually
quite expensive. In a professional environment, they also need to be regularly checked to
ensure that they are within spec. Luckily for hobbyists, though, most of those aren’t
necessary for the kind of reverse engineering you’d be doing at home.
The following describe the two most commonly used measurement tools by hobbyists; as
you’ll learn, one is a necessity for measuring, while the other is one you should probably
stay away from.
Digital Calipers: A Necessary Tool
Calipers are a simple measurement tool that measure the distance between the arms of the
slide. Even in the professional world, digital calipers are what engineers use most of the
time. They’re a surprisingly versatile instrument. Digital calipers can be used to measure
interior distances, exterior distances, and usually depths as well. With simple distance
measurements, most other measurements (like angles and radii) can be deduced.

A very inexpensive pair of digital calipers.
These days, simple digital calipers can be purchased for less than $20. Even at that price,
they’re still reasonably accurate. The accuracy of digital calipers is usually within
0.02mm, which is better than most 3D printers are capable of anyway.
HOT TIP
Don’t bother spending a lot of money on your first pair of digital calipers. High-end digital
calipers can be pretty pricey and are unnecessary for hobby tasks. Inexpensive calipers will
do just fine for most people outside of a professional engineering environment.
3D Scanners: Not All They’re Cracked Up to Be
If you’ve been investigating 3D printers, you may have also come across 3D scanners. 3D
scanners are devices that optically measure thousands of points on the surface of an object.
With those points measured, a computer can reconstruct the surface of a 3D object.
The idea is that you can just throw a part on the 3D scanner, scan it, and then print a
perfect copy. The appeal of this is pretty obvious; it takes away all of the trouble of having
to reverse engineer a part. But do 3D scanners fulfill their purpose?
The short answer, unfortunately, is no. This is for two big reasons: the accuracy of the scan
and the usability of the resulting model. Both of these are a pretty big deal and are keeping
3D scanners from being particularly useful in engineering applications.
The accuracy issue is one which you can probably see the problem with pretty easily.
Even high-quality scanners tend to result in imperfect models. That’s especially true for
complicated parts or parts with any internal geometry.
Because 3D scanners work optically, they can only scan what they can see. If there is any
internal geometry, the scanner wouldn’t be able to see it. So that geometry wouldn’t be
replicated and would be lost.
FASCINATING FACT
Tinkerers, hackers, and makers have been experimenting with the development of
inexpensive 3D scanners for a while now. Prototypes have been made from the Microsoft
Kinect and even as apps on cell phones. However, none of these are at the point yet where they’re
very useful for reverse engineering.
That leads us to the bigger issue: the created geometry can’t be easily modified. The scan
just produces what is essentially a surface mesh. No actual features are created, which
means there are no features for you to modify.
If you want to modify the model generated by the 3D scanner, you’ll have to modify the
mesh. The same is true if you just want to fix the model, like adding internal geometry or
fixing errors. To modify the mesh, you’ll have to use those artistic 3D modeling programs
I talked about before.
Measuring the Part
For some parts, measuring will be a simple process. For others, it can be significantly

more complicated.
Let’s start with a very simple part, like a cube 10mm to a side. To measure that part, you
just close your calipers and set them to zero. You then just measure the distance between
three sets of perpendicular faces. If it was a perfect cube, you’d get exactly 10mm between
each set of faces. And, of course, to model that part you’d just make a cube that is 10mm
in each direction.
Make sure to set your calipers to zero before measuring.
However, as you might imagine, most parts are much more complicated than a cube. To
measure real parts, you’ll have to measure the distance between a lot more points. But the
basic principle remains the same: gather measurements and reproduce them in your model.
Doing this will take a decent understanding of geometry. In most cases, you probably
won’t physically be able to take measurements of every feature on the part. Some won’t be
reachable, while others will have curves or angles with can’t be measured. That brings me
to the most important reverse engineering skill you need to learn: how make inferences.
Inferences
When calipers are your only measurement tool, you’ve got to learn how to make some
inferences about the part. The inferences you’ll need to make can be broken down into
roughly three types: geometric, design intention, and proportions. For most parts, you’ll
need to use all three to really get the part modeled right.
Geometric

The easiest kind of inference you can make is geometric. If you can remember your high
school math classes, these are the types of problems where you’re given two variables and
have to find the third. They’re based on understanding the mathematics of geometry.
Lengths and distances can be easily measured with the digital calipers, so you’ll usually be
trying to use geometric inferences to figure out angles and radii. Doing that might seem
overwhelming at first, but remember that your CAD software can help you do most of the
actual math. You can just draw lines with the information you know, and then let the
software fill in the rest.
An example of making a geometric inference about an angle is a basic right triangle. You
don’t have to know the angle of the hypotenuse; you just have to know the length of two
sides (since you know that one angle is 90°). In the case of the following image, the two
sides were 10, and the software filled in the hypotenuse of 14.1421. If you use the
Pythagorean theorem—where a2 + b2 = c2 (with c being the hypotenuse)—to check this,
you’ll find this is correct. Similar inferences can be made about isosceles triangles, which
have two sides of equal length, if you know the lengths of all three sides or two sides and
the height.
DEFINITION
The hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle is the longest side of the triangle. It’ll always
be the side whose endpoint doesn’t touch the right angle.
Of course, you won’t just be measuring triangles. However, the good news is that most
features with angles can be broken down into simple shapes like triangles.

Two sides of this right triangle were entered manually, and the hypotenuse was then determined by the CAD software.
Design Intention
In my humble opinion, design intent is the single most important clue you have when it
comes to reverse engineering. The principle behind this is simple: every part was designed
by another person. People tend to design parts in fairly predictable ways, so you can make
assumptions about the part based on that.
Remember the previous 10mm cube example? Let’s imagine that instead of measuring
exactly 10mm for each pair of faces, you actually measured 9.89mm, 10.01mm, and
10.8mm. You could model the part to those exact dimensions. Or you could ask yourself
about the designer’s intentions when he created the part.
Is there any reason why he would have given it those exact dimensions? If not, is it more
likely that it was intended to be 10×10×10mm? Maybe the differences are actually a
simple result of poor tolerances in manufacturing.

A case of figuring design intention. The measurement was 11.9mm, but we can pretty safely assume it was intended to be
12mm.
Unfortunately, it’s not quite that simple. This time, let’s say the measurements were
9.52mm, 9.53mm, and 9.51mm. You might chalk that up to poor manufacturing. But in
reality, the designer might have been working in inches. ⅜ inch equals 9.525mm, so the
designer might have intended it to be exactly ⅜ inch.
I bet this is starting to sound like a pretty big headache, right? How can you possibly
figure this out when there are so many factors? One of the easiest ways is to first
determine the origin of the part.
If it was designed anywhere but in the United States, it was probably designed in
millimeters. If it was designed in the United States, it really could go either way. Some
industries, especially older ones like the construction and automotive industries, tend to
stick to using inches. Some newer industries, like the tech industry, often use millimeters
instead. This may not help you determine for sure what units were used to design the part,
but it should help.
Linear measurements aren’t the only thing that can be determined based on design intent,
though. You can use take that into account for every feature on a part, including curves.
Does an angle look like it’s about 45°? There is a very good chance it is. If a radius seems

to measure out to about 3mm, you can pretty safely assume that was how it was designed.
The whole idea behind this technique is that you try and think like the original designer of
the part. If you were designing that part, would you choose some odd number? Probably
not; you’d most likely choose a nice, round number unless you had no other choice. You
can use that fact to your advantage when trying to determine how you should model the
part.
Proportions
And finally, you can make proportional inferences. These are judgments you can make
just by eyeballing the part. To go back to the 10mm cube again, would you really need to
take all of the measurements to know it is a cube? You could probably just take one 10mm
measurement, and then notice it was a cube and derive the other measurements from that.
As usual, though, most parts aren’t cubes and won’t be this simple. Instead, you’ll be
looking at the proportions of the part to help determine the measurements. If there is a
rectangular shape and you know that one side is 10mm and the other side looks to be
about twice as long, you can pretty safely assume it’s about 20mm.
Even if you can only determine one measurement, it’s easy to reasonably infer the other dimension.
That’s because as humans (you are human, right?), we’re pretty terrible at estimating
lengths and distances. But we’re surprisingly good at making comparisons, like the
proportions between features. I’m not sure exactly why this is, but it’s true.
Whatever the reason, it’s true that humans are much better at judging proportions than
they are at judging actual measurements. So use that to your advantage when modeling
parts. Don’t try to guess all of the measurements; just guess proportions based on known
measurements.
But why would you even need to be guessing at all? If you have those nice digital calipers,
why even bother trying to guess proportions? The most common reason is when you’re

trying to model a part that you don’t physically have access to, like if you’re reproducing a
part from a photo. You might be able to deduce some of the measurements from other
objects in the photo, or you might be able to find some measurements online that other
people have taken. If that’s the case, you can use the proportions of the part to determine
the missing measurements.
You can also use this technique for figuring out dimensions in areas you can’t measure.
This is especially true for interior features that just aren’t accessible. Unless you want to
try and cut the part in half, you’ll need to make some inferences to get those
measurements.
Modeling the Part
You’ve learned all of these methods for determining the dimensions of a part you want to
replicate, so now it’s time to model it. There are two ways you can approach this: model it
as you measure it, or take all of your measurements ahead of time and then model it.
Which approach you take is mostly just a matter of personal preference.
Personally, I tend to model the part at the same time I take the measurements. The main
reason is that it’s easier than having to try and write the measurements down in a sensible
way. I think it also saves a little time in the process.
But writing down the dimensions can also work well. That way you don’t have to keep
switching back and forth between modeling and measuring. You can just take all of your
measurements and then switch to modeling.
HOT TIP
When writing down dimensions, you’ll always want some method for keeping them in order.
You can do this by sketching a quick drawing of the part and writing in the dimensions. Or if
drawing isn’t your cup of tea, you can assign descriptions to the dimensions. But do something to
keep them organized, so you don’t accidentally get them mixed up.
Modeling a part when you only have digital calipers for measurements can be a little
tricky. As I went over in the previous sections, there are often a lot of measurements that
can’t be taken with calipers. So this is when you’ll want to start using the techniques you
just learned.
Start by doing as much as you can with the measurements you were able to take. These
will be your “hard” dimensions, which you can be reasonably sure about. Make inferences
about the design intent here, like using round numbers unless it makes sense not to.
Once you’ve got all of those hard dimensions in, you can start filling in the blanks. In
many cases, the geometry itself will give you the answers. Just like finding the hypotenuse
of the triangles, a lot of the dimensions will fill themselves in based on the dimensions you
do have. Or more accurately, those dimensions won’t be needed to fully define the model.
Lastly, you’ll need to make some judgment calls to fill in the dimensions you couldn’t
measure and can’t be determined with simple geometry. These will usually be things like
angles and radii for filleted edges. Luckily, these are the features that lend themselves the
most to making inferences.

That’s for a couple of reasons: they usually don’t have to be perfect for the part to function
properly, and they’re fairly easy to get right without taking measurements. Fillets are often
just cosmetic and aren’t even integral to the function of the part. If they are important, it’s
okay because they’re still pretty easy to guess at.
Angles are more likely to be important to the part’s functionality. But they’re also easier to
determine. Designers usually stick to 15° increments unless they have a reason not to. You
can usually correctly guess the angle just by looking at it.
In the cases where fillets and angles aren’t obvious, your best bet will be trial and error.
Experiment with different angles and radii until it looks like the real part. This is where
the human knack for comparisons will come in handy. You may be surprised by how close
you’ll be able to get the part just by doing this.
Using these methods, you should be able to successfully reverse engineer most of the
common plastic parts you come across. You’ll be able to replace broken things around the
house, on your car, or anywhere else something plastic breaks. The parts may not come
out perfectly the first time you print them, but with a little refinement and practice, you
should be able to produce functional replacement parts.
The Least You Need to Know
Reverse engineering is a very useful skill for reproducing and replacing broken parts.
Digital calipers are the only tool the hobbyist really needs to take measurements in most cases.
For dimensions that can’t be determined with digital calipers, you can make inferences and use deductive
reasoning.
When reverse engineering, always consider the fact that the part was designed by another person. Think about
what that person would have done while designing it.

PROJECT
5
Monogrammed Coaster
Project Time: 20 minutes
For your first 3D CAD modeling project, you’re going to start with something simple that
you can proudly display on your coffee table (until your spouse makes you move it).
You’re going to be modeling a custom-monogrammed coaster!
This should be an easy first project. You’ll just be modeling a basic circular plate and
cutting a letter into it. This will also be easy to print after you’ve modeled it.
Open Your CAD Program and Create a
New Part
Obviously, the first thing you’ll need to do is open up your CAD program. (In this
example, like all of the others, I’ll be using Solidworks.) When the program is open, you
can create a new part. For this example, I’ll be using millimeters. If you’d prefer to use
inches, just divide those dimensions by 25.4.
Extrude a Circle
To create the main body of the coaster, you should start by extruding a simple circle. You
need to select a plane to sketch on for the extrude command. Choose whichever plane
makes the most sense to you for that specific part, but keep in mind that you might need to
rotate the part when you slice it in order to orient it properly. So under the Features tab,
find the extrude command in your software and select Front Plane.

Extrude from the front plane.
The CAD software should then switch you to the sketching toolbar (or it may already be
open); in this software, you click the Sketch tab. Select the circle icon (defined by the
center point) and click on the origin point to place the center of the circle there. You can
then just drag the circle out a little bit.
Choose the dimension command in your software (you may need to choose the diameter
type specifically) and select the circle. This will place a dimension that defines the
diameter of the circle. You can then modify the dimension to fit your needs; in this case,
you want it to be 100mm.

Give the circle a diameter dimension of 100mm.
With the diameter of the circle defined, you can go ahead and extrude it. There should be a
button for completing the sketch (in Solidworks, it’s a green check mark, as you can see in
the following image), which will take you to the feature’s options. In those options, give it
an extrude distance of 10mm.

Extrude the circle 10mm out.
Fillet the Top Edge
Next, you want to fillet the top edge of the coaster. This will give it a nice, rounded top.
Rounding the top will make it more aesthetically pleasing and will also keep it from
having a sharp uncomfortable edge.
Click on the Features tab and select Fillet. Using the Fillet tool, select the top edge of the
coaster. Under Fillet Parameters on the left, specify a radius of 5mm. Because the top
and side meet at a 90° angle, the edge will be rounded down 5mm on the side and in 5mm
on the top. (Remember, fillets are defined by the radius of a circle that is tangent to both
surfaces.)

Fillet the top edge of the coaster with a 5mm radius.
Cut the Letter
The final feature to add to the coaster is your initial (or initials) cut out. This will be added
with the extruded cut command in your software. After choosing the command in the
Features tab, select the top surface of the coaster to sketch on.
Before you add the letter, you first need to add a guide to position the text. You could just
eyeball it and place it where it looks good, but as I’ve taught you, it’s better to fully define
everything. The text (for a single letter) will be 60mm high, so in order to center the letter
on the coaster, you need to put a construction line 30mm below the origin.
Start by clicking the line icon to draw a horizontal line below the origin point. You then
change that line to a construction line so it’s not used for the feature by right-clicking on
the line the checking the “for construction” option in your software. Add a dimension to
put the line 30mm below the origin point.

Add a construction line to use as a guide for the text.
You can now go ahead and add the text. In the text command of your software, select your
construction line as the guide. Next, change the font options so the text is centered and is
60mm tall. Choose a font style that suits your tastes, and then type in whatever letter
you’d like to use.

Cut the letter all the way through the coaster.
Finish the sketch to move back to the extruded cut options in the Features tab. You can
either specify a cut distance of 10mm or simply choose Through All (or however it’s
specified in your software), which will cut through all of the material in that direction. Or
you can just cut in a couple of millimeters if you don’t want it to go all the way through.
Complete the feature, and your coaster will be finished!

Once the cut has been done, the coaster is finished!
Export the .STL File and Print
If you’re satisfied with how the model turned out, you can export it as an .STL for
printing. The steps to export the file will depend on your specific CAD software, but
generally you’ll either “save as” or export as an .STL. When you export it, be sure to
choose millimeters, because that’s probably what your slicing software will be set to as the
default. You also want to save it at the highest-quality settings, because this model has lots
of curves in it.
With the .STL file in hand, you can go ahead and print it. This model won’t require any
special settings to print, so just use basic settings. You can then simply start your print and
let it cool afterward, and soon enough, you’ll have your very own monogrammed coaster!

Your printed coaster (if your initial happens to be “C” ).

PROJECT
6
Custom Storage Drawer
Project Time: 1 hour
Your second modeling project is going to be quite a bit more difficult than the first one.
You’ll be modeling a custom storage drawer for the storage shelf you printed for project 4.
You’ll be able to design the compartments however you wish to suit whatever you’d like
to store.
Because this will be harder than the first modeling project, it may be beneficial to spend
some time modeling some more basic designs on your own to get a feel for the software
before doing this. I’ll also be assuming that you know the basics of using the commands
and software, so I won’t be going over each feature in great detail; however, you can
check out project 5 if you need a refresher on where to go and what to do in the software.
If you’re ready, let’s jump right in!
Open Your CAD Program and Create a
New Part
Start by opening your CAD software and creating a new part. As usual, my
recommendation is to work in millimeters. This is especially true for this part, because it
will be sliding into the existing storage frame.
The frame was designed in millimeters, so the best way to ensure a proper fit is to use
millimeters for the new drawer as well. However, if you prefer to use inches, you can
divide all of the measurements by 25.4.
Extrude the Body of the Drawer
For this part, you need to start with an extrusion on the top plane. This is because the main
body of the drawer will be created by extruding from the side, and you want it to lay down
flat on the build plate when you print it. So in this case, the top plane actually corresponds
to the front of the part.
The opening in the frame is a rectangle 25mm tall and 100mm wide, with 5mm fillets on
the corners. In order to make the drawer fit into the frame, it needs to be slightly smaller
than that opening. You can draw the 25×100mm opening with construction lines, and then
offset those inside by .50mm. You can then extrude the offset lines by 100mm (the length
of the drawer).

The drawer body is offset .50mm from the 25×100mm opening in the frame.
Cut an Opening for the Handle
The next feature is a cutout that will allow room for the drawer handle. This is so the
handle doesn’t protrude from the front of the drawer. This design choice is mostly
cosmetic, but will also help the drawer to be printable on smaller printers.
To make this feature, you use the extrude cut command in your software on the top of the
part (or the front plane). Make an arc with a 100mm radius, with its endpoints 15mm from
each side of the drawer. Next, draw a line connecting the endpoints to make it a closed
shape. You can then simply do the cut all the way through the part.

Cut out a place for the drawer handle.
To finish the cutout, add a 50mm fillet to the ends of the cutout. This should be where the
endpoints of the arc were. The purpose of the fillets is simply to round the edge and give it
a more finished look and feel.
Design the Compartments
This next step is where the customization comes in. You essentially hollow out the drawer
and divide it into the desired compartments in one feature. How you divide it up is
completely up to you.
However, you should stick to a few basic conventions to make sure the drawer turns out
right. In my design, I gave all of the walls a 2mm thickness. This should make it sturdy
without being too bulky, so I recommend you do the same.
To do this, start by offsetting the outside lines of the part by 2mm all the way around.
Next, draw construction lines to divide it up into the desired compartments. Offset those
construction lines by 1mm in both directions (to make the walls of the compartments).
Then just trim the overlapping lines so that each compartment is its own fully closed
shape.

Design the compartments based on your needs. However, it’s a good idea to give the walls a 2mm thickness to make
them sturdy.
For the options in the extruded cut feature, choose what’s used to indicate “offset from
surface” in your software. You can then select the bottom face of the drawer. Enter
2.00mm, and it will cut the compartments down to 2mm from the bottom face.

Offset the cut 2mm from the bottom of the drawer.
Add a Rough Handle
Now you can start adding a basic drawer handle. You can use the extrude command in
your software, and use the bottom of the drawer as a reference.
HOT TIP
Why not put the handle in the middle of the drawer? Because doing so would require the
use of support material to print the drawer. Extruding it from the bottom will allow the drawer
to be printed without any supports, which will improve the quality.
The exact dimensions you use for the handle are up to you. But if you want them to match
the other drawers you’ve already printed, you can use the dimensions shown in the
following image. It’s a simple rectangle centered on the part that is 30mm wide and
protrudes 5mm from the front of the drawer. The outside corners have a 5mm fillet, and
the handle itself is 3mm thick.

Create a basic handle with the extrude feature.
Add Fillets to Handle
Adding fillets to the handle serves two purposes: to improve the aesthetics and to
strengthen the handle. The aesthetic reasons are a pretty obvious: filleted edges just look
nicer. But they’re also important because they make the handle stronger. The gradual
transition takes away the weak point that would otherwise be present at the 90° edges.
In this case, two different fillets are used. On the vertical edges on either side of the
handle, 10mm fillets are used. On the top of the handle (the horizontal edge), a 3mm fillet
is used. This gives it strength while still leaving a flat spot for you to grip when opening
the drawer.

Add fillets to improve the look and strength of the handle.
Add Ridges for Grip
The final two features you’ll create are there to make a couple of small ridges on the
handle. Their purpose will be simply to make the handle easier to grip when you’re
opening the drawer.
The first step to making these is a simple extrusion on top of the handle. I made mine by
drawing 1mm-diameter circles 20mm apart, and then connecting them with lines on the
top and bottom. The insides of the circles can then be trimmed away. The center of the
first ridge is 2mm from the edge of the handle, and the second ridge is 3mm from that.
Add a couple of small 1×21mm ridges to the top of the handle.

The final feature is .25mm fillets all the way around the top and bottom edges of both
ridges. This is just to smooth out the ridges and make them more comfortable for your
fingers.
Fillet the top and bottom edges of both ridges.
Export the .STL File and Print
With the part finished, you can export it and print it. Export the .STL file at high-quality
settings to make sure you retain the curves of the model. You can then just print it using
the same settings you used to print the drawers in project 4 and allow to cool before
removing.

Your finished drawer should look something like this, but with whatever compartment layout you decided to model.

PROJECT
7
Dust Collector
Project Time: 45 minutes
A dust collector is a simple little device you feed your filament through. Inside, a small
sponge catches any dust that was on the filament. Dust can cause some major headaches in
3D printing, including nozzle clogs, so it’s best to avoid the problem altogether by using a
dust collector.
This project also gives you the chance to experiment with parts that are designed to fit
together, helping you get a feel for the accuracy of your 3D printer and how to design
parts that fit snuggly. So boot up that computer and let’s get started!
Create a New Part and Revolve the Body
Go ahead and open your CAD software to create a new part in millimeters. The basic
design of the dust collector is pretty simple: a hollow cylinder divided into two parts that
clip together. This means you’ll actually be modeling two different parts.
For the base of the first part, start by using the revolve feature in your software. You can
just use the same dimensions that are in the following figure. The only exception is the
1.25mm radius dimension right next to the centerline, which is dependent on the size of
your filament. My filament is 1.75mm, so I made the opening 2.50mm to give it some
room. If you’re using 3mm filament, you’ll want to make that dimension something like
2mm radius.

The first feature is a revolve to create the cylindrical shape of the part.
Cut a Groove
Next you’ll be cutting a groove on top of the cylinder for the clips to fit into. This is a
pretty simple operation with the revolved cut command in your software.
Using the same centerline from the origin you used for the initial feature, you can just
draw a circle at the edge of the part. Put the centerpoint of the circle on the edge of the
cylinder so it’s constrained there, and then just specify a diameter of 2mm and a distance
from the top of 3mm.

Use the revolved cut command to cut a groove.
You then need to add fillets to the top and bottom of the groove. This will just help the
clips fit more cleanly when the two pieces are put together. In the Features tab, choose
Fillet and specify 1mm fillets. Next just choose the top and bottom edges of the groove,
and finish the feature. That’s all you need to do for the first part, so just save it.

Fillet the edges of the groove you just cut.
Create the Second Part and Revolve the
Body
Now it’s time to create the second part. This part is a little more complicated, but it starts
the same way: with a revolved base.
Just like with the last part, you can use the dimensions from the following image to create
the revolve. Again, you may need to change the dimension closest to the centerline if you
have 3mm filament.

The second part also starts with a revolve.
Make the First Clip
You can’t just extrude the clips because you need them to follow the curve of the cylinder
in order to function properly. So you should use the revolve command in your software.
Once again, you can use the dimensions from the following image. If you’re really paying
attention, you may notice it’s offset out and up by .25mm compared to where it should be
based on the first part. This is to give it a little clearance, so the two parts fit together more
easily.
When you actually finish the revolve, don’t do it a full 360°. You want the clips to be
flexible, so you should only revolve it by a small amount. (I used 30° on mine.)

The revolve command should be used for the clip, so it follows the curve of the cylinder.
Copy the Clip
To avoid having to remodel the clip three more times, you can use the circular pattern
button in the Features tab. But in order to use that command, you need to first create an
axis to use as a reference. This is easy enough; just create the axis by selecting any of the
cylindrical surfaces.

Create an axis to use for the circular pattern command.
With the axis created for reference, you can pattern the clip. Select the first clip, and then
select the circular pattern command. Under Parameters, select the axis of revolution, type
in 90.000 to separate the clips by 90°, and enter 4 for the number of clips (the original plus
the three copies).

Use your circular pattern command to copy the clip.
Finally, add some fillets to the edges of the clips. This will just make the clips a little bit
stronger.

Fillets alleviate stresses on edges and make the part stronger.
WATCH OUT!
You could have added fillets to the first clip and then patterned it along with the rest of the
clip, but I’ve found that patterning multiple features together sometimes causes errors.
You can see how the parts will clip together in this section view.
Export the .STL Files and Print
As you’ve done with the previous projects, you just need to export the part as an .STL to
print it. The only difference here is that you’ll need export both parts. You can then load
both parts at the same time and slice them together to be printed. To do this, just load the
first part and then the second part. The parts should automatically be placed next to each
other for slicing. From then on, you slice the parts the same way as you normally would.

Both parts can be printed at the same time.
Once your parts are done printing and cooled, you can start using them to collect dust. All
you have to do is feed the filament through the holes, cut off a small piece of a household
sponge and put it around the filament, and then clip the two pieces together. As the
filament slides through, the sponge will collect any dust on the part.

The two parts should be able to clip together. If they don’t, you can try tweaking the dimensions to experiment with how
parts fit together.

PROJECT
8
Reverse Engineering a Useful Part
Project Time: 30 minutes
This project will involve reverse engineering a part from around your house: an electrical
socket cover. Why a socket cover? Because everyone has one in their home, so it’s
something everyone will be able to follow along with. I’ll be modeling a standard U.S.
socket cover, but the process should be pretty similar for other kinds of sockets in other
countries.
A standard U.S. electrical socket cover.
The idea here is that you’ll be learning how to take measurements from the original part.
So I won’t be providing you with the actual dimensions I used in most cases. Instead,
you’ll be in charge of coming up with the measurements yourself.
Create a New Part and Extrude the Body
Open up your CAD software and create a new part. As always, I personally prefer to work
with millimeters. But you’re welcome to use inches if you prefer, especially since you’ll

be taking the measurements yourself.
You can start by modeling a simple rectangle to get the overall body of the cover done.
You want to extrude off of the front plane, so it lies flat on print bed. Just measure the
length and width of the cover to draw a rectangle, and make sure it’s centered on the
origin. Next, measure the overall thickness of the cover for the extrusion thickness.
Model a simple rectangular solid for the body of the cover.
Fillet the Edges
As I’m sure you’ve noticed, the outside edges of the socket cover are rounded. This is
really just a cosmetic feature, but it’s one which is easy to add.
You simply need to fillet the top outside edges of the cover. Because it’s just cosmetic, you
don’t need to get the radius of the fillet perfect; just pick a radius that looks right to you.

Fillet the top edges to improve the aesthetics. As you can see here, I used a radius of 3mm, but the radius you use is
entirely up to you.
Shell the Cover
Unlike the fillets, this feature is important to the functionality of the part. You’ll need to
use the shell command in your software to essentially hollow out the cover. To do this,
you first need to measure the thickness of the plastic that makes up the cover (not the
overall thickness).

Measure the thickness of the plastic that makes up the cover.
Once you know the thickness of the plastic, you can then create the shell feature. To do
this, you need to specify that thickness you measured, as well as the face you’d like to
delete. In this case, you want to delete the back face of the cover (opposite of the fillets).
Create the shell by specifying the thickness and which face you’d like to remove.
Cut One Socket Opening

Now it’s time to go add an extruded cut for the opening for the actual socket. If you look
closely, you’ll see that it’s actually a relatively simple cutout. It’s made up of two straight
lines that are connected by two arcs (at least on the U.S. socket).
You can model this in a number of different ways, but I recommend you start with the two
straight lines. Draw them based on their length and distance from the top (they should be
centered from left to right).
Next, you can draw the arcs. You know their endpoints (the straight lines), so you just
need to figure out the midpoints of the arcs. You can do that by measuring the width at the
widest point and drawing a construction line centered between the two straight lines to
represent it. You can then just draw an arc with its endpoints on the straight lines, and its
midpoint on the end of the construction line.
Cut the opening for the electrical socket.
Mirror the Socket Opening
The openings for the electrical sockets are symmetrical, so all you’ll need to do to make
the second opening is to mirror the first. Select the mirror command in your software and
use the top plane as the mirror plane, with the first opening as the feature to mirror.

Mirror the first socket opening to create the second.
Create the Screw Hole Support
On this particular socket cover, there is additional material on the back where the screw
hole goes through. This is to add support for the screw, where it pushes against the outlet
mounted on the wall. There are also some ribs on the back, but they’re probably not
integral to the function of the part.
This is a pretty simple feature—just a rectangular support with rounded corners. To begin,
measure the length, width, and depth of the support using an actual socket cover.
HOT TIP
Measuring the width and length are easy enough, but the depth is a little harder. If your
calipers have a depth gauge at the end, this is one feature where it will come in handy. If
you not, you’ll just have measure it as best as you can.

Measure the length, width, and depth of the support.
The corners of the support are rounded. However, the exact radius almost definitely isn’t
going to affect how well the part functions. So just estimate the radius of the fillets as best
as you can.
Add fillets to round the corners of the support.

Add the Screw Hole
The screw hole on this part is countersunk to allow the screw to sit flush (or almost flush)
with the surface of the cover. To make this, start by measuring the diameter of the actual
hole (this is easiest to do from the back) and cut that.
Finally, you need to add the countersink. This can easily be created by using the chamfer
command in your software on the edge of the hole. However, you need to know two
things: chamfer distance and angle. The distance is easy enough; all you have to do is
measure the diameter at the top of the countersink and divide it by 2. The angle will be
harder to measure, though. However, 45° is a pretty safe assumption, because it’s
commonly used for countersunk screw holes.
A chamfer can be used to add the countersink.
Export the .STL File and Print
The best way to determine how well you measured and modeled the part is to actually
print it out and try it. You can export it the same way as any other part, and I recommend
using the highest-quality settings. When you print it, you shouldn’t need to use any
supports, and you can probably get away with a moderate infill (like 25 to 50 percent). Let
the part cool before removing.

The finished cover mounted on the wall, and it fits correctly!

PART
5
Advanced Usage and Techniques
If you’ve already read the first four parts, you’re practically a 3D printing expert already.
So in this part, I introduce you to some more advanced techniques and uses for your 3D
printing—things like printing with more exotic materials, using multiple extruders, and
some popular modifications you can make to your 3D printer. I also tell you a little bit
about some uses for your 3D printer that you may not have even realized were possible.

CHAPTER
18
Printing with Other Materials
In This Chapter
Unique filament materials you can print with
Special hardware needed to print certain materials
Settings you’ll need to change to support other materials
Throughout this book, I’ve been talking almost exclusively about printing with PLA and
ABS filament. The reason for that is pretty simple: they’re by far the most popular
filament types on the market. The vast majority of all hobby 3D printing is done with
those two materials.
But as popular as PLA and ABS are, there are many other types of filament material on
the market. None of these are even close to approaching the popularity of PLA or ABS,
but they do have their uses. Most of them are specialty materials designed to be used for
particular types of prints. In this chapter, I go over some different materials you can use, as
well as what alterations you’ll need to make in hardware and settings to print them.
What Materials Are Available?
So what other filament materials are on the market, and what kind of prints are they ideal
for? While new filament materials are being developed and released all the time, these are
some of the ones which are gaining popularity now.
Nylon
Nylon is a very common plastic type that has been popular for decades. It’s recently
become available in filament form for 3D printers. The desirable properties of nylon are
its strength and its low coefficient of friction.
Parts that are part of a moving system, such as bushings and slides, are usually made from
nylon because of its low friction. So nylon filament is generally used for the same
purpose: to print parts where friction is a concern.
Polycarbonate
Another material that has been around for a very long time is polycarbonate.
Polycarbonate is a very strong material, making it ideal for applications where durability
and impact resistance are important. For example, bulletproof glass is made from
laminated layers of polycarbonate.

WATCH OUT!
Please do not attempt to shoot something you’ve printed in polycarbonate. It’s very strong,
but bulletproof glass is made using a very specific manufacturing process, and regular
polycarbonate will not stop a bullet. So go ahead and forget any ideas about 3D printing
bulletproof armor or something.
So if incredibly high strength is required in a 3D printing application, polycarbonate is a
good choice. In fact, it’s probably the strongest filament currently available for consumer
3D printers.
Flexible Filament
I’ve talked about flexible filaments a few times already, so you’re probably already at least
a little bit familiar with the idea. Flexible filament is a generic term used to describe any
of the flexible, rubbery filament materials available from a handful of manufacturers. The
actual formulas used vary from manufacturer to manufacturer, so these are really grouped
by their properties (not because they’re a particular kind of plastic).
This part was made from NinjaFlex, a popular brand of flexible filament.
Flexible filament has grown in popularity tremendously over the past couple of years. In
the hobby market, it’s often used for things like robot or RC tires, grips, and anything else
that requires a rubberlike feel. With a dual extruder setup, it’s popular to print both
flexible filament and a traditional hard filament in the same part. For example, you could
print a wheel and tire as a single piece from the two different materials.
Wood Filament

One filament material that is pretty surprising and unusual is “wood” filament. There are
only a couple of manufacturers currently making this filament, so it’s quite unique. The
material itself is essentially a mix of polymer and wood fiber.
When printed, the material actually looks remarkably like wood. In fact, it can even be
sanded just like wood. The appeal is obvious: you can 3D print objects that look like
they’re made of wood.
PET
Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) is another plastic that has been around in various forms
for decades. It’s one of many plastic types that are commonly used in a wide range of
products, from bottles to tapes. As far as mechanical properties go, it’s fairly similar to
other filament materials on the market.
The primary advantage that PET has over other filaments is how well it prints. It has
strength similar to ABS but doesn’t require a heated bed and doesn’t warp much (if at all).
Basically, it combines the advantages of PLA and ABS while avoiding their
disadvantages. However, PET has only recently been made available in the form of
filament. It’s only being made by a couple of manufacturers, so it’s still a lot more
expensive than PLA and ABS.
HIPS
High-impact polystyrene (HIPS) has traditionally been used for plastic parts that don’t
require a lot of strength (like packaging), but it has gained a new use in 3D printing as a
support material. In a dual-extruder 3D printer, HIPS can be used as the support material
while another material is used for the actual part.
The reason that HIPS is well suited for this application is because it dissolves in limonene.
The primary material doesn’t dissolve in limonene, so this is ideal because the support
material can be removed chemically instead of with a pair of pliers. While there are other
filament materials that are also suitable for this task, right now HIPS is the most common.
Hardware Needed
It’s probably not surprising that some of these materials will require special hardware. As
new materials are added to the market, it’s likely that the hardware requirements will
become even more specialized. I can’t cover the required hardware for all of the filament
materials, so instead I’ll give you an idea of what kind of hardware is commonly needed.
All-Metal Hot Ends
All-metal hot ends, as I’ve touched on previously, are simply hot ends which are
constructed entirely from metal. Traditional hot ends are made from a combination of
metal and plastic, which is adequate for standard hot end temperatures. But a lot of these
materials require that the hot end be much hotter than is necessary for ABS or PLA.
Some of these materials needed to be printed at temperatures of 300°C or higher. That’s
simply too hot for traditional hot end constructions, which can become damaged at

temperatures that high. All-metal hot ends can handle these extreme temperatures without
becoming damaged.
HOT TIP
All-metal hot ends are becoming very popular because of their high-temperature
capabilities. But they’re not perfect for all situations. Many all-metal hot ends are prone to
clogging and jamming, so it’s usually not worth adding one to your 3D printer unless you know you
need to print at high temperatures.
Print Fans
I’ve already talked about how important print fans are in Chapter 10. They’re very helpful
for some features, like bridges and small layers. But some materials require a print fan in
order to print at all.
Print fans exist to quickly cool the filament after it has been deposited onto the bed or the
previous layer. Materials like ABS solidify pretty quickly on their own, so a fan isn’t
necessary. But other materials are more finicky and have to be actively cooled in order to
solidify quickly enough.
Of course, print fans in general are a good idea anyway, so it’s debatable whether they
should even be considered “specialty hardware.” But strictly speaking, they aren’t
necessary for all prints and materials, making them optional. It’s also worth mentioning
that the results from a fan alone aren’t always good. Sometimes it’s necessary to add a fan
shroud to direct the cool air in order to get good results.
The Lulzbot TAZ comes with a shroud for the fan to direct cool air just below the nozzle.

Heated Beds and Bed Materials
You already know that heated beds are required for printing ABS, but there are other
materials that require a heated bed as well. Plus some materials like nylon even benefit
from special build platform materials. Traditional adhesion improvement methods don’t
always work for all materials. Therefore, some materials have their own unique techniques
for making sure the filament sticks to the bed.
FASCINATING FACT
Phenolic resin plastic was the very first commercially available synthetic resin. It was
originally sold by the Bakelite Corporation, and was immediately popular in a wide range of
products. Since its invention, it has been used to make virtually everything plastic at one time or
another.
At first, that may sound trivial, but it can actually be a fairly big deal for some materials.
For example, nylon filament reportedly adheres best to phenolic resin (usually known by
the trade names Garolite and Bakelite). Different filament materials have different ideal
bed materials, and it’s often helpful to switch between bed materials depending on the
filament you’re using. For instance, a glass bed works well for ABS and PLA, but you
may want to switch to Garolite for nylon.
Printing Techniques
As you probably surmised already, all of these filament materials don’t just require special
hardware. In addition to that hardware, the different types of filament also require specific
settings. Just like how you have to adjust the settings when you switch between PLA and
ABS, you have to adjust the settings to use these more exotic filament materials as well.
Temperature
The print temperature is the most obvious setting that will pretty much always need to be
adjusted. Almost all filament materials have their own ideal temperature setting, and the
range can be 100°C or more. The filament manufacturer should have some information on
what temperature is ideal for their filament, so be sure to check with them first. For
example, PLA is usually printed around 200°C, ABS at 230°C, nylon at 250°C, and so on.
If you tried to print at PLA temperatures, it wouldn’t even extrude. PLA printed at nylon
temperatures would burn or pool on the bed.

Adjusting the filament temperature within the filament settings.
Once you have an idea of what the temperature should be, it’s best to experiment a little to
find what gives you the best results. That particular filament may print better on your
printer when it’s a little cooler or hotter than recommended. Print a few small parts to get
your temperature dialed in, and then save it as a configuration for that material.
You should also follow the same steps for the temperature of the heated bed. Some
materials won’t need the heated bed to be on at all, while others might need it to be very
hot. However, the temperature of the bed is much more forgiving than the temperature of
the hot end, so as long as you’re within 10°C or so, it should work just fine.
Speed
Print speed is another major variable when you’re switching between filament materials.
Many of the more exotic materials have to be printed very slowly and will produce poor
results if they’re printed too quickly. This is basically determined by how quickly that
particular material can melt in the hot end, which can be dramatically different between
materials. For example, PLA can usually be printed at very fast speeds because it flows
well. Nylon, on the other hand, usually needs to be printed slowly (around 40mm/s) or it
won’t bond properly to itself.
Just like with the temperature settings, you should start by looking at what the

manufacturer recommends. If that information isn’t available, do some searching to find
out what settings other people are using for the same type of material. Once you’ve got
some numbers to start with, you should fine-tune it by printing a few parts, just like you
did after adjusting the temperature settings.
Cooling
As you learned earlier in this chapter, some materials will require active cooling while
others shouldn’t be cooled at all. Once again, this information can usually be found from
the manufacturer of the filament or by searching around to see what others are doing. But
cooling can be a lot more subjective than temperature and speed.
For some materials, you’ll want the fan on at full blast all the time. For others, it shouldn’t
be turned at all. There is also a lot of middle ground when it comes to using a fan. You can
have the fan come on just for certain features (like bridges or overhangs), or the fan could
be on a low speed. For example, PLA virtually requires a print fan to turn out well.
However, ABS should only have the fan on for extreme bridge or overhangs; otherwise, it
will warp. As a general rule of thumb, to start your experimenting, the fan should be off
for materials that are prone to warping, while materials that don’t have this issue can
usually be printed safely with the fan on. Getting your cooling settings right will definitely
take some patience and experimentation.
So how do you get it adjusted properly? Start by running a print with the fan on high the
entire time. You can then try running another print with it off completely. Compare the
results and see which one worked better. Once you know how the material reacts to
cooling, you can start adjusting the settings for particular features. For example, you might
have the fan off completely for the first few layers, on low for the rest of the print, and on
high for bridges and overhangs. The point is, you’ll need to look at the results to see what
works best.
Layer Thickness
This is a setting you may not expect to have to change, and in most cases you won’t. But a
small minority of filament materials (such as nylon) can be a bit sensitive when it comes
to layer height/thickness. Unless the filament manufacturer recommends otherwise, it’s
best to start by using whatever layer height you would normally use.
But if you’re getting poor results (especially inconsistent extrusion and poor surface
quality), layer thickness may be the culprit. When this happens, it’s almost always because
the layer height is too small, so try increasing it a little bit and see if that improves your
results. In extreme cases, you may even have to switch your nozzle out for some materials
that simply don’t flow well through a small nozzle.
The Least You Need to Know
The options for filament materials are rapidly increasing, and there is now a pretty large variety of materials
available on the market.
Some materials are better suited to particular prints than others. You should pick the material based on your needs
for specific parts.
Many materials require specific hardware—such as all-metal hot ends, print fans, and heated beds and bed

materials—in order to print. Before you order a new filament type, be sure to check that your 3D printer is
capable of printing it.
The print settings will almost always need to be adjusted for new materials. Be sure to take the time to tweak your
settings until you’re getting good results with a new material.

CHAPTER
19
Modifying Your Printer
In This Chapter
Adding fan shrouds or heated beds
Making the switch to all-metal hot ends
Installing extruders and extending axes
Modifications for milling or laser cutting
Sites for purchasing parts or finding 3D models to upgrade your printer
Once you’re comfortable with your 3D printer and have gotten bored with printing pencil
holders and coasters, you’ll probably start thinking about how you can upgrade or modify
your 3D printer. There are an endless number of modifications you can do to your printer
to make it bigger and better, and if you’re the tinkering type (which you probably are if
you’re reading this book), I’m sure you’re eager to get your hands dirty.
You can really modify everything on most printers with enough work. After all, you have
a 3D printer you can use to make new parts for upgrades. But there are a handful of
popular modifications that you can do to most 3D printers to improve their functionality.
So in this chapter, let’s take a look at some of the more common upgrades and
modifications you can do!
Adding a Fan Shroud
If your 3D printer doesn’t already come with a fan shroud, adding one is definitely the
most popular 3D printer modification. In fact, it’s usually the first modification people
make to their 3D printers.
WATCH OUT!
Attempting to modify your printer always carries with it the risk of damaging the printer. It’s
also likely that your warranty (if you have one) will be voided by the modifications. Therefore, make
any modifications and upgrades with the risks in mind.
While many manufacturers include a print fan with the printer, it’s often just a small fan
blowing in the general direction of the nozzle. Fan shrouds improve the situation by acting
as a funnel to direct and focus the air just below the nozzle. Doing so usually improves the
cooling capabilities of the fan quite dramatically. While you shouldn’t expect miracles, a
fan shroud can definitely make a difference.

The Printrbot Simple does not come with a fan shroud, but Printrbot supplies a printable model to add one yourself.
Adding a fan shroud is usually a fairly easy job. Most 3D printer models on the market
have fan shrouds already modeled and available for download. In many cases, you’ll be
able to attach the shroud using the mounting screws that are already on the printer for the
fan.
So all you need to do is find a fan shroud model for your 3D printer model and then just
download and print it. Once it’s finished printing, you can just mount the shroud to the
fan. You should immediately see a cooling improvement.
Adding a Heated Bed
If your 3D printer didn’t come with a heated bed, your material options are going to be
pretty limited. PLA will be the only commonly available material you can print
successfully. Now PLA is actually a really great material that prints well and is reasonably
strong, but it’s always nice to have the option to use other materials.
To do that, you need to add a heated bed to your 3D printer. The difficulty of doing this
depends on three major factors: how large the bed is, the control board you’re using, and
the power supply you’re using.
Bed Size
Generic 3D-printed heated beds usually come in a relatively small selection of standard
sizes. If your bed size is something common like 6×6 inches, finding a heated bed
shouldn’t be difficult. But if you’re looking for something strange like 3×9 inches, you’re
probably not going to have much luck finding one.

It is possible to make your own heated bed in whatever size you like, but it’s not easy to
do. You’d essentially have to make your own printed circuit board (PCB) at the size you
need, and you’d have to make sure the traces were the correct size to get the resistance
right. Or you can contact a heated bed manufacturer and have them make you a custom
bed, but that will be a little pricey.
HOT TIP
The heated bed doesn’t have to be exactly the same size as the build platform. As long as it
covers the print area (or is close to it), it should work fine. For example, if your print bed is
150×150mm, a 6×6-inch heated bed (152.4×152.4mm) would probably work just fine.
However, that shouldn’t be an issue for most people. 3D printers generally come with
pretty standard bed sizes, so finding the right size for your printer shouldn’t be too
difficult.
Control Board
In order to add a heated bed, your control board has to have an output to power it and an
input for the thermistor (which measures the bed’s temperature). Most modern control
boards will have the output and input for the heated bed, but not all will.
If your control board doesn’t have the connections for the heated bed, you’ll need to
upgrade to a control board that does. There are many control boards on the market that
should be compatible with just about any 3D printer. Changing control boards will take a
fair amount of rewiring work, but the process is usually well documented on websites like
RepRap.org.
If the control board already has the heated bed connections, adding the heated bed will be
significantly easier. However, if the bed is large (over 8×8 inches), you’ll also need to
make sure it can handle the current required for the bed. For example, if the bed draws 15
amps and the control board can only handle 10 amps, you’ll have a problem. But that
should only be an issue for large heated beds.
Power Supply
The final concern when adding a heated bed is whether or not the power supply can
handle it. Heated beds use a lot of power, so the power supply has to be able to provide the
power for the heated bed as well as the rest of the 3D printer. It’s not uncommon for the
stock power supply to be inadequate once a heated bed has been added.
Luckily, upgrading the power supply is a pretty easy job. Power supplies come in a variety
of styles and form factors, with all kinds of different connections. Some printers use
laptop-style power supplies, which means you’ll need to make sure the jack is the right
size and shape (in addition to it meeting the power requirements).
WATCH OUT!
Rewiring your printer, especially when it comes to the power supply, can be potentially
dangerous. It’s possible to improperly connect the wires, which could result in electrocution or fire.
Be sure you know what you’re doing and use the proper safety precautions when doing this kind of
work.

Other printers use generic power supplies that have bare connectors you simple screw
wires into. Those are the easiest to replace, because you just have to get a more powerful
one and switch the wires over. They also tend to be relatively inexpensive.
Many people also use desktop computer ATX power supplies. They’re ideal because
they’re cheap, readily available, and can put out a lot of power. However, they usually
have to be jury-rigged to work with 3D printers because they have built-in switches and
safety mechanisms. But they’re a great option for supplying a lot of power on a budget.
If the new power supply doesn’t have a power connector that matches the original, you’ll
need to do some rewiring for this modification as well. Luckily, this is usually a simple
matter of cutting off the old connectors and installing new matching connectors. Most
power supplies will only have two wires (positive and negative) that are color coded
(black and white or red), which just connect to the corresponding colors on the other end.
A standard ATX computer power supply converted for use with a 3D printer.
Switching to All-Metal Hot Ends
In the previous chapter, I talked about how all-metal hot ends are required for some
materials because of their high temperature requirements. For that reason, it has become
very popular to switch out the standard hot end for an all-metal model. Making that switch
is usually pretty easy to do, but like all things it can become complicated.
Manufacturers of aftermarket all-metal hot ends purposefully make them so they’re easy
to add to your printer. Obviously, it’s in their best interest to make them as universal as
possible. But they’re still not quite plug-and-play.

There are two factors here: physically making the connections and mounting the hot end.
Making the connections is usually as simple as just splicing four wires (two for the heating
element and two for the thermistor). The smaller wires will be for the thermistor, and the
polarity won’t matter. However, you’ll usually need to reconfigure your firmware for the
new thermistor as well (which entails changing the thermistor model).
Actually mounting the hot end can be a little more complicated. There are a few somewhat
standardized mount types, and then a handful of completely unique ways of mounting hot
ends. If your printer’s hot end is one of the standard mounts, you can often just swap out
the hot end. In some cases, you may need to first print some kind of adapter if the mount
types are standard but different.
It only becomes a serious headache if your printer has an unusual type of hot end mount.
Some manufacturers use completely proprietary hot ends that have unique mounts. In a
case like that, you’ll either need to find an adapter (or entirely new extruder carriage)
that’s already been modeled by someone else or model your own.
HOT TIP
Hot end compatibility is definitely something you should look into before ordering an all-
metal hot end. Do some searching on the forums for your 3D printer and see what other
people are doing. Is there a specific model of hot end that people prefer? Maybe some fit better
than others and are easier to mount. If so, that can help you decide what hot end to order.
Installing Multiple Extruders
Adding an additional extruder to your 3D printer (or a few additional extruders) is a very
exciting modification. It opens up a whole new set of possibilities when it comes to what
you can print. You can print in multiple colors, in different materials, or with a dedicated
support material. But it’s also a pretty difficult modification to make.
Some 3D printer manufacturers have kits available to upgrade your printer to a dual
extruder setup. For example, Lulzbot has an upgrade available for dual extruders. But I’m
not aware of any that currently have kits available for adding more than one additional
extruder. And it’s not particularly common for them to even sell those.

This is a drop-in dual extruder developed by Lulzbot for their TAZ 4 3D printer.
For most people, adding one or more extruders ends up being a completely custom job.
You’ll need to design a new extruder carriage with mounts for the extruders, upgrade your
control board to one with multiple extruder connections, and reconfigure your firmware.
None of that is easy to do, and can be quite complicated. The RepRap forums
(forums.reprap.org) are a good place to look for information on doing this kind of
extensive modification.
Fortunately, the hobby 3D printing community is very good about sharing information and
designs. If your 3D printer model is fairly popular, there is a pretty good chance that
someone has already done all of that work for you. With a little searching and some luck,
it’s entirely possible that you’ll be able to find the models you need to print, along with
information on the control board and firmware.
But even if that information is available, you need to be very comfortable with modifying
your printer. You need to take things apart and put them back together, rewire the control
board and extruders, and so on. Adding extruders definitely isn’t a job for the faint of

heart.
Extending Axes
While I’m on the topic of difficult modifications, let’s go ahead and talk about extending
your printer’s axes. It should be readily apparent why this is a desirable modification: it
makes your print area larger. Who wouldn’t want the option of printing bigger objects?
On the surface, this seems like a relatively simple job: just get some longer smooth rods
and a larger build platform. And in some cases, it is that simple. However, it often turns
into much more than that.
Those longer smooth rods may force you to modify the frame to fit them. If they’re
especially long, they may droop, which means you’ll need to get thicker rods. Thicker
rods will require new mounts and bearings. The additional weight may mean you’ll have
to upgrade the stepper motors and possibly even the control board and power supply.
As you can see, this often results in a cascading effect. Some printers (like Printrbots) can
have their axes extended easily and inexpensively because of the way they’re designed.
There are even kits available for some Printrbot models to do just that. Other printers
(especially those with fully boxed frames) will require a lot more work.
As usual, you should always start by looking at what other people have done. If others
have been able to successfully upgrade their printers with extended axes, look at how they
did it. If no one else has done it, that’s a bad sign. In some cases, it may not even be
practical or even possible to do. In cases like that, it’s better to just purchase a larger
printer.
Converting to a PCB Mill
Earlier in this book, I spent a fair amount of talking about what CNC mills do. If you
recall, CNC mills make parts by cutting into a block of material. A printed circuit board
(PCB) mill is basically just a type of CNC mill that’s designed to cut traces out of standard
PCB sheets for electronics projects.
HOT TIP
Many people convert their CNC mills into 3D printers, but going the other way doesn’t
usually work as well. The components used to build 3D printers simply aren’t as robust as
those used for CNC mills. This means a 3D printer converted into a CNC mill usually won’t have
the power or rigidity to mill anything but very soft materials (like plastic, machinable wax, and
wood).
Being able to make PCBs at home is a pretty big deal for electronics hobbyists, making
the conversion from 3D printer to PCB mill ideal. So if you’re interested in making PCBs,
converting your 3D printer can be a worthwhile solution.
Converting a 3D printer into a PCB mill is very similar to converting it into a CNC mill
since PCB mills and CNC mills are very similar. But the conversion to a mill strictly for
PCB use is usually a little bit easier. PCB mills just need to be able to cut through the thin

sheet of copper on a blank PCB, which doesn’t require a lot of force.
The low power requirements of PCB mills mean they’re easier to convert a 3D printer
into. The spindle doesn’t have to be high power (a normal rotary tool will usually work),
and the frame doesn’t need to be incredibly rigid. Overall, it’s a much cheaper and easier
conversion.
The easiest way to accomplish this is to design a Dremel mount for your 3D printer.
Ideally, you’ll replace the extruder mount with the Dremel mount. That’s all the physical
modification that is really needed for the conversion. A Dremel (or other rotary tool) has
all of the power needed for PCB milling.
Alterations for Laser Cutting
Maybe you’re thinking to yourself “Milling is so twentieth century; I want something
more futuristic!” Well, if that’s what you’re thinking, I have a treat for you: lasers! That’s
right, you can even add lasers to your 3D printer.
Laser cutting is actually a fairly mature manufacturing process at this point and has been
around for quite some time. The basic process is simple: a flat sheet of material is laid out
and a high-powered laser burns through it to create flat parts. Many parts are created this
way, and it’s especially popular for flat parts made from wood, acrylic, and various metals.
A laser cutter only needs to move in two axes, so a 3D printer is easily capable of the
necessary movements. The conversion is mostly a matter of slapping a laser on where the
extruder would go and replacing the bed with a platform designed for laser cutting. The
platform can be as simple as a tray with water in it, just to keep the laser from damaging
whatever is below the material being cut.
The physical modifications would be very similar to those needed for PCB milling. Just
remove the extruder mount and replace it with a mount which holds the cutting laser. The
platform below needs to be capable of reflecting the laser, so that it doesn’t cut through.
But before you start daydreaming about opening a metal fabrication shop, you should be
aware of the requirements for the laser. Cutting through metal requires a very, very
powerful laser. Those lasers are expensive, and so is the equipment to adequately power it.
However, some other materials can be cut with relatively inexpensive lasers. Acrylic, for
example, doesn’t require a particular high-powered laser. This is mostly due to how well it
absorbs the energy from the laser (as opposed to metals, which reflect a lot of the energy).
Therefore, it’s possible to convert your 3D printer into a laser cutter capable of cutting 1⁄4-
inch-thick acrylic for just a few hundred dollars.
HOT TIP
If you’re interested in converting your 3D printer to a laser cutter, be sure to research what
kind of laser is needed for the materials you’d like to cut. Different materials (and
thicknesses) all require lasers of varying power. Some materials can be cut with relatively low-
powered lasers, while others require very high-powered lasers.

Finding Parts
For most of these modifications, you’ll need to be able to source the necessary parts.
Finding the specific parts you need isn’t always easy, but with the power of the internet,
you shouldn’t have too much trouble. These days, there are many websites selling 3D
printer parts, and a simple Google search will help you find a plethora of them. However,
the following are some links to get you started:
McMaster-Carr (mcmaster.com): This is a great resource for all kinds of parts and
components. They have an enormous selection of materials, fasteners, and all kinds of
machinery components. They’re very popular in the engineering world, because their
selection is just so comprehensive.
eBay (ebay.com): You can find all sorts of 3D printer parts through this auction and
shopping site. This is especially true for inexpensive parts coming directly from China.
You would be hard pressed to find better prices anywhere else, though you’ll have to be
patient if your parts are being shipped from overseas.
Thingiverse (thingiverse.com): This is currently the largest repository of 3D-printable
models. Aside from all of the normal knickknacks and decorative items to print, you’ll
also find a lot of models for upgrading 3D printers. There is a very good chance you’ll
find a handful of upgrades for your printer that people have already modeled and tested
here.
The Least You Need to Know
There are many modifications you can make to upgrade your 3D printer, some of which are more difficult and
expensive than others.
Adding a heated bed allows you to use materials beyond PLA, making it a popular modification.
With multiple extruders, you can print in multiple colors, in different materials, or with a dedicated support
material.
McMaster-Carr and eBay are both good resources for finding 3D printer parts online. Thingiverse is the largest
online repository of printable 3D models. You can often find models there for upgrading your printer.

APPENDIX
A
Glossary
ABS Acronym for acrylonitrile butadiene styrene, a type of thermoplastic commonly used
for 3D printer filament. It is strong but prone to warping and cracking during printing.
ABS juice Also called ABS glue, a solution of ABS plastic dissolved in acetone. It makes
a very sticky substance that can be used as a surface treatment on the print bed to improve
adhesion.
acetone A common household and industrial solvent. Acetone breaks down styrene, which
allows it to dissolve ABS. It can be used for smoothing ABS prints and for making ABS
juice.
additive manufacturing The process used by all 3D printers, in which a part is created by
slowly adding layer after layer of material.
Arduino An open-source platform for developing and prototyping electronics. Arduino
models are generally small circuit boards without inputs and outputs for controlling
various electronics. The Arduino Mega is used by the RAMPS control board for 3D
printing.
Basic Input/Output System (BIOS) The firmware interface used on most computers. It’s
the first thing to load as soon as your computer starts up and controls how the operating
system (Windows, for example) is booted.
borosilicate Also known as Pyrex (one of its trade names), a type of glass that is
formulated to reduce thermal expansion. Because it’s much less prone to thermal
expansion than normal glass, it’s at a much lower risk of thermal shock. Thermal shock
can crack traditional glass if it’s quickly heated or cooled unevenly, a problem that
borosilicate doesn’t experience.
Bowden A general category of cold end where the filament is fed from a stationary
location through a feed tube and into the hot end.
calipers A common measurement tool used in a wide range of fields and industries. They
come in both analog and digital varieties and are used to measure lengths, distances, and
depths. Calipers are capable of very high precision and commonly come in 6- to 12-inch
sizes (though larger and smaller ones exist).
Cartesian An adjective used to describe things related to René Descartes, who was a
French mathematician and philosopher. His many contributions to mathematics were the
reason for the Cartesian coordinate system being named for him (though he wasn’t solely
responsible for its development). In the context of 3D printing, it is a way of defining
points in 3D space by their X, Y, and Z coordinates.
chamfer A simple beveled edge that connects two surfaces. If the surfaces meet at 90

degrees, a standard chamfer will cut across at 45 degrees for symmetry. However, a
chamfer does not have to be symmetrical and can cut across at other angles as well.
cold end The part of the extruder assembly that has a stepper motor and drive system to
feed the filament into the hot end.
computer-aided design (CAD) The process of designing parts using computer software
(either in 2D or 3D). It also refers to the software used to accomplish that.
computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) A term used to describe manufacturing
processes that are controlled by a computer (generally CNC mills). It also refers to the
software used by the computers for controlling the machinery.
computer numerical control (CNC) A way of controlling machine tools using a
computer, often used for computer-controlled milling machines.
control board The brain of the 3D printer, the control board is responsible for handling
and processing all of the inputs and outputs on the printer.
coupler A mechanical fastener used to connect the lead screws on the drive system to the
shaft of the stepper motor.
Delrin A trade name for a type of low-friction plastic.
digital light processing (DLP) One of many 3D printing processes, DLP uses projected
light to cure photopolymer resin in layers.
direct drive A type of extruder that doesn’t use a gear reduction system. Because of the
relatively low torque, direct drive cold ends are generally only suitable for 1.75mm
filament.
direct feed A category of cold end where the drive system is located directly above the hot
end, so filament is fed directly from the cold end into the hot end.
drafting The process of creating technical drawings of parts and assemblies. A person
who does this is a drafter (or draftsman or draughtsman). Traditionally, this was done with
a pencil and paper, but it is now done almost exclusively with CAD software.
enclosure A case that surrounds the 3D printer to keep hot air in and cold drafts out.
Enclosures can significantly reduce warping and cracking on printed parts.
end stop A switch at the end of each of the 3D printer’s axes that tells the control board
when each axis is at its limit.
extrusion The process used by FFF 3D printers to melt plastic and deposit it by squeezing
the molten plastic through a nozzle.
filament The material used by FFF 3D printers, which comes in the form of a long strand
of plastic and is generally wound on a spool.
firmware The program that runs on the control board for controlling the 3D printer.
flatness One of many terms used in engineering to specify geometric tolerances. In the
case of 3D printing, it describes how flat a surface is.
flexible filament An umbrella term for any filament material that is flexible, rubbery, and

squishy. This can be used as an alternative to the hard and rigid plastic that is more
commonly used for 3D printing. The exact composition differs depending on the
manufacturer, but the resulting material is fairly similar with all of them.
fused filament fabrication (FFF) Also called fused deposition modeling (FDM), the 3D
printing process used by almost all consumer 3D printers.
G-code A programming language that 3D printers and other computer-controlled machine
tools can use for instructions. The G-code is what is used to give most 3D printers the
commands they follow to produce parts.
green sand A specially formulated material used for sand casting. Sand casting is used to
produce metal parts by pouring molten metal into a mold made of sand. The mold is
normally produced by forming it around a positive master part; however, 3D printing the
mold removes the need to first create a master part.
Hall effect Discovered by Edwin Hall in 1879, refers to the tendency for voltage in a
circuit to change when exposed to magnetism. It can be harnessed to create proximity
sensors and is sometimes used for end stops and probes.
heated bed A type of 3D printing build platform that is electrically heated in order to aid
adhesion and reduce warping.
heated build chamber Similar to an enclosure, except it is actively heated. Heated build
chambers can often eliminate warping and cracking entirely.
heating element A simple electrical resistance-based heating device usually used to heat
up the hot end.
HIPS Acronym for high-impact polystyrene, a type of plastic that can be used as support
material for 3D printing. It dissolves in limonene, so it can be removed chemically to
avoid damage to the printed part.
host software The software that runs on your computer and connects your computer to the
3D printer. It can be used to manually control the printer, as well as to send files to be
printed.
hot end The part of the extruder assembly that heats and melts the filament that is fed by
the extruder assembly. As filament is pushed into the hot end, a heating element heats the
hot end. The temperature is hot enough to almost instantly melt the plastic into a very
viscous fluid, which is then squeezed out of the nozzle and deposited on the print bed.
hypotenuse The longest side of a right-angled triangle. It is always the side whose
endpoint doesn’t touch the right angle.
intellectual property Any idea that is legally protected. Providing legal protection for
intangible things like ideas is a complicated matter, and the laws vary from country to
country. But in the United States, intellectual property like inventions, music, copywriting,
patents, and so on are legally protected property.
layer height How thick each individual layer is. The height is inversely proportional to
both quality and print time, so the thinner each layer is, the longer it will take to print and
the better the quality will be.

LCD controller A device that connects to the control board and lets you control the 3D
printer without having a computer attached.
lead screw A precision-machined component for translating rotary motion into linear
motion.
mechanical advantage The amplification of force with the use of a tool or mechanical
system. This is usually achieved by trading movement distance for force. A lever is the
most basic example of this, because if one side of the fulcrum (pivot point) is twice as
long as the other, it will double the force exerted (though it will also double the distance it
needs to be pushed). This same basic concept is applied in a vast array of machines using
things like gears, pulleys, screws, and so on.
MultiJet Printing (MJP) A 3D printing process that uses multiple nozzles to spray binder
onto powder.
nozzle The small opening at the end of the hot end that determines how thick the extruded
filament is.
nylon A type of plastic that is noteworthy for its very low coefficient of friction. It can be
found in filament form for 3D printing.
open source A philosophy and usage rights system that allows information to be shared
freely.
parametric A 3D modeling system used by CAD software that defines the model by a
series of parameters which can be modified.
PET Acronym for polyethylene terephthalate, a type of plastic that can be used as a 3D
printing surface in film form or as a 3D printing material in filament form.
photopolymer resin A type of liquid resin that solidifies into plastic when exposed to
light (usually in the ultraviolet spectrum). Manufacturers can produce the resin in many
varieties, with different mechanical and chemical properties.
pitch The distance from one thread to the next. This is what determines how far the screw
and nut will move (relative to each) with one full rotation. For example, an M8 screw has
a standard pitch of 1.25mm. So if you have a lead screw with an M8 thread, every full
rotation of the lead screw will move the nut 1.25mm.
polycarbonate A very strong plastic that can be 3D printed. This is the type of plastic that
bulletproof windows are made from.
polyimide film Often referred to by its trade name Kapton, a film that can be used as a 3D
printing surface to improve adhesion. It can also be used as a tape in very high-
temperature applications, such as on the hot end.
powder bed printing Any type of 3D printing process that applies a liquid binder to
powder.
print fan A small fan that cools the extruded plastic after it has been deposited.
rapid prototyping A term that is often used synonymously with 3D printing.
RepRap This can refer to the RepRap project, which develops open-source 3D printers, as

well as the 3D printers themselves.
reverse engineering The process of determining the function and/or design of a man-
made object or system. This can be anything from reverse engineering software to
complicated mechanical systems.
scale The size of a part in relation to its physical real-world counterpart. It is often used to
represent something large (like a building) at a manageable size.
selective laser sintering (SLS) A 3D printing process that uses a laser to essentially melt
a powder into a solid piece. This process can be used for 3D printing metal parts.
shield In the context of Arduinos, a circuit board designed to be attached to the Arduino
board. Shields are generally used to expand the capabilities of Arduinos by adding either
more connections or sensors. They are usually designed for a specific application (like
GPS tracking or to interface with another device), although plenty of general-use shields
exist.
slicing software The 3D printing software that takes a 3D model and converts it into a
series of instructions for the 3D printer.
smooth rod A cylindrical metal rod used in 3D printers for linear motion.
square-cube law Describes the mathematical relationship between area and volume. Its
relevance to 3D printing is the way that volume (and therefore print time) increases
exponentially with size. For example, a cube 10mm to a side has a volume of 1,000mm3.
Doubling the dimensions of the cube to 20mm to a side results in a volume of 8,000mm3.
Because the larger cube is 8 times the volume, it will take 8 times longer to print than the
smaller cube.
stepper motor A type of electric motor commonly used for 3D printers because its
rotation can be very precisely controlled.
stereolithography The very first 3D printing process, this uses a focused UV laser to cure
photopolymer resin.
STL A file format used to store 3D models. This file format is used by almost all 3D
printing software, as well as CAM software.
surface finish The quality (generally smoothness) of the surface of a printed part.
tangent Refers to a line that touches a curve at a single point and continues straight on
from that point. The easiest way to visualize this is to picture a circle. A tangent line
touching the far-right side of the circle will continue on vertically (up, down, or both),
touching just a single point of the circle. The actual mathematics of defining a tangent line
are fairly complicated, but luckily CAD software handles all of that—you only need to be
concerned with the practical effect.
thermistor An electronic component that changes resistance based on heat. It’s usually
used to monitor the temperature of the hot end and heated bed.
thermocouple A type of temperature-measuring device used in a wide range of industries.
It’s inexpensive and doesn’t require a power source, which makes it ideal for some
applications. However, thermocouples aren’t very accurate, which generally makes them

unsuitable for use in 3D printer hot ends.
threaded rod A type of fastener that is basically a long bolt without a head at the end.
A threaded rod is often used in place of lead screws on 3D printers.
units The unit of measurement used in 3D modeling and printing. This specifies what is
used for the coordinates—for instance, millimeters or inches.
Z height The distance between the tip of the nozzle and the print bed. This is adjustable
and is important for adhesion.

APPENDIX
B
Resources
If you’ve finished reading this book and you’re looking for more material, or if you just
need some help for your specific 3D printer, this is the place to look. The following are
some online community resources I’ve compiled that may be helpful to you.
General Resources
These are online resources that should be applicable to just about every consumer 3D
printer. These websites can give you information on troubleshooting, printer
modifications, and printing in general.
3D Printing Subreddit (reddit.com/r/3Dprinting/): If you’re familiar with Reddit, be sure
to check out this subreddit. It’s the most active 3D printing subreddit and has many
knowledgeable users.
RepRap (reprap.org): This community-edited resource is full of information on RepRap
and RepRap-derived 3D printers. It also contains a lot helpful information on various 3D
printer components that are used in all consumer 3D printers.
RepRap Forums (forums.reprap.org): This is another RepRap community, but because
it’s a forum, you can ask questions and get help from other forum members. Before asking
questions, be sure to use the search function to see if your questions have already been
answered.
RepRap Subreddit (reddit.com/r/reprap/): Another Reddit community, this one is
specifically for discussions about RepRap 3D printers (and their derivatives).
Printer-Specific Resources
This is a list of websites dedicated to specific 3D printer models or brands. If you need in-
depth information on your particular 3D printer, these are some websites to check.
Deezmaker Bukobot Forums (forum.bukobot.com)
Flash Forge Knowledge Base (http://www.flashforge-usa.com/support/)
LulzBot Forums (forum.lulzbot.com)
MakerBot Community Links (makerbot.com/blog/)
MakerBot Subreddit (reddit.com/r/makerbot/)
Printrbot Subreddit (reddit.com/r/printrbot/)

Printrbot Talk Forums (printrbottalk.com)
SeeMeCNC Forums (forum.seemecnc.com)
Solidoodle Forums (soliforum.com)
Solidoodle Subreddit (reddit.com/r/solidoodle/)
Ultimaker Forums (umforum.ultimaker.com)
Ultimaker Subreddit (reddit.com/r/ultimaker/)
Miscellaneous Resources
Here you’ll find a short list of websites related to 3D printing, but not directly. These will
be good for further reading and research for your 3D printing projects.
Instructables (instructables.com): This website has detailed instructions for many kinds
of DIY projects. A lot of these take advantage of 3D printing, and this can be a good place
to find ideas for 3D printing projects.
Make: (makezine.com): The online website for Make: magazine, which is a publication
for makers and tinkerers. The same company organizes Maker Faires, which are great
local events with lots of 3D printing booths and displays.
MakerBot Thingiverse (thingiverse.com): This is, by far, the largest and most active 3D
model repository that is specifically for 3D printing. As a user, you can download 3D
models, free of charge, to print on any 3D printer. You can also upload your own models
to share with others.
Serial Hobbyism (serialhobbyism.com): This is my personal website, where I post
articles on various hobbies (including 3D printing). If you still want to read more from me
after this book, be sure to check it out!

APPENDIX
C
Further Uses of 3D Printing
You’ve read through this entire book and even managed to reach the final appendix!
Obviously, you just can’t get enough of 3D printing. Luckily, there are a lot of uses for 3D
printing I haven’t gone into yet. Some of these require more than just a regular 3D printer,
while others are very new and experimental ways of using a 3D printer. Whatever the
case, most of these will also require additional research on your part. But this should give
you an idea of some more things you can do with your 3D printer now and potentially in
the future.
Your 3D Printer as an Intermediary
Process Tool
One way to take advantage of your 3D printer is to use it as an intermediary for other
creative processes. Think of it like how you use a mixer before using the oven when you
bake a cake. The 3D printer becomes just one tool in the process instead of doing
everything. Using this approach, you can get around the limitations of 3D printing,
especially when it comes to material options and producing large quantities of parts.
Investment Casting
Investment casting is an extremely old manufacturing technique. It’s the process of
making a part, surrounding it with a mold, and then pouring molten metal into the mold to
reproduce the part. The reason it’s called investment casting is because the original part is
lost during the process and the mold cannot be reused.
Traditionally, investment casting was done with a wax original part. The wax was easy to
work with, melted easily, and was cheap, allowing a person to make an intricate metal part
by first working with wax. Investment casting was (and is) very popular for making
jewelry.
But astonishingly, 3D printers are almost perfect for this process as well. You can design a
part in CAD, 3D print it in PLA, and use that printed part for investment casting. The
melting point of PLA is low enough that it’s suitable for investment casting.
With this process, you don’t need a wildly expensive SLS 3D printer to make metal parts.
Instead, you can just use your inexpensive hobby printer to print PLA parts, and then use
investment casting to make metal parts. This is a method that has been proven to work
very well and is actually relatively inexpensive.
So what do you need to actually do this? Well, first you need a way to melt the metal,
which is a job handled by a foundry. Aluminum foundries can be made at home for less

than $100. You’ll also need a handful of basic tools and safety equipment for handling the
molten metal. And finally, you’ll need some casting sand for making the molds
themselves.
All in all, you can pretty easily get set up for investment casting for just a couple hundred
dollars. Home metal foundries are usually only capable of handling aluminum (which has
a relatively low melting point), but that’s good enough for most hobbyists.
A whole book could be written on investment casting alone, but the basics are easy
enough to understand:
Once you’ve printed a part in PLA, fill a container about halfway full with your casting sand. There are many
formulas in use for the sand, but it’s generally normal sand mixed with some sort of binder, like plaster.
Push half the part into the sand, making sure all of the crevices of the part are filled in.
Fill the rest of the container with sand, with a sprue (which forms a channel) for pouring the metal and another to
vent the air and gases as the metal is poured.
Once the casting sand has had time to set (the time frame will vary dramatically depending on the sand formula),
remove the hardened block of sand from the forming container.
Using the foundry, melt the metal (usually aluminum for hobby casting) in a crucible. Once it’s molten, it can be
poured into the opening formed by the sprue. As it’s poured in, the molten metal will melt away the original PLA
part.
After the metal has cooled, the block of sand can be broken apart, and the metal part can be removed for finishing.
It may take some practice, but soon you’ll be able to make your own 3D metal parts at
home!
Mold Making and Resin Casting
3D printing is great for making a few parts, but what if you want to make many copies of
the same part? Investment casting destroys the original part and the mold, so it’s not a
good option if you want multiple copies. This is where mold making and resin casting
come in. They allow you to make many copies of a part by simply pouring molds. This is
a more time- and cost-effective method of creating duplicate parts than simply 3D printing
them.
The first way to go about this is to 3D print the mold itself (which is the negative). This
will require you to either use mold-making tools in CAD or manually model the mold in
CAD. With a model of the mold, you can simply 3D print it like any other part.

A one-piece mold for making a chocolate bunny.
Once you have your mold, you can use common hobby casting materials to make your
parts. However, not all materials will be suitable, because some will stick to the mold. But
many materials (such as silicone) can be used.
All you have to do is pour the liquid material into the mold and wait for it to set and cure.
Depending on the material, this could take anywhere from a few minutes to a couple of
days. Once it’s cured, you can just pull it out of the mold and start a new part.
The other way of casting adds an extra step but has a number of benefits. For this process
(often called resin casting), you print a normal part on your 3D printer exactly as you
normally would. You then use a flexible silicone mold-making rubber to make a mold
around the printed part (the positive). After the silicone has cured, you can remove the
original part and begin casting new parts by pouring resin into the silicone mold.
The benefits of the resin casting method are twofold: you can make many molds from a
single printed part which can be used simultaneously, and your final parts can be made
from a variety of materials. With the resin casting method, you can make your final parts
from materials like polyurethane, which is incredibly strong—and much stronger than the
original printed part.
Using Your Printer for Good
But maybe you’re not just looking for another way of making parts. Maybe you want to do
a little more, and maybe you’re even feeling philanthropic. As luck would have it, 3D
printing can help with that, too!
Charity Work

One of the most exciting things 3D printers are being used for right now is charity work.
One use in particular has grabbed the attention of many people: 3D printing prosthetics.
Traditionally, prosthetics have been very utilitarian and rather unwieldy. They’re
expensive and tend to be ill-fitting and difficult to use. Custom prosthetics have always
been much better, but they’re even more expensive and aren’t usually covered by medical
insurance.
That’s where 3D printing has come in. Under the direction of organizations like e-NABLE
(enablingthefuture.org), 3D printer owners have been able to give a hand to those in need
—literally. People with access to 3D printers can 3D print prosthetic hands and give them
to the people who need them.
All of the parts needed for a prosthetic hand, ready to print.
I can’t overstate how revolutionary this is. The prosthetics themselves are rapidly
becoming more and more advanced as they’re developed further. They can be customized
to fit the user perfectly. And, perhaps best of all, they’re very inexpensive to 3D print.
This has allowed those who have lost limbs to get high-quality prosthetics for free. And
those prosthetics aren’t junk either; in most cases, they’re much better than the prosthetics
they would have received through traditional avenues.
Perhaps most importantly, the e-NABLE project is hugely beneficial to children. Because
children grow so quickly, it’s difficult for them to get prosthetics that fit them as they
grow. But now they can receive new 3D printed prosthetics that fit them perfectly as they
get older.
So if you have any interest in giving back, I highly recommend you look into this project
(and others). With just a little bit of your time and few bucks worth of filament, you can
really make a difference in someone’s life.

Hackerspaces
If the idea of getting involved in making things with other people appeals to you, consider
joining a local hackerspace (hackerspaces.org) or makerspace in your area. Hackerspaces
are basically small community workspaces where members can use a variety of tools for
their own personal projects. The idea is pretty simple: tools are expensive, so why not
share them?
Most big cities in the United States have one or more hackerspaces, and it’s likely there is
one in your area. To join, you usually pay a monthly fee to gain access to the hackerspace.
Once you’re a member, you’ll have access to a wide range of tools like 3D printers, CNC
mills, laser cutters, welders, carpentry tools, and so on.
Additionally, this will give you a place to congregate with other like-minded people. You
can collaborate on projects, get help with challenging problems, and take classes to
expand your skill set. Some hackerspaces are focused on particular topics (like electronics
or metal working), while others are more general and have a little bit of everything.
If you do join a hackerspace and have a 3D printer, it’s certainly worth considering
bringing your 3D printer. They do use membership dues to purchase tools, but
hackerspaces are expensive to run. A lot of the tools there are owned by members or were
donated by members. Whether you decided to bring your 3D printer or not, hackerspaces
and makerspaces are a great way to get involved with people in your community.
Potential Applications for 3D Printing
So far, I’ve talked about things you can use your 3D printer for. But maybe you’re
interested in learning about some experimental uses of 3D printing currently in
development. If so, there are many interesting applications for 3D printing that are
currently being explored.
For now, these uses of 3D printing are still experimental and under development, but the
possibilities for improving people’s lives are very interesting. They’re still very new, but
as these technologies mature, you’ll start to see how they can truly affect people’s lives
around the world.
Printing Food
FFF is unique among 3D printing technologies, because the same basic concept that
allows an FFF printer to extruder molten plastic can also work for any other material that
can be liquefied and then solidified. If a substance can be liquefied, squeezed out of a
nozzle, and then solidified, it can theoretically be 3D printed using the FFF printing
process. That can even include food.
Why would anyone want to 3D print food? Right now, my impression is that it’s mostly a
matter of novelty. But there are some reasons why it could be more than just a curiosity.

One example of this is wedding cakes. Anyone who has ever had to shop for wedding
cakes knows that intricate detail in the decoration is highly sought after. Those decorations
are carefully crafted by hand by the baker, which can be difficult and time-consuming,
which means it’s expensive.
But what if those intricate decorations could be 3D printed? It’s possible to use an FFF 3D
printer to extrude icing onto a cake and to create complex decorations with the icing. In
fact, it’s already been done. Icing is stored in a tube which can be compressed to squeeze
the icing through a nozzle. Just like with a standard FFF printer, the icing can then be
layered to create 3D designs.
Cake decorations are just one example of 3D printing food, and admittedly it’s not likely
to change the world. But what if 3D printing could be used in an unconventional way that
does have the potential to change the world?
Creating Buildings
If you’ve ever seen a new building being constructed, you know it can take weeks or
months. First, a foundation needs to be poured. After that, a frame has to be constructed,
walls must be added, a roof needs to be built, siding has to be added, and so on. It’s a
lengthy and complicated process, and a lot of labor is needed for the construction. But
what if buildings themselves could be 3D printed?
That’s not only possible, but it’s already been done. It’s still very experimental, of course,
and is mostly being done to test the idea. But it is being done, and the idea has been
proven. The process works by extruding concrete, layer by layer, to form the structure of
the house.
The idea of 3D printing houses or other buildings has tremendous potential for changing
the world. For one, automating the process of construction means the labor needed is
greatly reduced. Also, a large-scale 3D printer can also run all day and night, reducing the
time it takes to construct a building.
The possibilities are almost limitless for this technology. Strong and durable homes can be
built quickly and cheaply without skilled labor. By mounting the concrete extruder on a
crane, the potential size of the 3D printed building is almost completely unrestricted.
Building plans can be easily reused, reducing the time and cost of designing them.
You can probably easily imagine the implications in third-world and developing countries.
Long-lasting homes and buildings could be constructed quickly and efficiently, making a
big difference in countries where families can’t afford homes constructed using traditional
means.
The potential for improving the living conditions of people around the world is fantastic.
But what if 3D printing could go even further? What if it could actually save lives?
Making Organs
Even the wealthiest countries in the world struggle with providing adequate health care to
their citizens. One complication in particular is holding back medical care: organ
transplants. Two problems make organ transplants especially difficult: finding organ

donors and rejection of the transplanted organ.
Finding an organ to transplant is problematic for obvious reasons: it requires a donor. For
some organs, like kidneys, the donor can be alive, but most people aren’t eager to part
with their organs. For others—like hearts, for example—the donor has to be deceased. In
both cases, it’s difficult to find a donor. Even if a donor is found, blood types have to
match between the donor and the recipient of the transplant (among other requirements).
After all of that has been done, it’s still possible for a transplanted organ to be rejected by
the recipient. The human body just isn’t too accepting of tissue that originated in another
body.
Luckily, researchers think 3D printing can solve both of these problems. The idea is that
tissue is harvested from the patient’s own body and used as the material to 3D print a new
organ. This means a donor isn’t needed, and also means that the patient’s body is likely to
accept the new organ. This possibility alone is enough to revolutionize medicine, but it
doesn’t stop there.
When pharmaceutical companies test new drugs or treatments, they need something to test
them on. Traditionally, this is done on animals or human patients, which can be risky for
both. But if living tissue can be 3D printed, it would be possible to ethically test drugs
without the risk of harming any humans or animals. It also means tissue can be printed
with a specific condition that the drug is designed to treat.
For example, if a pharmaceutical company wanted to develop a new treatment for cancer,
they could 3D print tissue with cancer. That would let them test the treatment on real
human tissue that has cancer without risking the well-being of an actual cancer patient.
Done on a large scale, this could dramatically reduce the time it takes to develop a new
drug while simultaneously increasing the effectiveness of that drug.

About the Author
Cameron Coward is a mechanical designer and 3D printing enthusiast. As a mechanical
designer, he has extensive experience with CAD, 3D printing, CNC milling, and
traditional manufacturing. On his self-run website, Serial Hobbyism
(serialhobbyism.com), he uses his professional and personal experience to teach readers
everything they need to know about starting new hobbies. When he’s not writing,
Cameron can be found working on projects in his workshop or in the mountains of
Colorado.

