

 
This edition is published by PICKLE PARTNERS PUBLISHING—www.picklepartnerspublishing.com
 
To join our mailing list for new titles or for issues with our books – picklepublishing@gmail.com
 
Or on Facebook
 
Text originally published in 1995 under the same title.
© Pickle Partners Publishing 2015, all rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system or transmitted by any means, electrical, mechanical or otherwise without the written permission of the
copyright holder.
Publisher’s Note
Although in most cases we have retained the Author’s original spelling and grammar to authentically reproduce the work of the Author and the original
intent of such material, some additional notes and clarifications have been added for the modern reader’s benefit.
We have also made every effort to include all maps and illustrations of the original edition the limitations of formatting do not allow of including larger
maps, we will upload as many of these maps as possible.

IGNORING THE OBVIOUS: COMBINED ARMS AND
FIRE & MANEUVER TACTICS PRIOR TO WORLD
WAR I
 
by
 
Major Thomas A. Bruno, United States Marine Corps

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Thesis
Discussion
Conclusions
I. INTRODUCTION
II. BACKGROUND: TECHNOLOGY, TACTICS, AND THE CHANGING NATURE OF WAR
III. A BAPTISM BY FIREPOWER:
III-A. The Russo-Japanese War (1904-05)—Infantry Tactics
III-B. POSITION INFANTRY AND THE BASE OF FIRE
III-C. INDIRECT-FIRE ARTILLERY & COMBINED ARMS
IV. THE SIEGE OF PORT ARTHUR:
Combined Arms and Small-Unit Maneuver
V. CONCLUSION
APPENDIX A: THE END OF AN ERA
The American Civil War (1861-1865)
APPENDIX B: BREAKING THE LINES
Wars of German Unification (1864-1871)
APPENDIX B: PART II—THE RISE OF THE CAPTAIN
Prussian Doctrine of Subordinate Initiative
APPENDIX B: PART III—LEADERSHIP BY DIRECTIVE
Weisungsführung
APPENDIX C: VICTORY THE HARD WAY
The Anglo-Boer War (1899-1902)
APPENDIX C: PART II—INTERPRETATIONS OF THE BOER WAR
Observations of Foreign Military Observers
APPENDIX D: TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Tactics & Techniques
Fires
Tactical Formations
Levels of War
Warfighting Doctrines/Philosophies
REQUEST FROM THE PUBLISHER
BIBLIOGRAPHY

NAPOLEONIC SKIRMISHER TACTICS
CIVIL WAR
WARS OF GERMAN UNIFICATION/PRUSSIAN DOCTRINE
ANGLO-BOER WAR
RUSSO-JAPANESE WAR
GENERAL SOURCES
DOCTRINAL PUBLICATIONS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Thesis
Fairly or unfairly, the stalemate on the First World War’s Western Front is often
attributed to the intellectual stagnation of the era’s military officers. This paper traces the
development (or absence of development) of combined arms and fire & maneuver tactics
and doctrine in the period prior to WW I, focusing on the Russo-Japanese War.

Discussion
The Western armies that entered the Great War seemingly ignored many of the hard-
learned lessons and observations of pre-war conflicts. Though World War I armies were
later credited with developing revolutionary wartime tactical-level advances, many
scholars claim that this phase of tactical evolution followed an earlier period of intellectual
stagnation that resulted in the stalemate on the war’s Western Front. This stalemate, they
claim, could have been avoided by heeding the admonitions of pre-war conflicts and
incorporating the burgeoning effects of technology into military tactics and doctrine. Some
go even further and fault the military leadership with incompetence and foolishness for not
adapting to the requirements of modern war.
The Russo-Japanese War showed the necessity for combined arms techniques and fire
and maneuver tactics on the modern battlefield. Specifically, the war showed the need for:
(1) the adoption of dispersed, irregular (non-linear) formations; (2) the employment of fire
and maneuver techniques and small unit-tactics, including base of fire techniques; (3) the
transition to indirect-fire artillery support to ensure the survivability of the batteries, and;
(4) the necessity for combined arms tactics to increase the survivability of assaulting
infantry and compensate for the dispersion of infantry firepower.
However, deeply ingrained concerns over the loss of control on the battlefield and faith
in the ability of morale to overcome firepower prevented the full realization of advanced
combined arms techniques and fire and maneuver tactics. Instead, the lessons of the
Russo-Japanese War were disregarded or minimized.

Conclusions
Military leaders did not ignore the lessons of the Russo-Japanese War. In fact, the
ramifications of increased firepower and rudimentary techniques of fire and maneuver
tactics were addressed in most nations’ pre-World War I doctrine. Unfortunately, these
concepts were not fully developed or practiced due to a failure to recognize a change to
the fundamental nature of warfare itself. Massive firepower necessitated a new system of
warfare. To effect this type of transformation, the entire military culture—equipment,
doctrine, organization, and leadership— would have to evolve. Lamentably, the hard-
earned lessons of the Boer and Russo-Japanese Wars had not prompted such a
reformation. It would take the cataclysm of the First World War to act as a catalyst for this
transformation.
In summary, most military officers recognized the lethality of modern weaponry prior
to the First World War but consciously decided that offensive spirit and morale could
overwhelm firepower.
“… bullets quickly write new tactics.”[1]—Lieutenant General Wilhelm Balck, 1922
“Our long garrison life has spoiled us, and effeminacy and desire for and love of pleasure, have weakened our
military virtues. The entire nation must pass through the School of Misfortune, and we shall either die in the crises, or a
better condition will be created, after we have suffered bitter misery, and after our bones have decayed.”[2]—Field
Marshal von Gneisenau, 1806
“I am not at all interested in that silly nonsense you have shown me. Crawling around, taking cover, camouflage and
indirect-fire: I don’t understand these things and don’t care a dime. I’d like to see a dashing regiment, galopping [sic]
onto the battlefield, taking up positions and firing quickly!”[3]—Field Marshal Carl Tersztyansky de Nados, 1911

I. INTRODUCTION
“The horrors of the First World War—the machine guns, trench tactics, barbed wire and pounding artillery—came
as a ghastly surprise to the generals. Yet they should, and could, have known better. In 1904 Japan and Russia had gone
to war for dominance of the East. Journalists and military attaches had made meticulous observations, but the lessons of
this dramatic conflict were dismissed as irrelevant.”[4]
Nearly every historical study of the First World War contains a commentary alluding to
the effects of increased firepower and technology on the nature of warfare. In 1922,
German General Wilhelm Balck wrote, “Bullets quickly write new tactics.”[5] However,
most historical analyses of World War I would have the reader believe that the pre-war era
did not bear out his adage. The Western armies that entered the Great War seemingly
ignored many of the hard-learned lessons and observations of pre-war conflicts. Though
World War I armies were later credited with developing revolutionary wartime tactical-
level advances,[6] many scholars claim that this phase of tactical evolution followed an
earlier period of intellectual stagnation that resulted in the stalemate on the war’s Western
Front. This stalemate, they claim, could have been avoided by heeding the admonitions of
pre-war conflicts and incorporating the burgeoning effects of technology into military
tactics and doctrine. Some go even further and fault the military leadership with
incompetence and foolishness for not adapting to the requirements of modern war.
As early as the American Civil War (1861-1865) several indicators warned that the
nature of warfare was changing due to the developments of new technology. The Wars of
German Unification (1864-71)[7], especially the Franco-Prussian War (1870-71),
confirmed that the face of warfare had transformed sufficiently to require new tactics and
doctrine. Though some reforms were implemented, the fundamentals of Napoleonic battle
were still commonly practiced.[8] Later, lessons derived from the Anglo-Boer War (1899-
1902) and Russo-Japanese War (1904-5), caused several military organizations to enact
further reforms. These later conflicts demonstrated the devastating effect of increased
firepower. Both wars witnessed the evolution of decentralized small-unit infantry tactics,
rudimentary fire and maneuver methods, and basic combined arms techniques—with
small groups of soldiers led by junior officers and NCOs, advancing in irregular
formations under the cover of closely coordinated artillery cover— to overcome the
lethality of the modern battlefield.
The most basic change required was the evolution of infantry doctrine beyond the
traditional usage of skirmish line tactics. Dispersion, decentralization, and small-unit
maneuver were necessary for attacking infantry to advance through the enemy defensive

zone. Yet, at the outset of the World War, it was not uncommon for both the Allied and
Central Power armies to employ dense, close-order attack columns.[9] [10]
Even prior to the First World War, the Russo-Japanese War demonstrated the need for a
firepower ‘solution’ to the problem of covering the infantry as it advanced across the fire-
swept defensive zone. Now more than ever before, organic and supporting fires were
critical to suppressing enemy defensive firepower during the infantry advance.
Specifically, the Boer and Manchurian conflicts witnessed the development of basic fire
and maneuver techniques by employing position infantry— acting as an embryonic base
of fire—to support the maneuver of infantry attacks. In the years prior to World War I,
several nations directed the employment of position infantry in their tactical doctrines. In
later years, the German army would expand small-unit decentralization and base of fire
concepts into an advanced fire and maneuver tactical system.
Artillery support was also needed to provide accurate fires to cover the maneuver of
dispersed attacking units. This coordination was made more difficult by the war’s
transition from direct to indirect-fire artillery support. The dispersion of artillery batteries
and increased distance from the frontlines, combined with the era’s primitive
communications technology, made the facilitation of combined arms and massed fires
more difficult. Although most nations attempted to ameliorate the situation by establishing
a system of forward observers with special communications and signaling techniques, the
majority of combined arms coordination issues would remain unsolved until after the
outbreak of World War I.
The overall solution to crossing the fire-swept zone would demand more than merely
modifying of infantry tactics and artillery firing techniques alluded to above. Specifically,
it would require precise coordination between the artillery and infantry arms—namely,
combined arms. Artillery fires were critical in suppressing enemy defensive fires during
the infantry advance. Additionally, supporting fires were necessary to compensate for the
dilution of firepower resulting from the dispersion of infantry formations.
Several observers noted the aforementioned implications of modern war. Several of
these observations were codified into written military doctrine. Unfortunately, it would
take the catastrophic losses of the First World War’s early campaigns to act as a catalyst
for substantive change in military doctrine and tactics. Apparently, observations involving
the application of advanced warfighting techniques to overcome the effects of firepower
were not fully heeded prior to the outbreak of the Great War. The lessons of this oversight
remain applicable to modern military institutions—the ability to recognize the

implications of technology on warfare and the need for tactical and doctrinal
transformation remains critical to present-day military officers. Accordingly, studying the
reaction of pre-World War I armies to the developments of the Russo-Japanese and Boer
Wars remains cogent to contemporary military organizations.

II. BACKGROUND: TECHNOLOGY, TACTICS, AND THE CHANGING
NATURE OF WAR
The nineteenth century witnessed several phases of technological advancement. The
first phase of technological progress occurred in the mid-nineteenth century and saw
drastic 
improvements 
in 
the 
effectiveness 
of 
weaponry, 
transportation, 
and
communications. Scholars cite the advent of rifled weapons, breech-loading armament,
railroads, and the telegraph as examples of new technology available on the battlefield.
[11] Accordingly, many historians describe the American Civil War as the first major war
in the Industrial Age.[12] These innovations had profound effects on the Napoleonic
tactics still being practiced by most military organizations. Increased firepower resulted in
the expansion of skirmisher tactics and an emphasis on flanking maneuvers. However,
most armies stubbornly clung to close-order tactics as the primary battle formation in the
post-war years.[13]
A second phase of technology surfaced in the late nineteenth century. This period
brought about military advances that perfected the earlier innovations of the century.
Inventions such as magazine-fed repeating rifles, quick-firing artillery, machineguns, and
smokeless powder, combined to further increase the lethality of firepower.[14] Some
military observers believed that the ramifications of the magazine-rifle’s flat trajectory,
smokeless powder, and quick-firing artillery had a greater impact than the previous
emergence of the breechloader. Specifically, the use of smokeless powder and the
magazine-rifle extended the zone of lethal fire from 500 yards (of the previous
breechloaders) to 900 yards in front of the defensive line. Combined with the higher rates
of fire, it made this area “practically impassible.” Direct, frontal attacks against entrenched
troops were now considered “suicidal” by some officers.[15]
The combined effects of these military advances made offensive attacks risky and
further strengthened the advantages of a defensive military posture. The requirement for
proficient staff planning became absolutely essential due to the devastating effects of
defensive firepower. Staffs were necessary to ensure coordination between the different
service arms within the army. Although most military organizations were slow to
recognize the importance of combined arms—the complete coordination of all service
arms and support organizations—the concept was to become essential to modern warfare.
[16]

By studying the American Civil War and the Wars of German Unification, some
officers had identified the tactical implications of the first phase of the Industrial Age.
These conflicts highlighted the lethal effects of the rifled-musket and breechloader and
signaled the end for antiquated close-order tactics. Later, the Anglo-Boer War and the
Russo-Japanese War demonstrated the necessity of combined arms due to the
enhancements of the second phase of technology. The tactical lessons of the South African
and Russo-Japanese Wars should have established the requirement for combined arms to
support modern infantry attacks.[17]

III. A BAPTISM BY FIREPOWER:
III-A. The Russo-Japanese War (1904-05)—Infantry Tactics
The Russo-Japanese War has often been described as a prelude to the trench warfare of
the First World War. The battlefields of the Manchurian campaign were strikingly similar
to those of the First World War’s Western Front. For the first time in the modern era,
opposing trench lines were constructed—fortified with barbed wire, machineguns,
minefields, and massive artillery formations. For instance, the Battles on the Sha-ho saw
trench lines that stretched for 200 miles, separated in some areas by mere yards.[18] World
War I stormtroopers would later operate in similar surroundings.
Both Russia and Japan entered the war with traditional military doctrine and tactics.
The Russian army’s doctrine was based on the venerable principles of Dragomirow—
employing dense skirmish lines to maintain a high volume of fire. The Russian army
utilized dense formations to achieve firepower superiority and the shock effect of the final
bayonet charge. Both nations had yet to fully incorporate the lessons of the Boer War—
namely, the importance of massed fires combined with the dispersion of manpower. In the
case of Russia, even the basic lessons of the Franco-Prussian War had yet to be instituted.
[19] The Japanese, mentored by German army officers, possessed a more flexible
command system than their Russian adversaries. The Japanese army adopted the German
principle of Auftragstaktik,[20] which contributed to their ability to rapidly adapt to the
effects of the modern battlefield.[21] Successful Japanese infantry tactics developed
during the Russo-Japanese War underscored the fact that modern combat now depended
upon an army’s ability to “clearly [act] according to circumstances, without regulation
formations, and without official basis.”[22]
The harsh reality of modern firepower would force progressive thinking military
officers to devise the tactical innovations mentioned previously—irregular, dispersed
infantry tactics, rudimentary base of fire tactics, combined arms tactics, and the
coordination of indirect-fire artillery support with infantry maneuver. In order to penetrate
the fire-swept battle zone, both nations would be forced to modify their tactics (albeit
more slowly for the Russians) to compensate for enemy firepower. Though both nations
modified their tactics during the war, the Japanese army’s flexible command and control
doctrine must be credited with allowing them to adapt to modern war more rapidly than
the Russians. By war’s end, the Japanese had adopted revolutionary tactics employing

small groups of soldiers in irregular formations—crawling, running, and rushing across
the battlefield—to take fortified enemy positions. Though less frequently observed,
rudimentary infantry base of fire techniques were also devised to support infantry
maneuver. Beyond adopting irregular, dispersed formations, Japanese assaults were now
closely coordinated with artillery covering fire, precisely timed to support the infantry
maneuver element.
The most basic tactical evolution necessary to counter the increased firepower of the
modern battlefield was the dispersion of infantry formations. Unfortunately, Russian pre-
war doctrine was founded in shock tactics and bayonet charges rather than the
concentration of firepower. To achieve a density of firepower and shock effect, formations
with narrow frontages were commonly employed. Units arrayed in close-order were
(theoretically) expected to overwhelm the enemy.[23] [24] Early in the conflict, German
observers noted the Russian reliance on close-order shock action, rather than fire
superiority, to be decisive in battle:
“Instead of insisting upon a thorough individual training of the men for fire action, strict education in fire discipline,
and proper warlike practice in directing fire action and in handling troops, the Russian regulations expected success from
obsolete shock tactics without sufficient use of skirmishers and without enough preparation by fire.”[25]
In actuality, Russian written doctrine espoused the employment of extended-order
skirmisher formations, but their application was generally ignored due to perceived
difficulties in command.[26]
The effects of technology had greatly extended the ranges of most weapons.
Consequently, it was commonplace for artillery to engage targets as far as 6,000 to 7,000
yards. This occurrence had several implications for attacking infantry. Now, even rear
areas were susceptible to enemy long-range artillery fire, especially in observable terrain.
Tactical necessity forced Russian troops to deploy early into chain (skirmisher)
formations, especially when in open terrain within range of enemy artillery. (It became a
general rule to deploy companies into skirmish lines at ranges as far as 3,500 yards, but no
farther than 2,300 yards from the enemy). Due to the accuracy of Japanese artillery, close-
order movement in observed terrain became “absolutely impossible.” Heavy rifle fire
restricted the maneuver of dense infantry formations. Whereas Russian infantry
regulations stated that the range of effective rifle fire began at 1,000 to 1,400 yards from
the enemy, the lethal effects of Japanese rifle fire extended to ranges over 2,300 yards.
Inside of 1,100 yards, rifle fire became withering. (One source estimated that Japanese
rifle fire caused eighty-five percent of Russian combat losses during the Manchurian
campaign).[27]

Eventually, high rates of accurate rifle fire forced the Russians to modify their infantry
tactics. Often, entire battalions, not only companies, deployed into skirmisher formations.
However, Russian tactics remained reliant on dense intervals to maintain high rates of fire
in the attack. Russian officers preferred to put all available men into the firing line. At the
small-unit level, the Russians believed that infantry reserves were of minimal importance
since they often incurred casualties during the advance without contributing to the
firepower of the unit. Thus, all available men were deemed necessary to bolster the firing
line. As a result, company reserves were not regularly maintained, leaving regimental
reserves as the lowest level of tactical reinforcement.[28]
Ideally, Russian skirmish lines advanced at a run, taking maximum advantage of
terrain. Russian regulations stated that the firing line should rapidly advance to final firing
positions (located approximately 300-500 paces from the enemy lines) to form for a
bayonet attack. Though Russian officers still believed firmly that the bayonet charge
remained the final decisive action of infantry combat, they also realized that to be
successful final firing positions needed to be much closer to the enemy lines than
stipulated in the regulations. As a result, the final firing position prior to the bayonet
charge was usually located in a covered area in close proximity to the enemy lines.
Sometimes this distance was a mere fifteen to twenty paces from the enemy position. At
longer distances, the bayonet charge usually resulted in failure and excessive casualties.
[29] Thus, infantry necessarily relied upon a combination of fire and movement and
firepower (organic and supporting) to support the advance to their final attack positions.
But, because the final bayonet charge would be virtually unsupported by fires, its distance
had to be necessarily shortened.
Nevertheless, most Russian officers doubted claims that positions could be taken by
fire alone, and still believed that the bayonet attack remained the decisive method to
overtake an enemy position.[30] The experiences in Manchuria confirmed the Russian’s
faith in bayonet charges to overwhelm the enemy and solidify the morale of friendly
soldiers.[31] (Prior to the Russo-Japanese war, some military thinkers correctly theorized
that the increased accuracy, range, and rate of fire had made the bayonet charge
unnecessary. However, during the Russo-Japanese War, most military observers noted that
bayonet charges, in both day and night attacks, were often employed to carry the final
decisive battle action).[32]
Notwithstanding, the Russians seemed to adapt more slowly to the ramifications of
modern war. During the Russian attack on Mo-tien Ling (17 July 1904) the troops of the

10th and 24th East Siberian Regiments were formed in close-order formations to advance on
the Japanese defensive positions. The Japanese capitalized on the vulnerable target and
halted the advance.[33] As late as the attack on Wu-chang-ying and Chaing-liang-pu (14
October 1904), two regiments of the Russian 6th Siberian Corps attacked in antiquated
close-order formations. Amazingly, the battalions were formed up and inspected in parade
fashion, in full view of the waiting Japanese garrison. The formation marched at quick-
time without any extension of the ranks. Outside of seven hundred yards from the
Japanese position the Russians formed into a single battle line and continued the advance,
as if on parade. The Japanese defenders easily repulsed the exposed infantrymen, taking a
heavy toll of Russian casualties. After the failure of the first attempt, two battalions of the
Russian brigade reserves attacked in the same fashion. The follow-on attack met the same
fate as the first, (with one regiment alone losing nearly 2,000 men).[34] Amazingly, one of
the same regiments had attacked a strong Japanese position using the same outdated
tactics only two days earlier (on 12 October). The 219th Yukhnov Regiment attacked a
position occupied by six Japanese infantry battalions and supported by eleven artillery
batteries. At 600 yards, the Japanese opened fire with several thousand rifles and sixty-six
guns, decimating the Russian regiment. The Yukhnov Regiment lost twenty-two officers
and 832 men, a quarter of its strength, in mere minutes. As a result of its horrendous losses
in the two aforementioned battles, the regiment was rendered combat ineffective.[35]
The Russians did, on occasion, successfully employ irregular infantry tactics, though
less frequently than the Japanese. On their attack on One Tree Hill (16 October 1904),
Russian batteries disregarded the Japanese artillery and focused on enemy infantry
positions. Russian infantry advanced to the base of the Japanese-held hill in groups of four
to five men. The infantry regrouped in the dead area at the foot of the hill and conducted a
successful attack. Though their advance was later checked, the tactical execution of their
assault was successful. Additionally, the Russian tactics demonstrated both the
effectiveness of concentrating artillery fire on enemy infantry (rather than artillery) during
an attack, and the usefulness of small-unit maneuver under fire.[36]
Heavy losses at the outset of the war also caused the Japanese to alter their infantry
tactics. Early on, they abandoned European-style drill book maneuvers in favor of stealthy
advances and infantry rushes.[37] The Japanese quickly realized that fire superiority, not
shock power, was the key to modern infantry attacks.[38] Japanese infantry were initially
formed in dense skirmish lines (with an interval of one pace) to achieve a heavy
concentration of fire. Demonstrating basic fire and movement tactics, the infantry advance

was conducted by a series of rushes. Platoon-sized units (zugs), from the flanks of the
skirmish line, normally executed the initial rushes. The remaining two platoons provided
covering fire during the movement. The alternating rushes were designed to advance the
line forward in sections, with two-thirds of the unit engaging in covering fire during the
advance. [39]
The length of each rush depended on the terrain and tactical situation, especially enemy
fire. At each successive position, the Japanese soldiers constructed hasty entrenchments in
the prone position to shield them from enemy fire. In order to reduce casualties at closer
ranges, individual soldiers, located near the enemy flanks, normally executed the final
advance. If the enemy’s front was narrow, the doctrinal reaction was to maneuver to flank
the position while a pinning force attacked frontally. When attacking broad frontages, the
Japanese attempted to pierce the enemy line.[40]
If the firing line encountered severe fire, they would often halt the advance, entrench,
and await reinforcement. Supports followed the advancing skirmish lines at ranges of 100
to 150 meters behind the skirmish line. When the advance recommenced, the remaining
supports would trace the firing line, making use of the hasty field works previously
constructed by the skirmishers. If necessary, the skirmish line would conduct additional
series of hasty trench lines during their advance in order to maintain their positions. As the
skirmish line conducted its successive rushes, supports would occupy their abandoned
trench lines. Likewise, reserves occupied the positions last vacated by the supports. The
advance continued in this manner until the enemy position was overrun.[41]
One Russian defensive tactic was to allow the Japanese to approach within 100 to 200
paces and then discharge a lethal, concentrated volley-fire.[42] Often, this was when the
Japanese advance stalled and needed reinforcement. Correspondingly, the Japanese
devised a defensive tactic of falling back from their prepared positions to repulse Russian
attacks. During the Russians’ final charge, Japanese soldiers would then fire on the
advancing enemy soldiers while they negotiated their abandoned trench line.[43]
To compensate for the high losses sustained by attacks, the inducement to conduct
night attacks increased.[44] The Japanese made extensive use of night attacks, especially
to compensate for the vulnerability of attacking over open terrain. The attack normally
commenced with an artillery bombardment, followed by a pre-dawn assault. Several feints
preceded the main attack to deceive the enemy of the main objective and cause him to
commit his reserves.[45]
In the first major land action of the war, the Battle of the Yalu (1 May 1904), it became

obvious that traditional, linear infantry tactics were obsolete. Initially, the Japanese
advanced in extended-order (with a 1-2 pace interval in accordance with their regulations
—later in the war, they would extend the interval to as much as five yards, depending on
the battlefield situation). However, Russian infantry replied with rifle volley-fire as the
skirmish line approached 1,500 to 1,200 paces, causing the Japanese advance to lose its
organization. Although highly disorganized, the Japanese infantry pressed the advance and
succeeded in forcing the Russians from their trench lines. The Japanese overall attack was
extremely successful and resulted in a Russian retreat.[46][47] Although the Battle of the
Yalu was a Japanese success, their high losses demonstrated that rigid, linear tactics would
no longer be practicable.
The Japanese quickly modified their tactics in reaction to heavy losses by employing
extended-order and irregular formations. For example, during the Japanese advance on
Chiao-tou (July 1904, prior to the above engagement), the soldiers of the 23rd Brigade
moved forward in extended-order formation, with small sections of ten men or less
rushing forward.[48] By the time of their initial engagements near Liaoyang (30 August
1904), the Japanese infantry were observed crawling behind high-growing crops (kao-
liang) to conceal their movements. During an attack on Hill 1030, units advanced using
company rushes of 100-yard intervals.[49] As the Manchurian campaign matured, the
devastating effects of firepower became even more apparent. Dispersion and irregular
formations became a common characteristic of Japanese assault tactics. For example, in
the attacks to recapture Yen-tao-niu-lu (12 October 1904) the Japanese could not
maneuver across the bullet-swept fields, even using section rushes. The infantry reverted
to crossing the danger area in groups of two’s and three’s.[50]
General Sir Ian Hamilton, a British observer, later described the innovative tactics
utilized by the Japanese on an assault at Temple Hill (11 October 1904, during the battles
on the Sha-ho). His commentary was an accurate description of the Japanese proclivity to
disregard traditional formations in favor of aggressive fire and movement tactics:
“At the first glance it seemed as if there was no order or arrangement in this charge of a brigade over 500 or 600
yards of open plough. But suddenly I realised [British spelling] that it was not chance but skill which had distributed the
pawns so evenly over the chess board [sic]. The crowd, apparently so irregular and loosely knit together, consisted of
great numbers of sections and half-sections and groups working independently, but holding well together, each in one
little line under its own officer or non-commissioned officer. There was no regular interval … inasmuch as the formation
was not solid but exceedingly flexible and loose, offering no very valuable target even to a machine gun.”[51]
General Hamilton’s observations noted the rapidly executed attacks of Japanese
General Okasaki’s 15th Brigade. Okasaki’s infantry assault (described above) charged

through a 600-yard open field directly in front of Russian positions. Three successive
skirmish lines were formed with approximately a three pace interval between men. The
lines charged aggressively without regard for maintaining alignment or formation. The
amazing speed of the advance was credited with quickly overwhelming the Russian
defenders and demonstrated the willingness of the Japanese to employ dispersed, irregular
formations.[52]
General Okasaki executed the same type of attack the next day. During an attack on the
heights of Orr-wa the next morning (12 October 1904), he once again ordered a rapid
charge across another 600-yard field in front of the Russian positions. Once again, the
Japanese infantry overwhelmed the Russian defenders. On both occasions, observers
noted that the attackers halted infrequently during their charges.[53] [54] The German
Official History offered a testament to Okasaki’s tactics at Temple Hill stating, “Nowhere
on the field of attack were column formations seen which would have offered favourable
targets to the Russian artillery on the flanks.”[55] [British translator’s spelling]
The aforementioned tactics show a shift to small-unit, irregular formations (and the
utilization of combined arms to enable their advance). However, when in open terrain
facing lightly fortified positions, the Japanese reverted to doctrinal skirmisher-line tactics.
At Chaohuatun, (in a battle that precipitated the Russian retreat from Mukden), the
Japanese formed into skirmish lines with an interval of only one pace. Japanese artillery
supported the battle by commencing counter-battery fire prior to the infantry attack. The
artillery also targeted the Russian lines. From 13:45 to 18:55 the Japanese infantry slowly
advanced under the cover of artillery fire from its initial positions located only 600 yards
from the Russian lines. The skirmish line advanced, by a series of 50 to 100 yard-long
rushes, constructing hasty trenches at each successive position. It was noted by observers
that most of the Japanese casualties were received during the long halts at the hasty trench
lines (by enemy rifle and artillery fire). Only small numbers of men fell during the actual
rushes. During the infantry advance, the Japanese artillery maintained a high rate of fire,
focusing on the Russian lines. The batteries also echeloned forward to maximize its
support. As the friendly infantry approached 150 yards of the enemy lines, the Japanese
batteries shifted their fire to the Russian rear areas.[56]
Once again, the close coordination resulting from combined arms effects contributed to
the Japanese success. Concentration of fires at the correct time and place supported the
infantry assault. Arguably, the combined arms interaction facilitated the Japanese success
even though the infantry employed conventional, linear skirmisher tactics. U.S. military

observers reported that:
“… the war was conducted by both sides along strictly orthodox lines. The formation of the infantry for the attack,
the massing of the guns, and the concentration of their fire, the value of field fortifications, the siege of permanently
fortified localities, and so many other features, all savor strongly of the text-book … the recognized rules and principles
for conducting warfare underwent no serious modifications in their application.”[57]
Though the observer noted the proficiency of the Japanese at modern war, he missed
one crucial observation. The Japanese had not merely mastered the already existing
doctrine of modern warfare. Japanese infantry assaults, at times, displayed the rudiments
of combined arms attacks that would become a pillar of future tactical doctrines.
Additionally, although the Japanese only rarely exhibited true fire and maneuver infantry
tactics, they saw the necessity under specific circumstances, to disregard doctrinal
skirmisher formations and employ irregular formations consisting of small groups of men.
Apparently, the Japanese infantry’s return to the skirmish line formations on the open
terrain surrounding Mukden skewed military observations. Unfortunately, the U.S.
observer’s report missed the points that were to become the main lessons of the
Manchurian conflict, stating:
“The great dispersion which was threatened by the lessons of the Boer war found no application in Japanese tactics.
The intervals in the firing line were kept at a pace or pace and a half, a rather close formation theoretically, for modern
weapons, but giving a volume of fire sufficient to cope with that of the defense. The Japanese showed that the frontal
attacks by infantry over open ground are still feasible when made by good troops, well handled, and supported by an
adequate artillery fire.”[58]
However, this commentary is not entirely accurate. While the observation correctly
assesses some of the requirements to conduct a successful attack, it does not credit the
Japanese tactics for the adaptations they displayed in many of the aforementioned
examples. In several cases, the Japanese were forced to abandon contemporary tactics in
search of increased dispersion. In these instances, the Japanese tactics seemed remarkably
similar to the tactics eventually devised by the British during the Boer War. Even more
importantly, these same principles of combined arms and fire and maneuver would later
serve as the foundation of German small-unit stormtroop tactics of World War I.
The success of improvised infantry tactics did have an impact on post-war doctrine.
However, pre-First World War doctrine remained trapped in a transitional stage between
full acceptance of dispersed fire-tactics—dependent on firepower, combined arms, and
small-unit maneuver—and the desire to maintain the control of traditional linear-based
tactics. In an effort to maintain a superiority of fire, American regulations showed a
marked increase in the attention given to the coordination of supporting arms and base of
fire techniques. However, dense skirmish lines were wrongly preserved in an effort to

achieve a concentration of rifle fire.
For example, the fledgling fire and maneuver tactics listed in the American Field
Service Regulations, 1913 (FSR, 1913) contained incompatible guidance. The FSR
directed that gaining a superiority of fire required “the placing of as many rifles as
possible on the firing line …” Accordingly, the regulations directed that thin skirmisher
lines be formed in sections assigned supporting attacks. However, the main effort was to
be carried out by heavy skirmish lines in order to achieve a concentration of firepower at
the decisive area. Disregarding the lessons of the Boer and Russo-Japanese Wars, the FSR
directed that the decisive points of the skirmish line be made “as dense as possible”.
However, the regulations gave the commander the flexibility to advance in “any
formation” he deemed appropriate to the situation to minimize casualties while still
accomplishing the mission—to include advancing by rushes. In contrast, other sections of
the FSR stubbornly clung to admonitions about “maintaining the integrity of the attacking
line and the vigor of the troops”, consistent with traditional skirmish-line tactics.[59]
Other nations were also experiencing a transition period. In both Britain and France, a
doctrinal struggle ensued between fire-tactics and the spirit of the offensive. One school
believed that believed that morale and discipline, imbued in an offensive clan was a “sure
antidote to fire-power.”[60] [British spelling] Even General Hamilton, highly experienced
in modern combat, stated:
“War is essentially the triumph, not of a chassepot over a needle gun, not of a line of men entrenched behind wire
entanglements and fire-swept zones over men exposing themselves in the open, but of one will over another weaker
will.”[61]
In lieu of developing a firepower solution to cover the final assault, following the
Russo-Japanese War most military organizations acknowledged the expanded necessity
for such military expedients as feints and night attacks. Like Japanese tactics, these
methods sought to circumvent the deadliness of direct, daylight assaults by employing the
cover of night movements.[62] The FSR, 1913 incorporated several of these lessons. The
regulations contained the addition of an entire section devoted to the details of night
attacks. The FSR listed five cases when a night attack should be considered. Recognizing
the lethality of modern firepower, two of the five cases listed were: “to gain ground over a
fire-swept zone” and “to make an assault with minimum loss.” Another lesson of the
Manchurian campaign was incorporated in the FSRs’ recommendation to deceive the
enemy as to the location of the main objective by conducting false attacks and
demonstrations along the front.[63] Obviously, military theorists were prescribing
methods of avoiding direct, daylight assaults rather than devising the tactics necessary to

support them with fire.
Only small numbers of officers pressed for reforms based on firepower. For example,
as early as 1912 British Brigadier-General Ivor Maxse believed that modern firepower
demanded the dispersion of unit frontages. Dispersed formations would necessarily
require small sections to serve as the new base unit, led by NCOs. Rapid firing weapons
gave small-units sufficient firepower to survive.[64] The Commandant of the French War
School, General Jean Colin, (though still advocating the retention of skirmish lines), also
realized that future combat would be conducted by squads of soldiers led by junior officers
and NCOs. As early as 1912, he foresaw that, “The fighting front [would] no longer
consist of a continuous line of men firing, but rather a certain number of groups or
swarms, each led by a non-commissioned officer.” Though the use of such light infantry
‘swarm’ (or ‘horde’) tactics pre-dated Napoleonic times, General Colin’s observations
demonstrate his awareness of the need for dispersion on the modern battlefield.[65]
Unfortunately, most senior officers were still concerned with strengthening the firing
line to achieve high volumes of fire through troop density.[66] Thus, armies attempted to
ameliorate the deficiencies of the Boer and Russo-Japanese Wars using offensive tactics,
morale, and discipline—rather than a revised system of doctrine and tactics based on the
principle of ‘maneuver’ elements supported by a separate ‘firepower’ element.

III-B. POSITION INFANTRY AND THE BASE OF FIRE
Dispersed infantry tactics could not in themselves overcome all the problems caused by
modern technology on the battlefield. In fact, extended formations had several inherent
disadvantages. Even conventional skirmisher formations used during the Russo-Japanese
War had revealed several limitations of the traditional command and control systems. The
dispersion of extended-order formations, combined with battlefield disorder, made control
of maneuver and fire discipline extremely difficult. Officers noted that small-unit control
became increasingly difficult due to individual and section rushes associated with
skirmisher tactics.[67] However, it was noted that a showering of bullets in general areas
made up for accuracy that was lost at longer ranges and during infantry rushes. Thus, it
soon became obvious that the mass of fire in modern battle was more critical than the
accuracy of fire.[68] This realization led to an extremely important tactical evolution—the
development of rudimentary base of fire techniques. Massed fire was now necessary to
suppress defenders during the infantry advance. Position infantry located to the rear or
flanks of the advance, could provide concentrated covering fire to support the infantry
advance.
Arguably, the employment of this rudimentary base of fire technique was the most
advanced infantry tactic devised during the war. The utilization of a base of fire went
beyond the passive technique of dispersing assault formations and actually projected
firepower on the enemy. The base of fire employed organic firepower to cover the
movement of advancing troops as they advanced close to the enemy lines (at the critical
moment when the support artillery and mortar fires were usually shifted or ceased).
During the First World War, the German army would later employ the base of fire concept
extensively in its development of stormtroop tactics. Assault forces were designated as
maneuver (or shock) elements and a supporting fire element to cover the advancing forces.
[69] Thus, the rudimentary base of fire techniques employed during the Russo-Japanese
War can be seen as pre-cursors of advanced fire and maneuver tactics.
Even before the Russo-Japanese War, British theorist Colonel G. F. R. Henderson (as
early as 1902), recommended using long-range infantry fire to cover advancing infantry.
The British technique directed a portion of infantry be held back during an attack to
provide covering fire while the maneuver element executed the attack. This infantry
detachment would employ rifle and machinegun fire from positions as distant as 2,000
yards with the assistance of telescopes, field glasses, and tripods.[70] It was believed that
long-range rifle fire could be more accurate and reliable than artillery support for covering

fire. Also, the British advocated firing artillery and rifle fire over the heads of friendly
infantry when necessary. Henderson summarized the combined arms concept, stating
“long-range rifle fire is an important auxiliary to the artillery in covering the advance of
attacking infantry.”[71]
During the Manchurian conflict, base of fire techniques proved critical in providing
covering fire for assaults against prepared positions. For example, in the engagements to
penetrate the fortifications surrounding Liaoyang the Japanese encountered heavy artillery
and rifle fire from the Russian defenders. Japanese tactics were adjusted accordingly.
During their (31 August, 1904) attack on the Liaoyang fords, the Japanese commander
positioned an entire infantry battalion on an elevated ridgeline to provide covering fire for
the maneuver element’s assault. This battalion served as a rudimentary base of fire.
Additionally, a preparatory artillery barrage of shrapnel and high explosive ordnance was
delivered prior to the commencement of the attack to support the infantry assault.[72]
Thus, as early as Liaoyang the Japanese showed a propensity to employ embryonic base of
fire and combined arms techniques.
Likewise, at an engagement near Hill 774 (12 October 1904) examples of rudimentary
fire and maneuver and base of fire techniques were displayed to overcome the density of
enemy rifle fire. Under the cover of a night advance, Japanese infantry approached to
within forty yards of the enemy line. Using whistle commands to control the maneuver,
the Japanese skirmish line fell to the prone positions and opened a high rate of fire. Under
the cover of this fire, one section from the rear supports was directed to assault the flanks
of the position. Although the Japanese suffered a high rate of casualties, the position was
taken.[73]
Though the Russians were slow to adapt to modern combat, fledgling small-unit fire
and maneuver tactics gradually evolved in reaction to intense enemy firepower and the
rolling terrain in Manchuria. For example, one Russian officer documented a
recommended method for an infantry section (approximately thirty men) to provide
covering fire for the movements of two other sections. One section provided covering fire
while the other two sections maneuvered through an exposed area.[74] This technique
demonstrated the increased importance of suppression fire to protect the movement of
troops in open terrain. Observers also reported that the Russians employed long-range rifle
fire to support infantry attacks. However, the reports claimed that this fire was largely
ineffective due to poor visibility at extended distances. One observer’s report related an
occasion in which Russian soldiers fired blindly into a general area (with no actual targets

in sight) merely to support the friendly attacker’s morale.[75]
The Japanese army’s increased reliance on machineguns to provide covering fire for
infantry assaults was another indicator of tactical evolution. The mass fire of machine
guns was essential in supplementing the suppression fire provided by position infantry
(acting as a rudimentary base of fire). The evolution of Japanese machinegun techniques
showed the army’s propensity to utilize organic firepower to support maneuver.
At the outbreak of the war, the Japanese army was not equipped with machineguns.
However, they appeared shortly after their entry into the war. By war’s end, each cavalry
brigade was issued six machineguns, and each infantry regiment had three, with efforts in
place to increase this amount to six. Initially, the Japanese employed the guns mainly for
defense, targeting ranges of 600-800 meters. Later in the war, the Japanese began to
employ machineguns offensively. The Japanese observed that the high rate of machinegun
fire effectively suppressed Russian infantry fire. On the offensive, machineguns advanced
with the forward units to support the infantry advance. Their targets were usually the
enemy’s infantry lines. The Japanese displayed advanced combined arms tactics for the
times by directing machinegun fire over the heads of friendly troops when necessary. This
fire was continued until friendly troops reached within thirty meters of the enemy lines.
[76]
At close range, the infantry was eventually be expected to carry the attack with
minimal artillery supporting fire. In 1898 (prior to the Boer and Russo-Japanese Wars),
British and French officers still advocated sending guns forward on the flanks of the
infantry attack to provide direct-fire support to the final infantry charge. Later, military
officers prescribed firing while in motion (or marching fire) as a counter-measure.
Specifically, the U.S. army had favorable experiences with the employment of marching
fire during the Spanish-American War (1898). Officers reported that infantrymen, firing
while advancing, were able to lay down enough organic fire to suppress enemy troops in
their defenses. However, subsequent twentieth-century conflicts would prove this method
untenable.[77] Unfortunately, the institutional utilization of base of fire techniques to
facilitate close-in fire support was not yet fully conceptualized.[78] Nevertheless, a base of
fire supplemented with mass machinegun fire would be required to cover the gap in close-
in suppressive fires once the artillery was shifted.
Prior to World War I, fledgling methods of machinegun support emerged in an attempt
to cover the gap between the cessation of artillery cover and the final infantry charge. In
German doctrine, machineguns were used to lay accurate enfilade fire on the objective

after the artillery cover was shifted, “just when the crisis in the fire fight occurred.” (As
previously stated, the Japanese covered their infantry advances to within thirty meters of
the objective during the Manchurian campaign). Ultimately, it would take the battlefields
of the Great War to settle the debate and prompt officers to increase the fire of the infantry
maneuver element itself with man-portable light machineguns and other weapons.[79]
[80]
However, consideration was given to the topic of close-in (organic) infantry fire
support to cover maneuver in post Russo-Japanese War doctrine. The solution to
suppressing enemy defensive fires to cover the close-in maneuver of assault troops would
eventually be addressed by the development of fire and maneuver and stormtroop tactics
during World War I. Although not advanced to this level, British and American pre-World
War I doctrines had advanced to the point where they recommended the employment of
direct-fire infantry weapons to assist the infantry advance. Though the term base of fire
was not yet used, this technique marks the initial stages of fire and maneuver in written
doctrine. Thus, the employment of position infantry was clearly a precursor to the later
development of fire and maneuver tactics.
American Field Service Regulations, 1913 contained similar usage of base of fire and
combined arms techniques.[81] These methods were being devised to overcome the
lethality of modern firepower. To cover the skirmish line’s advance, U.S. doctrine
advocated maintaining a detachment of infantry firing from position to work in
conjunction with supporting artillery. The regulations directed that, “When the infantry is
ready to advance a powerful fire is concentrated upon the point of attack by all the
available artillery and position infantry in range …”[82]
Additionally, the American FSR, 1913 encouraged the cooperation of the supporting
arms and maneuver element within the various stages of the attack. For example, they
specified that once the advancing infantry came within the effective range of the enemy
rifle fire, the supporting fire (from the artillery and position infantry) must assist the
skirmish line in achieving a superiority of fire for the final advance. During the final
advance (as stated above), the skirmish line was directed to advance by a series of rushes,
maximizing the use of cover, to avoid heavy casualties. The rushes were to be executed by
“parts of the line varying from battalions to individuals, according to the intensity of the
enemy’s fire.”[83]
In the Decisive Action stage of the attack, the FSR, 1913 promoted a rudimentary
system of fire and maneuver tactics. Position infantry detachments were directed to

provide a base of fire.[84] (Supporting artillery fire was also directed to supplement the
fire of the position infantry). The FSR, 1913 even directed that the reserve, normally
tasked with following close behind the skirmish line, should “support the attacking line by
firing from elevated positions in the rear” as the maneuver element advanced. This section
of the 1913 regulations seems to have incorporated the lessons of the Boer and Russo-
Japanese Wars.[85]
However, organic firepower could not in itself provide enough firepower to support
infantry assaults. Supporting arms fire would be necessary to carry the infantry attack
forward. Thus, the Russo-Japanese War also demonstrated the necessity of combined
arms, specifically infantry-artillery coordination, in modern warfare. Additionally,
indirect-fire artillery methods became necessary to increase the survivability of the
batteries. The transition from direct to indirect artillery fire further complicated the
coordination of supporting fires. Nevertheless, precise coordination of artillery fires with
infantry maneuver was necessary to overcome the lethality of the defender’s firepower.

III-C. INDIRECT-FIRE ARTILLERY & COMBINED ARMS
The doctrine of Western armies incorporated an impressive amount of information from
their observations of modern conflicts, especially the Anglo-Boer and Russo-Japanese
Wars. Despite some institutional resistance to change, most military doctrines addressed
the lethality of modern firepower. Several hard-learned lessons of recent conflicts were
apparent in early twentieth century military publications. Specifically, the increased
necessity of indirect artillery fire and service arm cooperation was readily evident.
Late nineteenth-early twentieth century artillery doctrine, based on lessons originating
as early as the Franco-Prussian War, professed the employment of massed artillery fire to
decisively influence the battle, and counter-battery fire to neutralize enemy guns before
the infantry battle commenced. Post Franco-Prussian War technological improvements
(such as quick-firing artillery and smokeless powder), and the lessons of the Boer and
Russo-Japanese Wars, prompted further refinement of this fundamental doctrine. The
artillery piece now had a longer range than its predecessors and was therefore more lethal
to the opposing infantry. Artillery pieces now fired shrapnel rounds over 2,000 meters. At
this range, the artillery was outside the range of the infantry’s small arms range. Therefore,
neutralizing enemy artillery prior to advancing became even more critical to the attack.
[86]
French artillery doctrine of this period was based on direct-fire support of advancing
infantry. This was especially true after the development of the model 1897 French 75mm
field gun. Artillery provided supporting fire by advancing with the infantry in mutually
supporting gun sections. The field guns advanced from 1,500 meters by displacing two
pieces forward while two others maintained suppressive fire. The artillery advance halted
prior to 600 meters from the enemy and maintained a high rate of concentrated, but not
particularly accurate, direct-fire (rafale) while the infantry made their final charge. The
purpose of the rafale was to neutralize or, if lucky, destroy enemy targets using mass
direct-fire to protect the infantry advance. Ideally, artillery sections would find suitable
terrain at medium range (1,000 meters) to provide direct-fire support to the infantry attack.
Thus, the main goal of the rafale was to demoralize the target with a high-volume of fire,
rather than destroy him with accurate fire.[87] French doctrine professed that the
simplicity of direct-fire methods, based on mass fire would promote quick, aggressive
attacks. The sophistication required to conduct indirect supporting fires, combined with
the poor reliability of communications equipment, was viewed as a drain on the
aggressiveness of the assault.[88]

However, in the early twentieth century, the influence of the Russo-Japanese War
caused a shift in artillery doctrine. In an effort to increase the artillery’s survivability on
the modern battlefield, indirect-fire techniques began to gain support. (By 1910, French
artillery regulations referred to the practice of direct-fire as the “exceptional case,” though
it was continued in common practice).[89] Though the Russo-Japanese War had illustrated
the ascendancy of indirect artillery fire, other methods persisted in both doctrine and
practice. For example, German 1906 doctrine still listed three viable artillery firing
positions—unmasked (direct-fire), semi-masked, and masked (indirect-fire).[90] (However,
German doctrine did recommend masked positions (i.e. indirect-fires) over unmasked
positions due to the effects of hostile fire).[91]
Pre Russo-Japanese War Russian training and doctrine did not espouse the use of
indirect artillery fire.[92] Nevertheless, the war saw the transition from artillery direct-fire
to indirect-fire. (Though artillerymen had previously theorized on this eventuality, the
Russo-Japanese War confirmed the theories). Unexpectedly, counter-battery fire was no
longer the main threat to artillery positions. The majority of Russian batteries lost in battle
were overrun by Japanese infantry, not targeted by enemy artillery. The lessons of the
Franco-Prussian and Boer conflicts were overturned—infantry, not artillery was now the
main threat to forward deployed batteries. Russian batteries in the open were routinely
destroyed by massed Japanese rifle and artillery fire. Placing batteries on exposed high
ground was no longer practicable. To increase their survivability, artillery pieces were
increasingly deployed in masked terrain. These measures necessitated the Japanese
practice of employing observers to control the fires of the supporting artillery and
quickened the conversion to indirect supporting arms fire.[93]
Thus, the events of the Russo-Japanese War had underscored a major tactical indicator
— the need to complete the transition to indirect-fire artillery support. Specifically, the
Battle of Telissu (14 June 1904) decisively demonstrated the importance of indirect
firepower in modern warfare. The Russian army’s trench line at Telissu stretched for over
eight miles. The Russians, still not exploiting the advantages of low troop densities,
packed their defenders shoulder-to-shoulder in the trench lines. Although the Russian First
Corps commander (Lieutenant General Stakelberg) directed the guns to fire from covered
positions, his orders were disobeyed. Russian artillery deployed in the open, planning to
support the defense with direct-fire even though their defensive line was knowingly
selected with poor fields of fire. The pre-eminence of indirect-fire artillery soon became
readily apparent.[94]

During the initial stages of the battle, the Japanese replied to Russian artillery fire with
only a small portion of their batteries in order to lure the Russian guns to reveal their firing
positions. Within one hour of the commencement of the artillery duel, Japanese observers
had determined the position of every Russian battery. While the Russian guns were
distracted with the artillery duel, the Japanese launched an infantry probing attack.
Japanese artillery quickly overwhelmed Russian guns and proceeded to devastate the
counterattacking infantry. For example, the First East Siberian Division was decimated
and was routed into the nearby mountains.[95] Telissu confirmed the dominance of
indirect-fire on the modern battlefield. (One observer (French General de Negrier) claimed
that both the Russians and Japanese virtually abandoned the practice of direct-fire
following the Battle of Telissu. Although later at Sha-ho, Russian direct-fire artillery and
machinegun positions were once again silenced by indirect Japanese artillery fire.[96]
Henceforth, “infantry moving to the attack [could] expect the same close support of the
artillery as they have always had, but with this difference: The artillery will accompany
them with fire and not actually with the guns.”[97] (original underline emphasis)
The Russians also eventually adopted the practice of using indirect-fire and artillery
observers, but their employment was often disorganized. At Liaoyang on 31 August, the
Russian artillery observation post had only one wire line to the gun firing positions. It
soon became overloaded with traffic and the infantry was forced to improvise a
“dangerous back-up communication system [of] soldiers lying on their stomachs passing
messages hand to hand down the human chain to waiting messengers to the lee of the
feature.”[98]
The development of artillery doctrine at the turn of the century revealed several other
disparities between the Great Power’s employment of supporting arms. These differences
had a significant impact on the tactics of the Russo-Japanese War. For example, French
doctrine espoused a division of tasks in the assignments of their batteries. French batteries
were designated as either batteries d’infanterie, (infantry batteries), or countres-batteries
(counterbatteries). Infantry batteries were tasked to provide support to a designated
infantry unit, whereas counter-batteries were concerned solely with the targeting of enemy
artillery. This division of labor occurred even when the artillery batteries were of the same
artillery regiment and in close proximity to each other. Thus, it was common practice for
the French to mass their artillery, but divide their fires.[99]
German artillery officers considered the above listed command arrangements too
restrictive. They felt that an organization based on division of labor would restrict the

ability of local commanders to react to changing situations on the battlefield. German
artillerists were therefore given more latitude to coordinate with the infantry.[100] They
were expected to plan their fire support based on the flow of the battle rather than rigid,
pre-designated missions focused on narrow tasks. Thus, German batteries were free to
switch missions based on the commander’s intent. A common ‘battle flow’ resulting from
this doctrine was to engage long-range targets, such as enemy artillery, prior to the
infantry battle. Once the attack commenced the artillery focus of effort switched to engage
targets that hindered the infantry’s advance. Unlike their French counterparts, German
artillery units were free to displace and disperse so long as the batteries were able to mass
their fires on a single target. Gradually, the concept of massed fires began to gain pre-
eminence over massed artillery in early twentieth century German doctrine.[101]
The concept of schwerpunkt, or the decisive point where the commander would focus
his main effort, was central to the employment of German fire support. Once designated
by the overall commander, the artillery was doctrinally bound to achieve fire superiority at
the infantry’s schwerpunkt. This unwritten cooperation was based on the ability of the
artillery commander to adjust his fires to the battlefield situation in order to provide
maximum support. A clear understanding of the overall commander’s intent was central to
ensuring supporting arms could accomplish their missions—artillery commanders would
have to ‘do what was necessary” for success, not merely follow orders.[102]
The Japanese army, trained by German mentors, adopted a more advanced fire support
doctrine than their Russian adversaries. As a result, the Japanese displayed a large
propensity to employ combined arms tactics. In terms of equipment, the Japanese were
deficient when compared with the Russian artillery corps. The primary Japanese field
piece was the 1898 model Arisaka gun. The weapon was a 75mm accelerated (rather than
quick)-firer, with a poor recoil mechanism.[103]
By comparison, the Russian army was slower to adopt the advanced principles of fire-
tactics and combined arms. Ironically, during the war the Russian army possessed both a
better quality field piece (model 1900 76.2mm Putilov) and a vastly larger quantity of
artillery on the battlefield than the Japanese.[104] However, the Russian advantages in
equipment could not compensate for their poor doctrine.[105] Like most nations of the
era, pre-war Russian doctrine did not emphasize cooperation between artillery and
infantry. Though the Russians doctrinally approved of the concentration of artillery
batteries, the massing of artillery fires was not addressed in their field regulations.[106]
Russian artillery was generally employed as individual batteries. Although this decision

may have been influenced by the large size of Russian batteries (eight versus six guns) and
their higher rates of fire, their doctrine did not place an emphasis on massed fire. Russian
gunners preferred to maintain a sizable artillery reserve to guard against unexpected
reversals. This tendency prevented concentration by dispersing combat power.
Additionally, Russian inefficiency often prevented the unity of effort displayed by
Japanese firing units. As a result, Russian artillery rarely was able to achieve fire
superiority through the concentration of fires at the right time and place.[107] [108]
(Consequently, it was estimated that twenty percent of Russian battlefield casualties were
caused by enemy artillery[109] as opposed to only seven percent losses of the Japanese
during the Battle of Liaoyang).[110]
In contrast, the Japanese followed the example of their Prussian tutors and consistently
concentrated their artillery fire by massing their batteries. Heeding the advice gleaned
from the Franco-Prussian War (imparted by the German advisors), Japanese artillery
officers placed a high emphasis on supporting the infantry commander’s intent. A clear
understanding and adherence to the commander’s intent allowed the Japanese to more
efficiently mass their fires, while maintaining some degree of dispersion. ‘Silent
cooperation’ between infantry and artillery to achieve the commander’s objective enabled
separate batteries to fire on the same target area without being given explicit orders.[111]
For example, at Liaoyang the fires of 180 Japanese field guns and 32 howitzers were
concentrated on a single position at Shoushanpu.[112] Later, the Japanese massed a total
of 234 field guns and twelve heavy howitzer batteries at Liaoyang.[113]
Japanese doctrine espoused opening a battle with artillery. It was commonplace for
battalions to fire as a unit (of three batteries), rather than separate employment of batteries
or sections. In fact, individual employment of batteries was discouraged. Artillery was
expected to provide covering fire for the infantry to assist its advance.[114] Beyond
providing mere counterbattery protection, Japanese artillery was often called upon to
target enemy infantry targets to assist the attack.[115] Japanese artillery supported their
infantry’s attacks and did not hesitate to fire over their own troops.[116] (By the war’s
end, incidents of Russian batteries firing over friendly troops were also reported).[117]
The Japanese overcame the problems of enemy indirect-fire by violating previously
followed fire support doctrine. Japanese artillery fire was sometimes used to draw Russian
counter battery fire. This reduced the amount of fire the Russians could bring to bear on
the Japanese infantry attack. Thus, an important goal of Japanese artillery was to distract
the Russian artillery by drawing their fire.[118] [119]

Conversely, the Japanese batteries would periodically cease firing in order to feign
vulnerability to enemy counter-battery fire. This was especially effective if the Russian
guns were targeting areas close to the Japanese positions. Japanese cease-fires often
deceived Russian gunners into thinking they had accurately targeted the Japanese battery.
This distracted the Russian gunners from more important tasks and caused the Russian
batteries to needlessly bombard useless targets. (U.S. observers noted this tactic at the
attack on Shihliho on 12 October, 1904).[120] Some theorists assert that the Russians
should have disregarded these distracting counter-battery tactics and reduced their
counter-battery fire in favor of supporting their infantry. Since the Russians were largely
defending from earthworks, their susceptibility to Japanese artillery bombardments was
reduced. In contrast, attacking Japanese infantry would have been extremely vulnerable to
the increased fire resulting from the ‘additional’ batteries now freed from the artillery duel.
[121]
The Japanese did not wait for friendly counter-battery fire to neutralize enemy artillery
before commencing their infantry attack. Instead, their infantry would advance and draw
Russian artillery fire. Japanese batteries then attempted to locate and neutralize these
targets. American observers noted the propensity for Japanese gunners to sequentially
attack targets in the following order: enemy batteries, infantry, supply trains and reserves,
and finally in the rear area to prevent the reinforcement of the objective.[122]
The Japanese displayed proficiency in several of the aforementioned tactical principles
early in the war. In the first major land action of the war (even before the revelations of
Telissu), it became obvious that direct-fire artillery was obsolete. On 1 May, 1904 the
Japanese prepared their divisions to cross the Yalu River by commencing an artillery duel.
Prior to the battle, the Japanese had massed twenty howitzers into five batteries under the
Corps artillery. The three attacking Japanese divisions contained another six batteries
each. In contrast, Russian guns were dispersed along the riverbed in firing positions
clearly visible to the Japanese attackers. The Russians replied to the attack with a single
battery of artillery. Multiple Japanese howitzer batteries, concentrating their fires, soon
silenced the Russian battery. No other Russian guns were brought into action, freeing the
Japanese batteries to concentrate their fires on the Russian infantry positions. As Japanese
skirmishers advanced across the Yalu River (and Ai tributary), their divisional and corps
artillery provided an intense bombardment of the Russian infantry positions. Japanese
howitzers, employing indirect-fire, shelled the Russian rear areas.[123] By targeting rear
areas, the Japanese artillery plan thoroughly pounded the vulnerable, retreating Russian
infantry during their withdrawal.[124]

The Japanese re-learned the implications of fire superiority and indirect artillery fire
later in the war. On 26 August 1904 at Kao-feng-ssu, three Russian batteries utilizing
indirect-fire, avoided destruction from eight Japanese batteries trying to silence them. The
three Russian batteries were later able to decimate several Japanese infantry advances. The
Japanese infantry advanced in traditional company column formations. Observers noted
that the Russian batteries were able to concentrate “such a heavy fire … that the spirit of
the attack was broken.” The Japanese eventually resorted to a night attack to carry the
position. The initial Russian success at thwarting the advance was directly attributed to the
effect of the Russian artillery.[125]
Consequently, the Japanese were quick to learn the importance of combined arms
coordination. By the Battle of Liaoyang (30 August 1904), Japanese infantry attacks were
precisely timed with concentrated artillery fire support. During the Hill 1030 attack
(previously mentioned), four Japanese batteries massed their fires on the Russian forward
trenches, forcing the abandonment of several positions prior to the final infantry charge.
[126] Henceforth, the Japanese employed artillery bombardments in conjunction with
infantry attacks, seeking to exploit the advantages of combined arms. The advantages
were clear—enemy troops were relatively immune to the effects of artillery
bombardments while in their protective entrenchments. However, an impending infantry
assault would force them to leave their covered positions to repel the assault.
The advantages of combined arms were made clear during the Battle of Shihliho (12
October 1904). Japanese artillery pounded the Russian positions, initially with little effect.
Later, Japanese infantry attacked across a 1,000-yard open field. With the help of artillery
cover, the Japanese infantry were able to advance by rushes to within 600 meters of the
enemy without a single loss. From this point forward, the Japanese worked their way
slowly forward under a hail of Russian volley-fire. However, when the Russian troops
exposed themselves, they became extremely vulnerable to the accurate Japanese covering
fire and suffered heavy losses from the Japanese shrapnel. The disheartened Russian
soldiers abandoned their entrenchments and gave up the position. Without the support of
the artillery, observers asserted that the attackers would have been decimated by enemy
fire once the Russians manned their defensive positions.[127]
The Japanese consistently demonstrated the propensity to closely coordinate artillery
with infantry maneuver. During the assault on La-ta Shan (13 October 1904), Japanese
artillery opened the battle as usual. Under its cover, the Japanese infantry advanced, by
executing a series of long rushes (through open terrain), to the foot of the sloped Russian

position. The Japanese soldiers bunched together at the base of the hill and slowly crept
forward. At approximately 16:00, the distance between opposing forces was
approximately thirty yards. Nevertheless, for forty-five minutes, the Japanese artillery
continued a heavy bombardment on the Russian positions. Although multiple rounds fell
on friendly infantry positions, the Japanese eventually carried the position when small
groups of infantry charged the Russian trenches. (In addition to demonstrating the close
coordination of artillery and infantry, this engagement also showed the use of section
rushes (followed by troops maneuvering individually at close range) to carry forward the
attack).[128]
The Russo-Japanese War had a significant effect on the development of pre-World War
I artillery doctrine. By the conclusion of the Manchurian campaign, both the French and
Germans agreed on one point—indirect counter-battery fire was normally incapable of
destroying enemy artillery batteries.[129] However, while the destruction of enemy
artillery through counter-battery fire was unlikely, both nations’ doctrine acknowledged
that artillery should still be used to harass, or neutralize, enemy batteries. Rather than
expecting to destroy the enemy artillery, counter-battery fire was employed to minimize
the effect of enemy artillery on the attacking infantry. However, whereas the French
designated the previously mentioned counter-batteries, German gunners viewed artillery
suppression as a task to be prioritized amongst all other artillery missions. The number of
German artillery batteries performing counter-battery missions would thereby be adjusted
as the battlefield situation required.[130]
Western pre-World War military doctrine also seems to have incorporated several of the
implications concerning the effects of modern technology. The doctrine of most armies
acknowledged the necessity of achieving fire superiority on the battlefield. Most doctrines
recognized a heavy artillery bombardment as a necessary preliminary to assaults on
prepared positions. Even more importantly, military theorists were beginning to devise the
fundamentals of modern combined arms techniques. British theorist Colonel G. F. R.
Henderson emphasized the cooperation of all service arms as a key ingredient to success
on the modern battlefield. Specifically, Henderson advocated the cooperation of the
infantry and artillery arms.[131]
Unfortunately, most British officers still viewed artillery as an “accessory in the fire
tactics of the infantry, but not a partner in the planning of operations.” Though battery
commanders were expected to be familiar with the infantry’s plan of attack, the Field
Artillery Training Manuals did not explain how the fire support would be controlled, nor

did they direct a pre-arranged fire support plan. Consequently, British officers did not
view battle as a progressive system to occupy advantageous firing positions to support
follow-on advances with continued fire support.[132]
In contrast, pre-World War German doctrine[133] made it clear that the main task of
field artillery was infantry support:
“The principle duty of the field artillery is to support the infantry in the most effective manner. Its duties are
inseparably connected with those of the infantry. It should, on principle, always fight the targets that are most dangerous
for its infantry.[134] [original italics]”
Specifically, the German Field Artillery Drill Regulations stated that, at critical times,
field artillery should be expected to fire from exposed positions to support infantry
attacks. German infantry-artillery tactics encompassed rudimentary combined arms
tactics. Their doctrine strove to place the enemy in a dilemma by pressing the infantry
attack, even when the artillery did not achieve fire superiority. The infantry assault would
theoretically force the opposing infantry to abandon their sheltered fieldworks in order to
counter the attack. German batteries could then more easily overpower enemy infantry.
[135]
Although German pre-World War service regulations directed cooperation between the
infantry and artillery arms, they (like British regulations) did not prescribe the means or
techniques to accomplish this collaboration. It was generally understood that the infantry
would be reliant on artillery during its attack, but no specific system governing this
relationship was yet in effect.[136] A proper delineation of supporting relationships and
liaison would be necessary before true combined arms techniques would emerge.
Modern infantry attacks now placed a huge emphasis on gaining a superiority of fire.
However, British and American military thinkers agreed with the German doctrine,
believing that preliminary artillery bombardments would be countered by keeping troops
in covered positions. Similarly, they predicted that an infantry assault would be necessary
to force opposing troops into the open to defend against the advance. Beyond making the
defending soldiers vulnerable to artillery fire, the artillery would assist attackers by
disturbing the aim of defending soldiers. This reciprocal support of infantry and artillery
throughout all phases of the battle was summarized by Colonel Henderson’s statement,
“Superiority of fire can only be gained by the close co-operation of the artillery and the
infantry at every stage of the attack.”[137]
The doctrine produced in the years prior to World War I showed promising progress in
the development of combined arms techniques inherent in fire-tactics. A comparison of

the U.S. Field Service Regulations, 1905 and 1913 (FSR, 1905 or FSR, 1913) revealed an
increased awareness of the need for cooperation among service arms and flexibility in
maneuver in the early twentieth century. Both versions of the FSR stated, “Without
superiority of fire we may assume the frontal attack impracticable.”[138]
Both FSRs also contained the below paragraph:
“It is impossible to shoot an enemy out of a position. To avoid serious losses the defender has only to lie down
behind cover; but a resolute and simultaneous advance on the front and flank of a position, made after a thorough
preparation by and with the effective accompaniment of artillery and infantry fire, will generally be successful.[139] (my
italics)”
However, whereas the FSR, 1905 mentioned the need for cooperation between infantry
and artillery to overcome the firepower of modern weaponry, the 1913 regulations are
much more detailed, especially concerning issues such as fire discipline, plan of attack,
and infantry-artillery cooperation. The FSR, 1913 specifically addressed the integration of
infantry and artillery in the attack. Artillery was directed to position itself within 3,000
yards of the enemy position in order to maximize the effect of shrapnel rounds, while
remaining outside the effective range of enemy rifle fire.[140] Interestingly, the artillery’s
objective was listed as “that part of the enemy’s forces inflicting the greatest damage to
the infantry.”[141] Although the regulations stated that the most likely initial target was
usually the enemy’s artillery, they allowed the engagement of any significant target that
the commander deemed decisive, thus breaking with the requirement to commence the
battle with an artillery duel.[142]
The FSR, 1913 also directed a closer relationship between the infantry and artillery in
both planning and on the battlefield. The 1913 regulations expanded upon the fundamental
observations of the FSR, 1905 and delineated a plan for the Offensive. The FSR, 1913
promoted combined arms planning and execution by dividing the Plan and Conduct of the
Attack into a planning phase followed by several distinct stages of the attack
—Preparatory Stage, Decisive Action, and the Final Stage (consisting of consolidation
and pursuit).[143]
The first phase, termed the Plan of Attack, directed that the offensive battle be
coordinated in an attack order which designated the cooperation of the various service
arms. The attack order delineated that an offensive battle commence with a preparatory
stage designed to force the enemy into a defensive posture and ideally commit his reserves
(thereby identifying his weak points). The preparatory stage relied on all three service
arms, acting in unison, to attain a superiority of fire.[144]

The 1913 regulations went beyond tasking the artillery with the mission of preparing
the battle. The FSR directs:
“When the infantry is ready to advance a powerful fire is concentrated upon the point of attack by all the available
artillery and position infantry in range; at the same time the fighting all along the [skirmish] line is pushed with the
utmost vigor … Under the protection of this fire the attacking infantry begins its advance and moves straight upon the
objective, as rapidly as possible, consistent with maintaining the integrity of the of the attacking line and the vigor of the
troops.[145] (My italics)”
The combined action of artillery and infantry cooperation throughout the entire course
of battle was frequently mentioned: “The principle work during the attack is done by the
infantry. Assisted by the artillery, it works its way from point to point toward the assigned
objective.”[146] [FSRs’ underlined emphasis] This concept was underscored by the
stipulation that during both the preparation and main attack, artillery officers or scouts
accompany the commanders of the infantry firing lines. These artillery observers were
directed to communicate the requirements of the infantry to the artillery batteries via
signals or wire.[147] Like Russia and Japan, the U.S. military’s use of artillery observers
acknowledged the increased attention necessary to coordinate artillery indirect-fire with
infantry maneuver.
During the Decisive Action stage, the direction concerning infantry-artillery
coordination was more specific. The artillery was directed to “assist the main attack” by
positioning itself “so as to bring, at the proper time, a heavy fire on the objective.” Both
artillery and position infantry were tasked with covering the advance of the attacking force
with “powerful fire concentrated upon the point of attack.” The FSR, 1913 directed that
the progress of the infantry maneuver element and the conduct of supporting fires should
be mutually related. It stated, “If the attacking line is temporarily checked, the intensity of
the covering fire must be increased to keep down the fire of the enemy.”[148]
The artillery was directed to provide covering fire by the most effective means
possible, to include displacing to a better position during the attack. During the infantry
advance the covering fire was maintained on the enemy line until the friendly infantry
approach within 300 yards of the impact area.[149] When the infantry reached their final
firing positions, artillery support became extremely complicated. As the infantry charge
neared the objective, close-in artillery fire was necessarily shifted or ceased to prevent
fratricide. At this Final Stage of the battle, the artillery was directed to shift its fire to the
rear of the enemy’s position to “impede the movements of possible hostile reserves and to
spread confusion in the rear of the enemy’s position.” After friendly forces took the
objective, the artillery was directed to rapidly displace to positions which could support

the consolidation and pursuit. However, the effects of unsuppressed rifle fire on advancing
infantry were devastating at close-range.[150]
This problem was somewhat alleviated by allowing the fire of percussion ordnance to
continue to within 150 meters or closer. Under extremis, even these sound safety measures
were abandoned. For example, at the Battle of Pieters’ Hill (Boer War, see Appendix C)
the commander directed his infantry to maintain supporting fires even if “two or three of
their shrapnel burst in the ranks of his infantry.”[151] During the Russo-Japanese War, the
same sentiment concerning the value of supporting fire over risk of fratricide prevailed:
“The moral effect produced by artillery fire, which forced the defenders to take to cover and did not permit them to
raise their heads above the parapet, was so highly esteemed by the Japanese infantry that it requested the batteries to
continue firing, without regard to the losses thereby inflicted in its own ranks, until it had taken the position or unfurled
small national flags as an indication that fire support was no longer necessary. According to the opinion of the Japanese
themselves, the losses inflicted in their own infantry by their own guns were insignificant in comparison to the losses
which the defender could inflict by delivering his fire undisturbed at a range of a few hundred meters, when not kept
down by the attacking artillery.”[152]

IV. THE SIEGE OF PORT ARTHUR:
Combined Arms and Small-Unit Maneuver
The evolution of Japanese infantry and combined arms techniques during the siege of
Port Arthur provides a useful study of the synergistic evolution of tactics during the
Russo-Japanese War. The protracted campaign of infantry assaults against an extensive
network of fortified defensive positions foreshadowed the First World War’s Western
Front. The evolution of Japanese assault tactics combined dispersed, irregular infantry
formations with precisely coordinated artillery support. Advances in both areas were
necessary to allow the Japanese to achieve final victory. Consequently, the Japanese
victory at Port Arthur demonstrated the aggregate advantages of linking fire and maneuver
with combined arms techniques. Arguably, the tactics developed to break the Russian
defenses served as precursors to the German stormtroop tactics developed under a similar
battlefield environment.
Japanese employment of combined arms tactics evolved in reaction to their early
attempts to press the siege of the Russian fortifications at Port Arthur. Following their
initial failure to carry the Russian positions of Wangtai and Ridge H on 23-4 August,
1904, the Japanese determined that normal open assault methods would not lead to
victory. Beyond reinforcing their forces with siege artillery, a determined effort was made
to coordinate infantry attacks with artillery support. Attacks were supported by
bombardments from siege artillery, howitzers, field guns, and naval guns.[153] Although
their early attempts to take the Russian stronghold failed, Japanese tactics were beginning
to adapt to trench combat. This was demonstrated by the 24 August 1904 attack on the
Panlung forts where 400 Japanese guns supported an infantry assault with a creeping
barrage.[154] One observer stated that, “It looked as if there was not a single foot of
ground which had not its own particular shell, and the whole ridge was enveloped in a
thick cloud of smoke and dust from the explosions.”[155] This description seems eerily
similar to the description of combat on the First World War’s Western Front.
Later, on 26 October 1904 the Japanese assaulted Russian positions at the perimeter of
Fort Erhlungshan and Fort Sungshushan. A naval gunfire and howitzer bombardment of
the entire frontage commenced at 11:00 and continued throughout the day. At 15:30, the
bombardment intensified and increasingly focused on the trench lines surrounding
Erhlungshan and at Sungshushan. At 16:30, the intensity of artillery fire further intensified

on the two positions. A coordinated infantry attack commenced at 17:00 by two infantry
columns of approximately 200 men, who successfully overran the trench line positions.
The artillery bombardment continued during the assault with designated troops waving
flags to identify the forward trace of the advance for the artillery observers. Nevertheless,
several Japanese shells fell among friendly troops. However, the protection offered the
assailants was so effective that scarcely a man was lost taking the Sungshushan trench line
and not a single soldier was lost during the assault on Erhlungshan (by enemy fire).[156]
Although this primitive method of combined arms coordination was not flawless, it
demonstrated the high level of coordination between Japanese artillery and infantry.
Later in the Port Arthur siege, further refinements in fire and maneuver and combined
arms tactics were evident. Many lessons had been learned during months of failed
attempts to take the Russian forts at Erhlungshan, Sungshushan, 203 Meter Hill, and North
Tungchikuanshan. In late (26-30) November, the Japanese launched several unsuccessful
and extremely costly attempts to seize the fortresses. Initially, the assaults were conducted
by dense skirmisher and close-order formations, causing heavy casualties.[157]
By December, a marked change in infantry tactics had occurred. Poorly supported mass
attacks had not succeeded in overwhelming strong Russian defensive positions. The final
assault on 203 Meter Hill (5 December 1904) demonstrated an adjustment in Japanese
tactics. A fierce bombardment was conducted for three days with 1,000 rounds a day
pounding the hill. The initial infantry assault was made by a company advancing up the
hillside in groups of twos and threes. The forces regrouped in a trench and advanced
through a dead zone in extended-order. Before (and during) the final attack on the Russian
trenches, six Japanese batteries conducted an intense bombardment using a mix of half
shrapnel and half high explosive shells. The successful attack demonstrated the
importance of close infantry-artillery coordination and the need for small unit maneuver
(utilizing irregular formations). Because of its commanding position, the capture of 203
Meter Hill, enabled it to serve as an excellent artillery position for subsequent attacks on
the nearby Russian fortifications.[158]
By late December, the frequent employment of new assault techniques was obvious to
military observers. On 31 December American observers witnessed Japanese soldiers
advancing under the cover of a heavy artillery barrage. Each artillery battery was assigned
a specific target to support the infantry advance, and was controlled by an observation post
atop the newly won ‘Artillery Hill’ (203 Meter Hill). Following the bombardment, the
observers noted small groups of two to three soldiers entering the Russian fieldworks. In a

follow-on attack on the Wangtai fortress (1 January 1905), small, irregularly formed
groups of infantry crawled up the slopes of objectives, covered by heavy artillery fire. The
artillery, firing over the heads of the slowly advancing infantry, conducted a vigorous
bombardment of the hilltop fort. The lead trace of the infantry was located a mere 100 feet
below the summit of the hill. At a designated time, the artillery shifted its fire, and the
infantry advanced in irregular formations (averaging one-half zug) to take the now-
abandoned Russian trench. The infantry controlled the supporting artillery fire using flag
signals. A group of 25 soldiers reached the Wangtai parapet and an even smaller
detachment of ten men initially entered and seized the fort.[159]

V. CONCLUSION
The Anglo-Boer and Russo-Japanese Wars demonstrated the full impact of the
Industrial Age on modern warfare. The implications of these regional conflicts certainly
foreshadowed the destruction caused by the First World War. However, the commonly
asserted claim that the lessons of previous conflicts went unheeded by incompetent or
foolish generals is inaccurate. The armies of the Great Powers had painstakingly analyzed
the ramifications of the Boer and Russo-Japanese Wars. Often, the tactical advances made
during the Boer and Manchurian Wars were the result of tactical exigencies that were not
codified into written doctrine during the hostilities. After the wars, some basic concepts
were incorporated into doctrine. However, due to institutional and cultural resistance,
written doctrine alone could not guarantee assimilation into the practical training methods
of the respective armies.
Following the Russo-Japanese War (and earlier Boer War), an incomplete transition
from skirmish line-based tactics occurred that encompassed the effects of modern warfare.
This transformation included several tactical evolutions. The resulting developments can
be grouped into four broad categories:[160]
(1) the adoption of dispersed, irregular (non-linear) formations;
(2) the employment of fire and maneuver techniques and small unit-tactics, including base of fire techniques;
(3) the transition to indirect-fire artillery support to ensure the survivability of the batteries, and;
(4) the necessity for combined arms tactics to increase the survivability of assaulting infantry and compensate for
the dispersion of infantry firepower.
The need for dispersed formations became evident as early as the American Civil War
and Franco-Prussian War. The Boer and Russo-Japanese Wars not only confirmed the
necessity for dispersed formations, but also foreshadowed the transition to non-linear
assaults. Ample evidence existed that linear skirmish lines would soon be obsolete. In fact,
both wars witnessed formless units advancing by running, rushing, and crawling—
especially during the Russo-Japanese War. The Manchurian campaign saw occasional
employment of small-unit detachments moving through an otherwise impenetrable fire
zone. Some observers identified dispersion through small-unit maneuver and irregular
formations as keys to overcoming intense firepower. These small units varied from
platoon, squad, and fire team-sized elements. The need for small-unit maneuver to counter
the massive firepower of fortified defensive positions became especially apparent as the

siege of Port Arthur progressed, foreshadowing the trench warfare of the World War.
Intense Russian defensive fire from fortified positions caused small detachments of men,
rather than large formations, to cross the defensive zones (at the assaults on 203 Meter
Hill, and Wangtai).[161]
Additionally, irregular formations, consisting of dispersed, small-units of infantry
required a modification of the military’s command and control system. Although these
decentralized leadership principles would not be fully developed until the First World War,
it became apparent that modern soldiers would be required to display high levels of
individual initiative and independent action. The initiative required surpassed the earlier
expectations for skirmishers to merely make individual decisions concerning rates of fire,
target selection, and the use of cover in the advance. In the near future, small-unit leaders
would be responsible for achieving the commander’s overall guidance with minimal
supervision over a widely separated battlefield. The Japanese military’s adoption of the
German principles of Auftragstaktik and Weisungsführung certainly contributed to their
successful employment of small-unit and fire and maneuver tactics.
Dispersed infantry now needed the assistance of external firepower to bolster their
reduced volume of fire. The dispersion of tactical formations and the decentralization of
fire control had caused the diminution of concentrated rifle fire. The use of position
infantry to provide a base of fire was an improvisation developed to compensate for mass
infantry fire. Eventually, machinegun fire would be used to supplement this covering fire.
Thus, the Russo-Japanese War (and Boer War) showed the necessity for a transition from
fire and movement to fire and maneuver (though neither conflict attained the latter concept
in its entirety).
Consequently, both wars saw limited use of a stationary base of fire to cover the
movement of the infantry maneuver element.[162] This technique was especially
important to cover the movement of attacking infantry during the final assault when
mortar and artillery fire was normally shifted or ceased. Military observers took note of
the effectiveness of these techniques. Resultantly, post-war doctrine showed evidence that
these lessons were incorporated into infantry doctrine. Both British and American
publications (in doctrine or professional forums) made note of position infantry to provide
cover for assault forces. Later, fire and maneuver and stormtroop tactics would make
extensive use of infantry base of fire techniques.
Coordination between artillery and infantry was made more difficult by the necessity
for indirect artillery fire. The Battle of Telissu definitively demonstrated the necessity for

artillery to fire from covered positions in order to survive on the modern battlefield.
Indirect-fire would lengthen the distance between the batteries and the frontline infantry,
necessitating a higher level of effort to effect proper coordination.
Lastly, fire-tactics demanded increased cooperation between artillery and infantry.
Nearly every Western military organization identified this occurrence in their doctrine.
[163] Artillery fire was now expected to support all phases of the attack, not merely the
preparation. Additionally, artillery objectives were not necessarily enemy artillery
batteries, but any target that threatened the infantry’s progress. This often necessitated
firing over the heads of friendly infantry at extremely close ranges. Liaison between the
artillery and infantry arms necessarily assumed increased importance. This cooperation
was complicated by the adoption of increasingly dispersed, non-linear infantry formations.
Techniques involving artillery forward observers, fire support communications, and
signaling systems surfaced, but were in their infancy.[164]
The dispersion of firing batteries (for survivability) further necessitated the massing of
fires rather than massing of the actual artillery formations. Like decentralized infantry
tactics, the dispersed artillery units would now have to support the commander’s
schwerpunkt with minimal direct guidance. The pre-World War period was a transition
period for this artillery-infantry relationship. As previously covered, nearly all nations
recognized the necessity for increased cooperation among service arms, especially artillery
and infantry. Most nations demonstrated their awareness of the concept in written doctrine,
but had not issued specific command and control guidance delineating exact relationships.
Regardless, the Boer and Manchurian Wars showed a huge increase in artillery support
for infantry attacks. By Pieters’ Hill and Driefontein, British artillery ‘rolling barrages’
provided close, precisely timed artillery support during the infantry attacks. (See
Appendix C) The Japanese army demonstrated superb coordination of artillery throughout
the Russo-Japanese War, but especially during their assaults at Liaoyang and Port Arthur.
They also consistently demonstrated the advantages of massed fires in artillery supporting
fire. Most nations’ post-war doctrine reflected this newfound awareness.
Even so, the incorporation of doctrine does not in itself constitute an evolution in
tactics. Three basic steps are required to fully incorporate changes into military practice.
The first step is to gather and critically examine new opinions and observations. Second,
the organization must modify existing regulations, tactics, and doctrine. Last, and most
important, the institution must reinforce the newly written tactics with realistic training.
[165] Barring the last step, doctrine remains theoretical rather than practical. Observations

and examinations of the Boer and Manchurian Wars (during and after the conflicts)
accomplished the first step. The majority of Western armies implemented the second step
by issuing revised training manuals in the early 20th century. Unfortunately, the critical
third step was never fully achieved prior to the First World War.
Though written doctrine was adapted to the implications of increased firepower,
military culture was not significantly impacted. In fact, strong institutional and intellectual
arguments prevented the progress of modern fire and maneuver tactics. Deeply ingrained
concerns over the loss of control on the battlefield and faith in the ability of morale to
overcome firepower prevented the full realization of new doctrine. Lessons of earlier
conflicts were disregarded or minimized. In the years leading to the First World War, the
Anglo-Boer War was increasingly viewed as an anomaly. Likewise, the lessons of the
Russo-Japanese war were also distorted. Observers asserted that “despite high losses the
Japanese had defeated the Russians in Manchuria through offensive spirit, cold steel and
high morale rather than firepower.”[166]
Most military officers recognized the lethality of modern weaponry but consciously
decided that offensive spirit and morale could overwhelm firepower. Accordingly, British
officers expected losses in modern assaults to reach as high as twenty-five percent, but
insisted that there was a “necessity to suffer loss in order to drive the assault home.”
Amazingly, the concept that psychological qualities could offset firepower led several
officers to promote close-order formations to boost the morale of attacking soldiers.[167]
The high casualties of the Great War would prove the British estimates correct—a
conscious decision had been made to pay the price to overwhelm firepower with men!
Because it was commonly believed that a combination of morale and disciple could
bolster offensive tactics, no further tactical advances were deemed necessary. Military
officers and theorists failed to realize that an entirely new system of war would be
necessary for success on the modern battlefield—not merely modifications to existing
tactics. Instead, most pre-World War I debate revolved around adjustments to current
tactics and doctrine, (such as offensive versus defensive tactics, dense versus thin skirmish
lines, etc.). The assumptions upon which pre-World War I tactics were based—the
perceived requirements to mass soldiers to increase infantry firepower, and the need to
retain control over troops on the battlefield—would be proven “both false and
costly.”[168]
Therefore, military leaders did not ignore the lessons of the Boer and Russo-Japanese
Wars. In fact, the ramifications of increased firepower and rudimentary techniques of fire

and maneuver tactics were addressed in most nations’ pre-World War I doctrine.[169]
Unfortunately, these concepts were not fully developed or practiced due to a failure to
recognize a change to the fundamental nature of warfare itself. Massive firepower
necessitated a new system of warfare. To effect this type of transformation, the entire
military culture—equipment, doctrine, organization, and leadership—would have to
evolve. Lamentably, the hard-earned lessons of the Boer and Russo-Japanese Wars had not
prompted such a reformation. It would take the cataclysm of the First World War to act as
a catalyst for this transformation.

APPENDIX A: THE END OF AN ERA
The American Civil War (1861-1865)
The nineteenth century witnessed several phases of technological advancement. The
first phase of technological progress occurred in the mid-nineteenth century and saw
drastic 
improvements 
in 
the 
effectiveness 
of 
weaponry, 
transportation, 
and
communications. Scholars cite the advent of rifled weapons, breech-loading armament,
railroads, and the telegraph as examples of new technology available on the battlefield.
[170] Accordingly, many historians describe the American Civil War as the first major war
in the Industrial Age.[171] These innovations had profound effects on the Napoleonic
tactics still being practiced by most military organizations. Increased firepower resulted in
the expansion of skirmisher tactics and an emphasis on flanking maneuvers. However,
most armies stubbornly clung to close-order tactics as the primary battle formation in the
post-war years.[172]
The advent of the Minie ball, and subsequent rifled firearms and artillery, should have
drastically altered each of the service arm’s tactics. The effective range of rifled small
arms was four times that of its predecessor’s, foreshadowing the end of linear, close-order
infantry tactics.[173] Specifically, rifling had enabled infantry formations to produce
accurate fire to over 200 yards and increased their effective range to over 400 yards.[174]
The later introduction of breech-loading rifles greatly increased the rate of fire and
allowed defenders to reload in the prone position.[175] Costly Civil War battles such as
Malvern Hill, Fredericksburg, Gettysburg, Cold Harbor, and Franklin demonstrated the
lethality of modern weaponry against frontal attacks in open terrain and should have
foreshadowed the end of the manpower-squandering infantry charge.[176]
The tactics of the various service arms were also affected. Rifled artillery now
outranged the older smooth bores. Long-range rifle and artillery fire tended to force
smooth bore artillery even further to the rear of the battlefield thereby reducing its
effectiveness. The infantry’s increased battlefield prowess enabled foot soldiers to shatter
cavalry attacks. This vulnerability relegated the cavalry’s mission largely to scouting,
screening advances and retreats, protecting flanks, raids, and exploiting enemy routes
created by infantry assaults.[177]
The Civil War experience should have resulted in increased importance placed upon the
proper utilization of infantry on the battlefield, though most Civil War commanders, and

those who would follow, failed to recognize this development. The roles and abilities of
artillery and cavalry, although still extremely important, were not as decisive as in the
Napoleonic Era. Increased firepower, at extended ranges, gave the defense a definite
advantage over close-order offensive tactics.[178]
Nevertheless, infantry tactics during the Civil War remained largely linear. Most battles
commenced with the formation of a line of battle oriented on adjacent units or key terrain.
The war’s basic infantry formation was a regimental battle-line of two to three ranks with
skirmishers posted forward to prepare the attack. During the attack, units would advance
while attempting to maintain a linear, albeit a loose, formation. The battle-line was
believed to allow maximum combat power to be concentrated on the enemy while
advancing. Thus, the close-order formation remained the fundamental infantry tactic.[179]
However, some Civil War commanders adapted linear tactics to compensate for the
increased lethality of the defender’s firepower. Lines were extended in order to reduce the
density of the formation in an effort to reduce casualties.[180]
Pre-war American tactical doctrine was based on the drill manual of General Winfield
Scott. It espoused close-order infantry maneuver in two or three ranks. Interestingly, pre-
war infantry manuals did reflect the contemporary influences of French doctrine stemming
from Napoleonic armies. Particularly, American drill manuals professed the limited use of
skirmisher tactics.[181] Scott’s tactics recommended skirmisher teams of two men
working together in a loosely aligned skirmisher line. Units formed as skirmish formations
were directed to maintain a reserve of no less than one third of its strength, demonstrating
the army’s uncertainty concerning the decisiveness and survivability of open-order units
on the battlefield.[182]
Just before the outbreak of the American Civil War, the U.S. Army released a revised
drill manual that incorporated some of the latest European tactical concepts—Lieutenant
Colonel William J. Hardee’s Rifle and Light Infantry Tactics for the Exercise and
Manoeuvres of Troops when acting as Light Infantry or Riflemen (1855). Hardee’s manual
retained close-order maneuver as the standard battlefield tactic, but expanded the
emphasis on skirmisher teams. Skirmisher formations were expanded to four-man teams
with an increased importance placed on accurate rifle fire from covered positions.[183]
Thus, the manual showed restrained progress toward looser tactical formations.
In actuality, by 1864 skirmisher formations were fairly common on the battlefield. It
was not uncommon to have regiments deploy anywhere from ten to one hundred percent
of its infantry as skirmishers. However, the skirmishers’ mission was to screen or probe

the enemy rather than perform the decisive action of the battle. Formed infantry nearly
always conducted the main attack, with rare cases of main attacks being executed solely
by skirmishers.[184]
There were isolated incidences of conceptually advanced assault tactics. For example,
(brevet) Major General Emory Upton’s infantry attack at the Battle of Spotsylvania (10
May 1864) revealed his advanced thought process:
“Upton thought that if you were going to storm an entrenched position you had to move fast. To stop and open fire
—standard procedure, at the time—was to lose, simply because men standing up in the open got shot much more rapidly
than men concealed behind earthworks. Upton told his men to keep going without a halt and without firing a shot, and he
organized them in four compact lines, making an assaulting column that was narrow and deep. The first line was to
swarm over the Rebel parapet with fixed bayonets, the next two would fan out to right and left to clear the trenches on
each side, and the fourth line was to provide reinforcements wherever they were needed. If all of this worked, Upton
believed, his men could punch a narrow but deep hole in the Confederate line; if supporting troops then came up to
exploit the opening, Lee’s position would be broken ….”[185]
His brigade’s assault demonstrated innovative assault techniques based on small-unit
maneuver (though still utilizing traditional formations) to break the enemy lines.
Thus, some officers recognized that to penetrate enemy breastworks, defended by
modern firearms, modifications to Napoleonic tactics would be necessary. Even prior to
Spotsylvania, (then-Colonel) Upton had been promoting ‘hammer blow’ tactics, which
sought to penetrate enemy defensive lines using densely packed column formations.
Upton believed a compact formation, moving rapidly across the battlefield, could
successfully pierce enemy trench lines. Essentially, Upton was attempting to overcome
enemy defensive fire using speed rather than firepower. Column formations would not
allow friendly troops to maximize their offensive fire. However, at close distances, the
column could traverse the battlefield quickly, with enough shock power to break the
enemy lines. After the first line of troops penetrated the trench line, following lines would
turn to the left and right to hold and expand the breach for exploitation by follow-on
troops.[186]
Upton’s hammer tactics were a limited success at Spotsylvania. His attack succeeded in
penetrating the Confederate lines. Unfortunately, failure to exploit Upton’s initial success
resulted in a Union retreat. On 12 May 1864, the Union army would re-attack, again
employing Upton’s tactical concepts, in a corps-sized attack. The results were the same—
an initial success resulting in ultimate failure.[187] Upton’s tactics, while innovative,
would obviously not be effective in future conflicts involving machine guns and accurate
artillery supporting fire. However, his tactical innovation displayed a basic recognition of
the need for change.

Notwithstanding, the Civil War was fought using largely traditional Napoleonic tactics
and leadership principles with only minor modifications. Infantry close-order formations
deployed in three lines to attack. The unity of the battalion, rather than the flexibility of
extended order, was emphasized. In terms of leadership, junior officers were expected to
carry out their guidance and were not encouraged to maneuver or deviate from their
superior orders, excepting extremely rare situations where higher control became
impractical.[188]
It was not until two years after the war that any written evidence of tactical evolution
appeared in American doctrine. Major General Upton released A new System of Infantry
Tactics, Double and Single Rank, adapted to American Topography and Improved
Firearms (1867). Upton was largely responsible for drafting the U.S. Army’s post-war
doctrine. Although the title acknowledged the effects of increased firepower on post-war
tactical doctrine, it also retained close-order formations. However, Upton did acknowledge
his premonition that future battles would most likely be fought in a single-rank battle line
(in contrast to his title) or a large skirmish line. Conversely, the preface of Upton’s drill
manual demonstrated the army’s continued reliance on close-order tactics over skirmishers
for decisive results and ease of command:[189]
“Whatever the changes the breech-loader may necessitate in the disposition and management of troops in battle,
the employment of lines of battle offensively and defensively cannot be dispensed with, neither can the means of
massing and deploying troops be omitted.”
“While attacks in masses have been abandoned, a preponderance of men and fire, in the future as in the past, will
have to be relied upon to carry positions which are beyond the power of skirmishers … experience will prove that the
safety of an army cannot be intrusted [sic] to men in open order with whom it is difficult to communicate; but that to
insure victory, a line or lines of battle must ever be at hand to support or receive the attack.[190] (Italics added)”
Interestingly, Upton acknowledged the need for modern soldiers to be imbued with a
limited amount of initiative in order to make individual battlefield decisions, yet refused to
abandon close-order tactics. He advanced beyond all previous drill manuals by including
limited tactical guidance in his text by discussing the applicability of various maneuvers to
certain battlefield situations. Specifically, the manual incorporated basic steps of tactical
planning such as designating pinning forces, flanking forces, and reserves. (Hitherto these
matters were regarded as the realm of commander’s discretion, and therefore not discussed
in drill manuals).[191]
More importantly, the evolution of Upton’s later tactical thought showed increased
reliance on skirmisher tactics to overcome the lethality of breech-loading weapons. By the
time of his post Franco-Prussian War tactical publications, Upton’s overturned his

previous views concerning the inability of skirmishers to achieve the decisive stroke in
combat. In his 1878 tactical analysis of the Armies of Asia and Europe, Upton
acknowledged that most European (and American) tactical doctrines now employed
skirmisher formations, posted in two lines, as the standard infantry combat deployment.
Skirmishers were to advance by executing a series of rushes with the skirmish line being
continually reinforced (by supports) to maintain high rates of fire. U.S. Army doctrine
employed a single line of skirmishers[192] deploying from line or column. Breech-loading
arms allowed soldiers to reload without moving to the rear. Therefore, a single line
formation could now maintain a continuous, high rate of fire. Thus, the reduced density of
a single skirmisher line would theoretically reduce casualties while still maintaining a high
volume of fire in the attack. (Ambrose, Upton and the Army, p. 60; Jamieson, Crossing the
Deadly Ground, p. 10). The inclusion of precise maneuvers to allow entire battalions to
deploy skirmisher formations left no doubt as to the pre-eminence of the skirmisher line in
post-war tactics.[193] By the late nineteenth century, battlefield roles were reversed—
skirmisher formations, not dense battle lines, were expected to carry the decisive battle
action. The main purpose of supporting formations was now to reinforce the skirmish line.
[194]
Specifically, Upton’s infantry formations directed battalions (consisting of four
companies) to be divided into two sections. The first section, composed of two companies,
would form the skirmisher line. The second section, also of two companies, would follow
directly behind the skirmishers in lines of supports and reserves. The skirmishers would
move forward in small rushes while other squads[195] maintained harassing fire.
Doctrinally, skirmishers would advance to within 150 yards of the enemy line while the
reserves formed for the final charge. Hopefully the first line of charging reserves would
break the enemy line. If not, the second line of reserves would be committed to the attack.
Thus, Upton’s tactical formations attempted to maintain high rates of fire in the advance to
compensate for its dispersion. Advances were made in small rushes to reduce casualties in
the attack. The fundamentals of fire and movement upon which Upton based his
skirmisher tactics remained valid until the twentieth century.[196] [197]
However, the dispersed nature of extended-order tactics demanded a sharp increase in
the individual initiative and responsibility of the officer and soldiers. By 1878, Upton’s
previous observations concerning individual soldier’s morale and initiative had evolved
substantially:
“In the new [skirmisher] system the major assumes the functions of a brigade commander; a captain requires the

knowledge and skill of a colonel; a lieutenant performs the duty of a captain; a sergeant takes the place of a lieutenant,
and a corporal, no longer required to simply fire his musket, takes command of a squad or section.”
“To all of these grades latitude is given in the management of their commands under fire, and hence an error in
judgement in any one may initiate a movement that may lose a battle”.[198]
Although still struggling with the loss of control inherent with extended-order
formations, Upton’s doctrine was acknowledging the expanded roles of small unit leaders
and subordinate initiative on the modern battlefield.
The largest doctrinal advance made by the post-war American army occurred with the
issuance of its revised 1891 Infantry Drill Regulations (IDR). The 1891 tactical manuals
expanded Upton’s fundamentals by including ‘tactical interpretations.’ Though not
advanced to the point of endorsing combined arms tactics, the manuals attempted to
“instruct officers how to maneuver and engage their troops to gain advantages in battle.”
Conceptually, the new Drill Regulations, separated mechanical drill motions from tactical
maneuver. This conceptualization was practically applied by dividing the manuals into
two sections—Close Order, which directed the formations necessary to bring troops to the
battlefield, and Extended Order, for its skirmisher employment on the battlefield.[199]
Importantly, the 1891 IDRs designated a squad of eight men as the basis for its
extended-order tactics. The regulations directed dispersed groups of men to advance under
the hail of enemy gunfire individually, by rushes. Professional reviews of the 1891 IDRs
made such dramatic observations as “[w]ith these tactics the line of battle disappears.…
The fighting line will consist of a series of squads as skirmishers, the normal number of
men in a squad being eight.” Arguably, this was the most advanced tactical thinking
displayed by the American army to date.[200]
Unfortunately, Civil War armies and their successors did not stress combined arms and
tactical coordination among service arms. The epitome of Civil War era staff expertise was
commonly viewed as the execution of a successful flanking maneuver rather than the
detailed orchestration of an attack. Civil War infantry attacks often displayed poor
cooperation among service arms, resulting in minimal exploitation of the benefits of
combined arms.[201] The U.S. army continued its under-emphasis on inter-arm
cooperation in the years following the Civil War. In 1874, the War Department published
revised drill manuals using the concept of ‘assimilated tactics.’ However, rather than
attempting to create combined arms doctrine, assimilated tactics merely strove to
disseminate a “system of commands and formations that were compatible among infantry,
artillery, and cavalry.” Thus, the army was focused on the basic task of ensuring service

arms could understand each other rather than the more complex capability of coordinating
with one another.[202]
Ironically, Napoleon, who most Civil War commanders strove to emulate, willfully
sought to combine the strengths of the army’s service arms to maximize his chances of
victory. Though the concept of combined arms had not yet been formally developed,
Napoleonic battle tactics often included an artillery bombardment to weaken the enemy
line, followed by an infantry assault to seize the main objective. The decisive action,
normally performed by the cavalry or infantry reserve, exploited the broken or weakened
line. Napoleon thereby employed combined arms to influence the battle at key times and
locations. Unfortunately, detailed cooperation among service arms seems to have eluded
most Civil War commanders.[203]

APPENDIX B: BREAKING THE LINES
Wars of German Unification (1864-1871)
If the American Civil War did not prove the necessity of adopting open-order tactics,
the Wars of German Unification, especially the Franco-Prussian War, certainly reinforced
the concept. Even before the Franco-Prussian War, the Austro-Prussian War of 1866
demonstrated the effects of modern firepower. The combination of the superiority of the
Prussian ‘needle-gun’, superb fire discipline, and flexible skirmisher formations was
credited with assisting the Prussians in tactically overwhelming the Austrian army.
However, the odds (in terms of weaponry and tactics) would be nearly even during the
Franco-Prussian War. Both nations’ armies possessed breech-loading rifles and armies
trained in skirmisher tactics.[204] By the outbreak of the War of 1870, the French army
was armed with the reliable chassepot rifle. The Chassepot had a flat trajectory and longer
range (1,200 meters) than the Prussian Dreyse ‘needle-gun’ (800 yards). As a result, the
Prussians found it extremely difficult to maneuver against French infantry in the open
when not supported by artillery fire.[205] Though close-order formations were still
expected to carry the decisive action, observers noted that skirmisher formations were
better suited counter the firepower of breech-loading weaponry.[206]
The increased firepower resulting from rifled, breech-loading weaponry had a large
impact on the participants of the Franco-Prussian War. Observers of the war noted both an
evolution in infantry tactics and the implementation of combined arms techniques (beyond
those of Napoleonic origin). Military officers realized that extended-order skirmisher
tactics would be critical to survival on the modern battlefield. Additionally, they asserted
that combined arms techniques would be essential to the success of infantry attacks.[207]
In terms of combined arms techniques, military observers noted the necessity for
increased interaction and cooperation between service arms. The Germans derived the
term Great Tactics to describe the integration of service arms.[208] The Franco-Prussian
War saw an increased emphasis on the importance of combined arms, especially artillery
fire, to support infantry maneuver.[209] Although the infantry was still expected to
execute the decisive stroke, artillery was credited with deciding several key battles by
preparing and covering the ground movement.[210] Integration was given a high priority,
resulting in evolution beyond Napoleonic era Grand Tactics, (or the integration of
infantry, cavalry, and artillery after gaining contact with the enemy). Turning movements,

now routinely practiced by German commanders, were heavily reliant on artillery support
for success. Artillery not only prepared the battlefield, but also supported the infantry
turning movements.[211] To achieve a superiority of firepower the Germans often massed
their artillery into huge formations.[212] The increased range of the German 80mm field
gun allowed them to concentrate in relative safety from the shorter-ranged French pieces.
[213] [214] (The longer range of German pieces enabled them to engage enemy targets at
ranges as high as 3,500 yards. However, most artillery battles were fought at ranges less
than 1,600 yards).[215]
To neutralize the lethality of enemy artillery, while still covering the infantry advance,
German artillery planners divided battles into two distinct phases—counter-battery fire
and infantry support. Increased artillery range assisted the Germans in achieving their first
task, the neutralization of the French batteries. Once the enemy guns were silenced and the
infantry advance was commenced, the German’s dissolved their concentrated formations
and pushed artillery to the front lines to support the infantry. These forward-deployed
units fought as batteries, sections, or individual guns and provided direct-fire support to
the advancing infantry. Ideally, the infantry would advance under the cover of friendly
artillery fire. Prussian infantry came to depend on friendly artillery fire to suppress
defensive chassepot fire.[216]
Due to the increased lethality of small arms, direct-fire artillery support was extremely
costly to the gun crews. Regardless, German gun crews were routinely placed within
enemy small arms range in order to provide cover to advancing infantry. German field
artillery regulations dictated that Prussian infantry should “never have to do without the
support of the artillery” and that Prussian artillery “must not, in decisive moments, avoid
even the heaviest infantry fire.”[217]
The effects of technology also resulted in modified infantry tactics. Specifically,
infantry in open terrain would have to be deployed in extended-order skirmisher
formations to survive. Additionally, the movement of infantry formations would now have
to be covered by artillery fire, or “distant musketry fire” to provide it protection while
moving.[218] (Arguably, this concept was a precursor to the contemporary base of fire
concept). Though German doctrine dictated positioning supports as close as possible
behind advancing infantry, heavy enemy fire resulted in supporting formations remaining
at the extreme effective range of their weapons to increase their survivability.[219]
The French opened fire with their Chassepots at ranges of 1,000 to 1,400 paces.
Although this long-range fire was moderately effective, it rarely checked Prussian

movement. The fire was strong enough to force the Prussians to deploy half-companies
into skirmisher formations to continue the advance. Within 800 yards of the enemy
position the intensity of enemy firepower normally necessitated that the remainder of the
regiment assume skirmisher formations. Only preparatory movements, protected by
covering terrain, could be executed (in the more easily controlled) close-order formations.
[220] [221] At 500 paces chassepot fire became extremely effective, and by 400 paces
infantrymen were forced to seek cover or assume prone positions. Advances were
accomplished by a succession of rushes using terrain to provide cover. As a result of the
high volume of breech-loading rifle fire, firefights grew heated at ranges from 500-150
paces from the enemy position. Although not yet reflected in official doctrine, the
battlefield experience of the war proved that “extended order [was] the rule, close order
the exception.”[222] Notwithstanding, the rigors of actual combat prompted the German
army to deviate from its written doctrine in order to survive on the battlefield:
“As the absolute impossibility of this [close-order] maneuver, so much practiced on the parade ground, was apparent
to our generals, it was never attempted on the offensive, and when tried on the defensive generally failed. On both sides
therefore, the tactics of the drill ground and peacetime maneuvers were completely altered as far as concerns the fire of
the masses”.[223]
Consequently, close-order and volley-fire tactics were abandoned in favor of skirmisher
tactics. In fact, throughout the course of the war the relationship between the roles of
skirmisher and close-order formations was reversed—instead of merely supporting the
attack, skirmishers now performed the decisive action. Conversely, close-order formations
were relegated to covering the skirmishers’ advance with massed supporting fires.[224]
However, like the commanders of the American Civil War, German army leadership
was hesitant to relinquish close-order formations due to the advantages in discipline and
control inherent in linear tactics. The loss in control caused by extended formations would
necessitate an increase in the discipline, initiative, intelligence, and self-reliance of the
average soldier and non-commissioned officer. Both junior officers and individual
skirmishers would now be required to make independent decisions including the use of
cover and terrain, fire discipline, and the aggressive use of supporting arms. The reduction
in direct tactical control, combined with the need for semi-independent action, would
result in the employment of a smaller tactical formation—the company—as the base
tactical unit.[225]
In most Western armies, deeply ingrained concerns about the loss of discipline and
morale prevented a full conversion to modern tactics. Officers worried that an over
extension of skirmisher lines would result in a loss of control, discipline, and morale. Even

such forward military thinkers such as Prussian Generals Wilhelm Balck and Albrecht von
Boguslawski warned against such over-extension and too much reliance on extended-order
tactics.[226] In fact, fear over losing control during battle caused a reverse in advanced
military doctrine. The German Drill Regulations of 1888, while mentioning the
importance of subordinate initiative, retained close-order formations as the primary attack
formation.[227]
British military theorist, Colonel G. F. R. Henderson, in his initial (pre-Boer War)
writings, felt that the interest in extended-order tactics brought about by the Franco-
Prussian War was overemphasized and “fundamentally unsound.”[228] [229] Some senior
officers felt that extended-order formations were difficult to control and resulted in
subordinate units that exercised too much independence. Henderson cited examples from
the War of 1870 of both individual soldiers and entire companies deviating from their
initial orders and maneuvering to seek cover. Henderson claimed that these deviations
caused confusion and disorder on the battlefield.[230]
Henderson viewed the German tendency for subordinate initiative and decentralization
in a poor light:
“… once the zone of aimed infantry fire is reached, the control of the firing line must perforce be resigned to the
section leaders, and that even the captain can only exercise a very general supervision over his company, whilst battalion
commanders are expressly forbidden to interfere, during the passage of this zone, with the action of their subordinates.
There is no disposition to restrict the responsibility of the subaltern officers, and the maxims laid down in the Field
Exercises, as well as the training of the battalions, have for their object the fitting of the junior officer for important
duties”.[231]
In response, Henderson yearned to,
“… restore the order and cohesion to the attack which it lost in 1866 and 1870, to substitute for rashness,
impatience, and individual fighting, the strength and momentum of concentrated numbers bound together by a discipline
which permits no swerving from the line of direction … better adapted than the disintegrating methods of the Germans
…[232] (My italics)”
Henderson believed that the cooperation of service arms was the key to success in
battle—substantially more important than skirmisher tactics. He feared that the dispersion
of troops would lead to “lack of strength at the decisive moment, the dispersion and
intermingling of tactical units, and the control of the troops taken out of the hands of the
superior leaders.”[233] Henderson’s desire to maintain order on the battlefield was
exemplified by his approval of the late nineteenth century British drill book revisions. The
pre-Boer War doctrine stressed that “instead of encouraging excessive exercise of
initiative, the paramount importance of order, of the cohesion of the attacking body, and
maintaining the true direction is included on every page.”[234]

In accordance with Henderson’s views, several British officers would later revert to
traditional formations in an effort to maintain order on the battlefield. A compromise in
the varying doctrines resulted wherein, “Close and extended order combined [were]
officially taught as the form for infantry; close order whenever it is possible, extended
order only when it is unavoidable.” Additionally, the British drill book emphasized the
frontal attack to achieve the decisive action, rather than flank attacks.[235] Ironically,
these observations are the exact opposites of those the Prussians derived from the Franco-
Prussian War.
It took the catastrophe of the Anglo-Boer War to convert Colonel Henderson to a
supporter of extended formations. His post Boer War observations reversed his previous
writings and praised the versatility of extended skirmisher formations and the exhibition
of subordinate initiative on the battlefield. In his later (post-Boer War) writings, Colonel
Henderson finally realized that to survive on the modern battlefield, infantry in open
terrain would have to advance in extended-order, with “at least five paces between
skirmishers [along with] supports and reserves in the same open order.”[236]

APPENDIX B: PART II—THE RISE OF THE CAPTAIN
Prussian Doctrine of Subordinate Initiative
Since field grade officers could no longer exert direct control over the dispersed
extended-order formations, the role of junior officers became more prominent. Company
commanders (normally captains) would have to make independent decisions based on the
general directions from their superiors, rather than mindlessly following the orders of
senior officers. This necessitated an increase in the “power, responsibility, and
independence of action” of junior officers.[237] According to one senior military officer,
“there should be no interference whatever with a company … except through the
captain”—a radical statement for the times.[238] Concepts stressing increased subordinate
initiative would have huge implications in the development of doctrine in the years to
follow, especially German command and control methods.
The experiences of the Franco-Prussian war strengthened the emphasis on
decentralized leadership concepts. In order to overcome the uncertainty of the modern
battlefield commanders would be expected to make decisions on their own, without
waiting for higher direction. After the War of 1870, there was a better understanding that
military precepts were “intended to be adapted with elasticity to prevailing circumstances;
one must act up to the living spirit, not to the dead letter.”[239] Even before the war, the
Reglement of 1812 had espoused concepts such as Auftragstaktik, or mission tactics,
which demanded individual initiative from all leaders in order to achieve the commander’s
overall objective. This new doctrine was designed to allow the army’s leadership to
operate under conditions of battlefield uncertainty without becoming paralyzed.[240]
General Graf Helmuth von Moltke (the elder), Chief of the Prussian (later, German)
General Staff from 1858-1888, was uniquely capable of adapting and modifying the
principles of war practiced by Napoleon to the technological advances of the Industrial
Age.[241] The precepts of his innovations have their origin in the nineteenth century
Prussian doctrine of Kesselschlacht— battle of encirclement and annihilation. Though the
doctrine was being modified to account for developments in firepower and other
technology in the post-Napoleonic Era, its basic principles remained ingrained in the
German command mentality—conduct flanking attacks in order to encircle and destroy
the enemy army.[242] In 1869, even before the war, the German General Staff had issued
the Regulations for Higher Troop Commanders. The regulations “warned against the

futility of frontal attacks and urged that wherever possible Prussian troops should attack
the flanks of the enemy position.”[243] Flanking and encirclements were directed as the
key elements of Prussian doctrine. Moltke had already identified the strong advantages
associated with a tactical defensive and was determined to exploit them.[244]
Moltke realized that the centralized military operations, which were effective during
the earlier Wars of German Unification, would no longer be sufficient due to the effects of
advanced technology brought about by the Industrial Age.[245] The influences of the
Industrial Age would cause Moltke to build upon the theories devised by his predecessors
in the General Staff. By analyzing the lessons of the American Civil War and Prussia’s
experiences in the minor Danish War of 1864, the General Staff realized the newly gained
predominance of defensive tactics. The Prussian military was adapting to the effects of
modern firepower on offensive operations.[246]
The basics of Prussian tactics included the employment of an advanced guard to
reconnoiter the location and disposition of an enemy force. Ideally, (if the situation
favored a decisive battle), an artillery detachment would be used to cover the main body’s
movement to concentrate and deploy on the battlefield.[247] Superior numbers and
firepower would thereby be concentrated on the enemy.[248] The Franco-Prussian War
provided Moltke ample motivation to enact additional changes to Prussian tactical
doctrine. Huge manpower losses at the Battles of Spicheren and Worth reinforced the fact
that increased firepower had made frontal attacks extremely costly. After much loss in
initial frontal assaults, both battles were ultimately decided by German flank attacks.[249]
[250]
Ideally, Moltke strove to employ the advantages of modern technology to coordinate
the movements of separate units so as to converge simultaneously on an enemy force. This
would allow the Prussian military to execute an operational-level encirclement of the
enemy. The aim of Moltke’s strategy was to ensure that the Prussian army retained the
initiative, thereby forcing the enemy to react to its actions.[251] Specifically, the Prussian
goal was to employ operational maneuver to force the enemy into frontally attacking a
strong friendly position. The advantages of the tactical defense could then be exploited. In
order to account for modern technology, the Prussian Kesselschlacht doctrine remained
offensive, but Prussian tactics were becoming increasingly defensive.[252]
However, modern technology also enabled enemy armies to detect and react to tactical
flanking attacks initiated after contact had been established. Additionally, the huge
frontages of modern armies, combined with the range and lethality of modern weaponry,

made turning movements within the range of the enemy impractical. Therefore, to be
successful, flanking attacks had to be conducted outside the enemy’s reconnaissance zone.
These factors demanded that maneuver forces remain separate—only to converge during,
not prior, to battle.[253] Ideally, Moltke strove to fix his opponent with a strong advanced
force, and then envelop him with the remaining forces converging from multiple axes.
Moltke’s revolutionary concepts gave birth to the operational-level of warfare by
espousing maneuver to accomplish strategic objectives.[254]

APPENDIX B: PART III—LEADERSHIP BY DIRECTIVE
Weisungsführung
Moltke’s belief in decentralization went beyond tactical concerns and permeated the
highest levels of his strategic thought. At heart, he was a firm believer in the
Clausewitzian dictums concerning the uncertainty of warfare. Moltke defined strategy as a
“system of expedients.”[255] Since a commander could never accurately forecast the
outcome of an engagement, a series of improvisations would ultimately overcome binding
orders. This type of environment would once again highlight the necessity for independent
action by local commanders. According to Moltke, the best service a commander could
provide his forces was skillful staff work aimed at concentrating the army at the place and
time that provided it with the maximum possible advantage. Once deployed, a commander
should be issued only broad, conceptual objectives. In order to react to unexpected
occurrences, the local commander must be given the latitude to make independent
decisions.[256]
Although technology had increased the ability of military staffs to control large armies,
the weakness of Moltke’s operational planning was the limitations of the 19th century’s
fledgling communications systems. Extensive coordination between widely separated
armies, and between each army’s individual service arm components, was extremely
critical to success in modern warfare. The existing communication systems—primitive
radios, telegraph networks, and couriers—could not ensure reliable and timely
coordination between military organizations.[257] In order to overcome this weakness,
Moltke strove to modify the entire high-level command philosophy of the Prussian army.
In order to allow operational maneuver, German army commanders had to operate with a
limited amount of independence. Although all the armies had to work harmoniously
towards the achievement of common strategic objectives, individual subordinate
commanders would have to display command initiative in order to overcome the
limitations of the current communications system.[258]
Theoretically, Moltke’s command philosophy would overcome the obstacles of
commanding distant armies by instituting the practice of Weisungsführung (or leadership
by directive). The General Staff would issue operational plans to army commanders, then
rely on their individual initiative (assisted by a competent staff officer corps) to achieve
the expected objective.[259] This leadership philosophy recognized that the local

commanders were the best informed to make appropriate decisions. Consequently, the
German command system allowed subordinate commanders wide latitude. The desire to
maintain centralized coordination was attained by the issuance of general directives
describing the overall objective. The system also ensured that time critical decisions could
be made without the delays previously required to seek approval from higher authorities.
The German operational tempo, by encouraging the issuance of timely orders, would now
have a decided advantage over Germany’s enemies’.[260]
In the years prior to the World War, the German concept of initiative was expanded by
General Helmuth von Moltke (the younger—nephew of his elder namesake). He realized
that modern generals would have to control massive armies along fronts that were
hundreds of miles long. Though the German High Command (or die Oberste
Heeresleitung, OHL) would later flounder under his leadership, the younger Moltke’s
clear understanding of the need for subordinate unit initiative and mission-type orders was
displayed by his pre-war comments:
“[Modern war] will probably always at first come to fractional battles of individual armies or army groups. If the
conduct of these battles leads to a common result, which lies within the sense of the whole operation, then the operation
was correctly conducted. These individual battles can however lead to fragmentation and thereby destroy a whole
operation. They can lead to a situation in which everything dissolves into individual fighting groups, each of which
pursues its own particular purpose … The High Command will not always be able to bring to battle under favorable
conditions every army in the extensive operational area. However it probably can and must keep in view a great, clearly
recognized, logical, and firmly held goal, and continually direct all forces toward this goal[261] [My Italics]”
The younger Moltke deduced that the High Command should not attempt to directly
influence the conduct of battles. The OHL’s mission was transformed into directing
actions at the operational level. Subordinate unit commands would now be responsible for
the conduct of their battles and associated maneuvering.
Clearly, the younger Moltke had expressed the need for increased initiative at the
individual army headquarters. He believed huge armies, fighting on vast battlefields,
would force modern commanders to depend on their army commander’s initiative, stating,
“The Supreme Command needs to be intelligently helped by the initiative of army
commanders. The latter, on their side, should always think in terms of the general situation
and try increasingly to conform to it.”[262]
This process marked the diffusion of subordinate initiative to the lower levels of army
command. This practice would expand until subordinate initiative and adherence to
mission-type orders were demonstrated at the lowest levels of army command.[263] A
distinct difference between the German army and its opponents was the German army’s

encouragement of junior subordinate initiative. This tendency was demonstrated in both
the staff corps and regular army line units. Junior officers were routinely given important
tasks. For instance, even lower-ranking General Staff officers had direct access to both
frontline commanders and senior staff officers.[264]

APPENDIX C: VICTORY THE HARD WAY
The Anglo-Boer War (1899-1902)
Britain entered into the Boer War woefully unprepared for the effects of modern
conflict in almost all aspects of training, doctrine, and organization. The obsolescence of
British training and doctrine was described by J. F. C. Fuller as a system that viewed war,
“… as an unending succession of Peninsula engagements …It never considered what the enemy might or might not
do … It was rigidly formal, rigidly conventional, and rigidly exact. To doubt the doctrine of the 1896 Drill Book, with its
columns and echelons and its squares would have been heretical … When this is realized, I feel we ought to be
charitably disposed towards those gallant gentlemen who led us from one tactical absurdity into another; for they had
been schooled in a system which was absurdity itself”.[265]
The British army corps organization was equally outdated. The basic tactical unit of the
British army was the battalion. The regimental headquarters performed mainly
administrative functions. The corps system was not yet established as a permanent
institution, but rather a temporarily formed expeditionary force composed of individual
units. This ad hoc organization had never previously trained together. Neither the corps
nor divisional headquarters possessed staffs whose caliber of training allowed for even
basic coordination of service arms.[266]
Additionally, the composition of the expeditionary corps was faulty. The British War
Office initially emphasized infantry over cavalry. The first British divisions sent to Africa
contained two brigades totaling 10,000 men. Of that total force, only 850 were
cavalrymen.[267] In fact, of the first 45,000 troops sent to Africa, only 6,000 were cavalry
or mounted infantry, regardless of the fact that the British staff college had taught that
cavalry was “the most desirable arm to contend with the Boer.”[268] Regardless, British
cavalry would have most likely been ill prepared for the task of reconnaissance and
screening. Their pre-war training still emphasized Napoleonic era shock tactics rather the
subtler tasks related to observation and intelligence.[269] A shortage of cavalry would
cause difficulties in reconnaissance and screening during the expedition’s early operations.
For example, during Lt-Gen Lord Methuen’s offensive to relieve Kimberley (beginning in
November 1899), a lack of cavalry reconnaissance assets restricted the execution of any
wide, flanking maneuvers. The expeditionary force advanced with a minimal
reconnaissance screen and performed few operational-level maneuvers to gain a positional
advantage on the battlefield.[270] This lack of operational (and even tactical) maneuver is
shocking when viewed in direct contrast to the operations of the Prussian army in the War

of 1870. (See Appendix B)
Even before the outbreak of the Boer War, the British army was made aware of several
of its tactical deficiencies. In 1898, the British army conducted peacetime maneuvers that
demonstrated the army’s reliance on frontal attacks (without planning secondary
supporting attacks), and its complete disregard for performing reconnaissance prior to
attacking. British tactics were heavily dependent on rigid formations of the Napoleonic era
and Crimean War rather than the skirmisher formations made prevalent by the War of
1870. Though British doctrine had incorporated limited use of skirmisher tactics, these
techniques were not regularly practiced due to training area restrictions in Britain. For the
same reasons, the development of combined service arm tactics was not practiced during
peacetime. Specifically, infantry tactics depended on close-order formations employing
volley-fire at close range. Infantry maneuvers were not coordinated with the artillery, nor
did they attempt to use the terrain to cover their advance.[271]
Huge British losses of the Anglo-Boer War once again warned of the obsolescence of
close-order infantry tactics. As stated above, British written doctrine at the beginning of
the war espoused close-order battalion formations with a large emphasis on volley-fire.
Though the Drill Book of 1896 did not include any guidance on the deployment of troops
in extended-order, battle regulations did allow the use of a skirmisher screen to cover the
frontage of an advancing formation. However, the main attack was to be conducted by
Napoleonic era close-order infantry formations consisting of three battle lines.[272]
Independent skirmisher fire was advised only at short range, after the volley-fire was
completed. The British infantry advance relied on volley-fire, delivered at close range,
rather than the German technique of individual skirmish fire at longer ranges.[273]
Specifically, British tactics recommended advancing, (in close-order) to within 800
yards of the enemy line before deploying. At that time, a battle deployment of three lines
(attack, supports, and reserves) was formed for the attack, in close or extended-order.
Virtually no emphasis was placed on preparing the attack by fire. British artillery was not
encouraged to cooperate with infantry once the attack commenced. Employment of single
batteries was commonplace even though British doctrine recommended the concentration
of batteries. As with most armies, direct-fire was the normal method of fire, with effective
ranges between 1,500 to 3,000 yards.[274]
In contrast to rigid British tactics, the capabilities of the Boer infantryman’s
Spanish/German Mauser model 1893 rifle exploited the advantages of modern technology.
The rifle was fed by a rapid loading cartridge clip that dramatically increased its rate of

fire. Additionally, the round had smokeless powder which helped the shooter remain
hidden. The Mauser’s flat trajectory was especially lethal within 300 yards, but effective
over 1000 yards.[275] The ability to produce a high volume of accurate, long-range rifle
fire allowed the Boers to adopt revolutionary infantry tactics to support their defensive
war.
Boer light infantry, armed with Mauser rifles in irregular formations, decimated British
regulars, advancing in columns.[276] This became apparent early in the conflict during the
skirmish at Graspan (25 November 1899) when a British naval brigade, attacking a Boer
position in close-order, suffered nearly 50 percent casualties. In the same skirmish, “well-
dispersed supporting infantry suffered few losses”, yet the British continued to overlook
the discrepancy in their tactics.[277]
Later, the harmful effects of British un-preparedness were again made obvious by the
extremely heavy British losses during the “Black Week” of December 1899. In the span of
six days (10-15 December 1899), the Boers repulsed the British army in three separate
battles (Stormberg, Magersfontein, and Colenso). The combined casualties caused the
British 380 killed, 1,550 wounded, and 860 prisoners of war compared to the Boers’ 100
killed and 250 wounded. In each case, the British army failed to reconnoiter strong Boer
defensive positions prior to its advance.[278] The high British casualties can be largely
attributed to the Imperial Army’s outdated tactics and doctrine.
For example, at the Battle of Magersfontein (11 December 1899), the British deployed
4,000 men in a (close-order) quarter column formation.[279] The British commander
planned on advancing the column to within 300-500 yards of the Boer positions before
deploying to an extended-order formation with a frontage of 2,500 yards. During the
advance, a large portion of the formation was pinned by heavy Boer rifle fire. In order to
extricate them, a huge artillery barrage was executed to cover withdrawal of the pinned
British infantry. The British army suffered 950 casualties (seven percent of the
division[280]), with 210 killed, as compared to Boer losses of 90 killed and 188 wounded.
[281] Though British artillery was used extensively, the protection afforded by the Boers’
defensive fighting positions reduced the effectiveness of the bombardment, demonstrating
the importance of fieldworks on the modern battlefield.[282]
Later at Colenso, 6,000 Boers were able to resist the advance of 21,000 British troops
from dispersed defensive positions along a riverbed. The Boers derailed the two-pronged
British attack by decimating a forward deployed artillery brigade with infantry rifle fire.
[283] Despite the possession of a superior number of artillery, the British infantry main

assault, without effective artillery support, ground to a halt. (Forty-four British artillery
pieces opposed five Boer guns). Meanwhile, the second prong of the attack, also formed
into dense, slow-moving quarter columns, was stalled by heavy Boer fire.[284]
In these early battles, the strength of the defensive became readily apparent to the
Boers. Boer infantrymen adopted revolutionary defensive tactics, including digging
individual fighting positions on forward slopes, rather than ridges and hilltops.[285]
Fighting positions increased the accuracy of Boer rifle fire since the firing point was level
with the ground—creating lethal “grazing fire” as opposed to “plunging fire”. Grazing
fire, with its level trajectory, was lethal out to the Mauser’s maximum effective range—
substantially longer than “plunging fire” which, due to its steep firing angle, was short-
range and inaccurate.[286]
These tactics worked superbly at the Battle of Modder Bridge (November 1899),
demonstrating the strength of the tactical defense. British forces could have easily flanked
the Boer position, but opted for a frontal attack. Disregarding their own cavalry’s warnings
of enemy reinforcement, the British attacked straight into a strong enemy position. The
British main infantry force was once again pinned by accurate Boer rifle and artillery fire,
aided by the placement of whitewashed stones as range markers. British infantry within
1,200 yards of the Boer front were forced to crawl to avoid the enemy artillery and rifle
fire, and mounted troops could not safely approach within 2,000 yards. More importantly,
the British artillery formations had to withdraw to positions 1,400 yards from the front to
avoid withering enemy fire. The British were once again forced to rely on a heavy artillery
barrage to withdraw their pinned forces and press a flank attack.[287]
During the initial (conventional) phase of the war, the dispersion of frontline troops
was central to Boer tactics. At the battles of Magersfontein and Colenso, the Boers
maintained a density of 600 men per mile of frontage. The low density of forward-
deployed troops reduced the effectiveness of British artillery preparations, but was strong
enough to counter the nominal British cavalry and screening forces.[288] The concept of
low troop density tactics foreshadowed the flexible defense doctrine that would later be
developed by Germany in World War I.[289]
British Boer War tactics slowly evolved, reflecting the use of low-density troop ratios
to counter increased firepower. By the Battle of Paardeberg (February 1900), British firing
lines were described as “strong, but not dense” and were deployed at long range (outside
enemy effective rifle fire). Formations were formed in breadth rather than depth to
increase survivability. (In fact, German observers noted British lines were so thin at places

that they did not possess enough firepower to continue the advance without reinforcement
from supports).[290] Additionally, once within the enemy’s effective weapons range, only
skirmisher formations were employed. British infantry advanced by any means possible—
running, rushing, and crawling— rather than using rigid linear tactics. Demonstrating
basic fire and movement tactics during the assault, alternating portions of the firing line
covered sections conducting rushes. However, the cooperation of artillery and infantry
was still evaluated as weak by German observers.[291][292]
The Boer War demonstrated the pre-eminence of artillery on the modern battlefield.
(The British army’s reliance on artillery to extricate its trapped infantry has already been
covered, but the Boers’ unconventional artillery tactics also underscored several critical
lessons). The Boers’ scarcity of artillery pieces caused them to devise irregular defensive
tactics that yielded successful results. A common Boer tactic was to employ single guns
rather than batteries. A single piece was often successful at contesting a pass or ford, in
addition to bogging down the advance of an opposing force. For example, although Boer
artillery fire was not credited with causing an inordinate amount of casualties at
Ladysmith, it was effective at disrupting and preventing British ground sorties.[293]
On several occasions, small numbers of Boer guns were able to neutralize much larger
numbers of British pieces.[294] Though this disparity was partially due to the longer range
of the Boer guns, a large portion of blame must be attributed to faulty British artillery
doctrine.[295] British artillery tactics demanded a counter-battery artillery duel prior to
commencing the infantry battle. However, the previously mentioned dispersion and
entrenchment of Boer artillery made this counter-battery duel largely ineffective. To be
successful, the British would have to coordinate their infantry and artillery attacks, rather
than treating them as separate events. During the pre-attack artillery bombardments, Boer
defenders were relatively safe in their field works. However, if the British had coordinated
their artillery bombardments with the infantry advance, the Boers would have had to
expose themselves to artillery fire to defend against the advancing infantry.[296]
British post-war artillery doctrine seemed to incorporate these lessons. If the British
possessed superiority in artillery, their guns were massed to achieve a concentration of
fire. However, if the enemy had a superiority of artillery, British gunners were directed to
disperse their firing units (in batteries or sections) along the infantry firing line, (mirroring
Boer tactics). Unfortunately, the British had incorporated a lesson with a skewed
objective. Boer artillery tactics were devised solely for defensive tactics. Boer artillery
dispersion, though effective in harassing and neutralizing enemy attacks, was not designed

to influence an offensive battle.[297] Massed artillery and later, massed fires were to
become the way of the future.
In addition to out-ranging British guns, Boer artillery employed improved firing pits
known as Schanzes[298] In addition to providing cover and concealment, the firing pits
were often situated to provide indirect flanking fire, (rather than direct-fire that the British
army doctrinally employed).[299] Beyond highlighting the need for combined arms
coordination, the tactics noted above warned that the days of direct-fire artillery were
coming to an end. Though successful in the Boer War, the Schanze confirmed the
vulnerability of forward-deployed artillery and foreshadowed emergence of indirect-fire
artillery methods. Improved munitions introduced after the war would render even
hardened firing pits susceptible to enemy direct-fire weapons.
Unfortunately, the changing character of the conflict promoted another inaccurate
doctrinal lesson. Early Boer War battles showed heavy reliance on artillery to compensate
for poor infantry tactics. However, from June 1900 to May 1902, the Boer War
transitioned to a guerrilla war against mobile light-infantry. As tactical operations became
‘lighter’, artillery played an increasingly minor role. Mounted troops, rather than
firepower, proved instrumental in countering mobile Boer guerillas. This occurrence was
reflected by the changing composition of the British expeditionary force. By 1901, the
British Forces contained 79,000 mounted troops (including cavalry, mounted infantry, and
mounted Yeomanry). Cavalry and light mounted troops seemed to play an increasingly
important role in modern combat.[300] This trend was in direct contrast to the Prussian
observations concerning the diminished role of modern cavalry and pre-eminence of
massed fire. (See Appendix B)
Nevertheless, the Boer War did convince the British that the primary purpose of
artillery was to support infantry—not to target enemy guns. Henceforth, the British would
focus on gaining fire superiority for its attacking infantry by concentrating its fire on the
enemy line. The Boer rifleman’s lethal accuracy convinced British officers that the
primary threat to friendly infantry was enemy infantry, not artillery. British artillery was
now truly viewed as a supporting arm.[301]
Modified British tactics coordinated artillery support with infantry maneuver. By the
time of battles such as Railway Hill and Hart’s Hill (also 27 February 1900), fledgling fire
and movement infantry tactics, supported by artillery, had been developed. A system of
long rushes at greater distances, followed by short rushes at closer ranges was utilized in
the infantry advance. Each wave of infantry, upon reaching its final position provided

covering fire for subsequent waves. After all assault waves were in their designated
positions, the final attack was commenced.[302]
The British now realized that the coordination of infantry attacks with artillery support
was essential. The Battle of Pieters’ Hill (27 February, 1900) demonstrated the first British
employment of a ‘rolling barrage’ in the Boer War. The earlier attempts at using low angle
artillery fire (of shrapnel and high explosives rounds) on the enemy fighting positions had
proved largely ineffective. Instead of focusing on a counter-battery duel prior to the battle,
artillery was tasked with providing a ‘creeping barrage’ just ahead of advancing infantry.
A bombardment of over 70 guns protected the initial deployment of troops. Rolling
artillery cover, combined with the aforementioned infantry rushes, proved successful at
the Battles of Pieters’, Hart’s, and Railway Hills.[303] Prior to this time, British artillery
would cease-fire once the infantry commenced its advance so as not to fire over friendly
troops. This resulted in the artillery remaining in ‘observation’ during critical periods of
the attack.[304]
At the Battle of Poplar Grove (7 March, 1900) British columns, though still employing
line tactics, deployed a full ten kilometers from the enemy positions and employed
extended-order formations rather than close-order.[305] Before the war’s end, the British
commander issued instructions ending the use of close-order formations in the attack. The
instructions advised deployment to tactical formations between 1,500 to 1,800 yards of the
enemy positions to remain outside the effective range of enemy observation and rifle fire.
By 1901, the British Infantry Drill directed the avoidance of independent frontal attacks, if
at all possible.[306]
By the Battle of Driefontein (10 March 1900), the British Army displayed great
improvement in tactics. British commanders correctly identified firepower as the decisive
element of combat and designed their battle plan accordingly. The correct balance between
firepower and reduced troop density on the firing line was achieved. Thinly formed
skirmish lines were gradually reinforced during their advance by the reserves. This
allowed the British to achieve and maintain a superiority of fire. Additionally, a well-
placed regiment on the flanks provided effective enfilading fire to cover the advance (over
open terrain) of the main attack. British artillery also supported the advance of the
maneuver units. Multiple batteries concentrated their fire on the decisive points along the
Boer lines rather than being distracted into participating in an artillery duel. The artillery
maintained its fire “close in front of the assaulting infantry” during the infantry advance.
The battle demonstrated the importance of fire and movement in “continually increasing

the strength of the fire, and then hurling the shaken enemy from its position by means of a
resolute assault,” that characterized modern war.[307] Additionally, fledgling fire and
maneuver tactics were demonstrated by the employment of an entire regiment as a base of
fire to cover the advance of the main attack. Driefontein underscored the dominance of
fire-tactics over shock tactics.
Early British tactics had employed frontal assaults with minimal cooperation from the
artillery. Often this cooperation was limited to the near worthless practice of employing
‘artillery reconnaissance’—using artillery to draw enemy fire. However, post-war British
military reforms incorporated several important lessons. First and foremost were the
implications of modern firepower. The massed formations found in the Infantry Drill Book
of 1896 were replaced with modern fire-tactics. The Boers’ rapid, long-range fire had
rendered conventional line and column tactics obsolete. Also, since volley-fire had proven
ineffective against low density targets, The Provisional Course of Musketry for the Year
1902 made the precipitous step of abandoning volley-fire and omitting several antiquated
drill positions, in addition to encouraging the use of cover in the attack. Post-war doctrine
directed advancing infantry to open fire at 650 yards to conserve ammunition, intensify
close-in fire, and improve accuracy. Additionally, the ineffective practice of ‘artillery
reconnaissance’ also abandoned.[308]
Arguably, the most significant artillery lesson of the war was the increased employment
of long-range fire and the resultant indirect-fire techniques. The British pre-war Artillery
Drill Book of 1896 defined the maximum engagement range as 3,500 yards. In contrast,
Boers trained with the ranges as high as 6,800 yards. By war’s end, British gunners had
enacted doctrinal and equipment modifications and were targeting ranges of up to 9,000
yards. This involved shooting at targets the gunners could not see (i.e. indirect-fire).
Accordingly, increased emphasis was placed on the training and communication of
Forward Observers to observe fire now out of eyesight. This task was made more difficult
by the loose skirmisher lines and rushes that replaced the rigid, predictable, close-order
formations of the past.[309] By the war’s end, British gunners showed an evolution in
advanced firing methods—employing direct, indirect, and predicted fire techniques.[310]
[311]
Like the Prussians, pre-war British artillery doctrine (advocated in the Artillery Drill
Book of 1896) had stressed the forward deployment of guns during an infantry attack to
provide maximum covering fire. Gun placement was determined by several factors,
including a position with a clear view (direct-fire) and good cover. In contrast, Boer

gunners chose their firing positions based largely on protection from enemy fire. As a
result, the Boers frequently deployed their guns behind ridges and hills to provide long-
range, indirect-fire. Although this resulted in dead zones at various areas, the Boers were
willing to accept these limitations to preserve their numerically scarce assets. By 1902,
British post-war doctrine showed an evolution in artillery support concepts. The revised
doctrine emphasized cover and concealment, resulting in a compromise between
protection and the tactical limitations of indirect-fire.[312]
The Boer War also underscored the importance of the high rates of fire made possible
by the advent of magazine-fed rifles and machineguns. The British devised an offensive
doctrine for the employment of machineguns. The army initially classified them as
artillery and even organized them as batteries. During the Boer War, the British deployed
machineguns at the rate of one per line battalion. By 1908, the army had two per battalion
and requested double that amount. Machinegun tactics sought to maximize the weapon’s
effects on the ‘middle ground’, from 900 to 1,600 yards, where enemy rifle fire was not
very effective against the gun crew. It was estimated that a single machinegun could
provide the same firepower as fifty riflemen. By 1911, the British army had established a
machinegun course which stressed several of the points learned during the South African
campaign—concealment, surprise, and engaging targets in depth. With enemy infantry
deploying into assault formations at 1,800 meters, accurate rifle fire was not effective at
these extended ranges. The only difference between this system and the techniques
employed in the First World War was the ratio of weapons to troops and the employment
of interlocking fields of grazing fire. The Boer War foreshadowed the concept that future
warfare would favor the massed fire of machineguns over individual marksmanship of
riflemen.[313]
Though the South African War demonstrated the value of the machinegun and laid the
basis for future doctrine, its development as an offensive weapon was impeded by
technical problems related to weight and reliability. (Early water-cooled guns weighed
sixty pounds plus water and were prone to jamming and overheating). These deficiencies
led some officers to resist the procurement of machineguns or limit their employment to
the defense. Even after the Russo-Japanese War had proven the machinegun’s usefulness,
the British officer corps remained divided on the specifics of its tactical employment.
Eventually, two machineguns were attached to each infantry battalion, though some
officers felt they should be organized into batteries to augment or replace artillery.[314]
The increased employment of machineguns in European armies at the turn of the

century led most military organizations to the realization that dense, regular skirmish lines
were impractical. Loosely formed skirmish lines executing short rushes were necessary to
overcome the mass fire of machine-gunners. Accordingly, as a result of their experiences
in the Boer War, the British adopted a skirmish line interval ranging between five to
fifteen meters.[315][316]
By 1901, British command and control concepts had also evolved in marked contrast to
pre-war doctrine—dispersed, highly-mobile infantry rushed and crawled in attacks
controlled by whistle commands given by junior officers and NCOs. Individual soldiers
and junior leaders had the responsibility to find cover and direct the timing of their rushes
in accordance with the commander’s guidance.[317] Previously, the colonial influence on
the army encouraged British commanders to become personally involved in the detailed
execution of orders rather than merely providing overall guidance—decentralization of
command necessary for semi-independent operations would have been considered
peculiar. In contrast, the revised Combined Training Manual identified the need for
increased subordinate initiative, stating:
“Success in war cannot be expected unless all ranks have been trained in peace to use their wits. Generals and
commanding officers are, therefore, not only to encourage their subordinates in so doing by affording them constant
opportunities of acting on their own responsibility but, they will also check all practices which interfere with the free
exercise of the judgement, and will break down, by every means in their power, the paralyzing habit to routine, when
acting under service conditions”.[318]
As a result, junior officers and NCOs were allowed a marked increase in responsibility
and command.
Dispersed formations demanded a modified command and control system. Like
Moltke’s Prussian command concepts, the British began to realize that a commander could
only control a battle in the broadest of terms. Subordinate initiative of junior officers and
NCOs would be necessary to accomplish the commander’s overall objectives.[319] (See
appendix)
The lethality of Boer rifle and artillery fire also affected British defensive tactics.
During the initial stages of the war, the British army was hesitant to employ field
entrenchments, fearing a negative, defensive psychology would result. Pre-war British
doctrine only acknowledged two types of field entrenchments—the ‘half-hour’ and ‘hour’
hasty positions were rudimentary earth embankments (of approximately one and one-half
feet) that offered virtually no protection from high-angle fire. However, by Magersfontein
British infantry were becoming accustomed to digging field works (due to sheer
necessity). By wars end, British troops were constructing superb field entrenchments with

great care given to camouflage and protection from overhead fire (even though the number
of Boer artillery pieces had declined). It was also realized that high-angle howitzer fire
was increasingly required to reduce enemy fortifications.[320]

APPENDIX C: PART II—INTERPRETATIONS OF THE BOER WAR
Observations of Foreign Military Observers
The lessons of the Boer War were not lost on the armies of foreign nations. Several
nations sent military observers to study the conflict. In his post war reports, Austrian
observer Captain Robert Trimmel (1870-1959) noted the tactical evolution that had
occurred within the British army. British infantry now advanced behind a protective screen
of skirmishers, with mounted units assigned to screen their flanks. Small pinning forces
were used to fix enemy positions in the front while mobile forces threatened the flanks.
[321][322]
Captain Trimmel noted the necessity for artillery to employ cover and emphasize
concealment to survive on the modern battlefield. He also noted the relatively minor effect
of artillery on well-entrenched troops. Trimmel’s reports emphasized the importance of
fortifications in defensive positions, stating, “Experience showed that neither artillery fire
nor rifle fire alone were strong enough to shake fortified defense positions enough to
allow them to be taken by assault. Even weak very forces were able to produce enough
firepower to stop frontal assaults in suitable terrain.” This type of observation may have
led to the pre-World War underestimation of artillery barrages.[323]
Trimmel’s description of the ‘new’ flow of battle commenced with an artillery
bombardment. (As previously stated, he observed that if the defenders were entrenched,
the barrage usually had little affect). Meanwhile, the British deployed just outside of the
effective range of Boer artillery (approximately 5,000 meters from the enemy position).
The Boer infantry normally commenced individual rifle fire at 2,700 meters. However,
this fire was largely ineffective due to the extended range. As the range decreased, the
lethality of the Boer rifle fire was normally able to limit the advance of British infantry to
900 meters in open terrain. Accordingly, pinning forces often operated at ranges from 900
to 1,800 meters from the Boer lines. Unlike the Franco-Prussian War, even reinforcements
and reserves were forced to abandon close-order formations. Mounted infantry were also
forced to dismount as far as 2,700 meters to advance in relative safety.
Trimmel underscored the necessity of flanking tactics stating, “All these experiences
show that frontal assaults have become impossible as it is not possible to break the
firepower of an adversary who has entrenched himself.”[324] Trimmel disagreed with
German observers who believed that frontal attacks could still be successful if executed

according to approved regulations. In contrast, German accounts cited the battles of
Elandslaagte (October 1899) and Driefontein (March 1990) as successful British frontal
attacks and used them to justify their newly revised doctrine and regulations, largely based
on fire-tactics.[325]
Even before the Boer War was analyzed, the Austro-Hungarian infantry manual of
1889 had declared that pure frontal assaults should only be executed if employing surprise
or exceptionally suitable terrain. “In all other cases the enemy should be contained by a
pinning force while the main attack should be executed as a flanking movement.” Austrian
general officers noted that infantry attacks would have to advance under cover, and with
the support of artillery. Later, advocates of Burenverfahren, or Boer attacks, claimed that
assaults should be conducted by small groups of infantry advancing through a series of
rushes. It was thought that these rushes, emphasizing the use of cover, would offer the best
chance of success against modern firepower. One even advocated the coordination of
howitzers and heavy mortars to support the infantry advance, with balloon observers to
report enemy positions, noting that surprise and flank attacks should take the place of
frontal assaults whenever possible. If unavoidable, a frontal attack would have to be
supported by howitzer fire to be successful.[326]
A reviewer of Trimmel’s observations summarized his lessons of the Boer War with the
following conclusions:
“1. Infantry controlling an open terrain cannot be dislodged even by forces five times their own number.
2. Against entrenched infantry, even artillery fire shows little results, with the possible exception of howitzers.
3. Good camouflage is more important than strength: an invisible enemy cannot be aimed at.
4. It is definitely useful to have cavalry which can shoot, carbines and rifles being better suited to the conditions of
modern warfare than the lance.
5. Attack is still the superior form of warfare, but flanking movements should replace conventional frontal assaults.
Given the firepower of modern rifles, pinning forces in the front of the enemy’s position can be quite small, thereby
freeing more troops for flanking operations.”[327]
In 1903, Austria issued a new infantry manual incorporating several of the observations
and lessons of the Boer War. Many aspects of the manual were promising. It advocated
principles such as establishing fire superiority prior to commencing an attack, the
importance of reconnaissance, and the need for flexibility and initiative in both training
and combat. However, several aspects of the new doctrine were dubious in relation with
the lessons of the Boer War. In order to maintain a superiority of rifle fire, the Austrians

recommended executing long rushes made by large groups of infantry, rather than
emphasizing small unit advances mentioned previously. The Austrians were
overemphasizing troop density in order to achieve massed fire. Future conflicts would
prove long rushes by dense groups of attackers were extremely vulnerable to enemy
firepower. Additionally, the Austrian doctrine emphasized accurate fire, rather than rapid
fire, to conserve ammunition. Ironically, most Boer successes were probably attributed to
their rates of fire (rather than the accuracy of fire).[328]
One very disturbing omission was the removal of the prohibition against unsupported
frontal assaults that was found in the earlier 1889 Austrian regulations. This omission was
in direct contradiction to the lessons of the Boer War, where flanking attacks had been
pivotal to the British army’s later successes. Excluding these deficiencies, the Austrian
infantry manual of 1903 was a sound tactical document for the times. Unfortunately, its
strong points were never realistically incorporated into the army’s practical training [329]
The German reaction to the Boer War’s implications initially mirrored the British
lessons learned. For example, the German revised regulations, issued in 1903, established
firepower as the most decisive element in battle. The previous emphasis on the necessity
of a final bayonet charge was omitted. However, as the years progressed, the German
perspective showed a marked shift. By time the regulations of 1911 were published,
German doctrine was once again downplaying the pre-eminence of firepower and
reemphasizing the importance of tenacity, persistence, and the increased allure of the
bayonet charge. The main firefight was to be conducted at ranges of approximately 800
meters. From this point, the skirmish lines were to advance by a series of rushes to
overtake the enemy positions. The infantry was not restricted to wait for the artillery to
achieve fire superiority.[330]

APPENDIX D: TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Tactics & Techniques
Base of Fire—Fire placed on an enemy force or position to reduce or eliminate the
enemy’s capability to interfere by fire and/or movement of friendly maneuver element(s).
(FM101-5-1, MCRP 5-12C)
Combined Arms—is the full integration of arms in such a way that to counteract one,
the enemy must become more vulnerable to another. (MCDP-1, MCRP 5-12C)
• For the purposes of this essay, combined arms is used to describe the coordination,
cooperation, and integration of service arms, namely infantry and artillery, to achieve the
effect described above.
Fire and Movement—a technique primarily used in the assault wherein a unit or
element advances by bounds or rushes, with sub-elements alternately moving and
providing covering fire for other moving sub-elements. Fire and movement may be done
by individuals (personnel or vehicles) or units (such as fire teams or squads). Usually, fire
and movement is used only when under effective fire from the enemy because it is
relatively slow and difficult to control. (MCRP 5-12C); the simultaneous moving and
firing by men and/or vehicles. This technique is primarily used during the assault of
enemy positions. (FM 101-5-1)
• For the purposes of this essay, Fire and Movement is used to describe assaults by
bodies of troops advancing with no organized base of fire, or covering fire provided by
alternating sections of advancing troops.
Fire and Maneuver—the process of one or more elements establishing a base of fire to
engage the enemy, while other element(s) maneuver to an advantageous position from
which to close with and destroy or capture the enemy. (MCRP 5-12C); the movement of
forces supported by fire to achieve a position of advantage from which to destroy or
threaten destruction of the enemy. (Maneuver, FM 101-5-1)
• Prior to WWI, the systematic delineation of separate fire elements and maneuver
elements was not evidenced. True fire and maneuver tactics, employing designated fire
elements and maneuver (or shock) elements, would not be developed until the First World
War. However, the Boer and Russo-Japanese Wars did demonstrate isolated, yet not
infrequent, incidences of embryonic fire and maneuver techniques (by employing position

infantry— acting as an embryonic base of fire—to support the maneuver of infantry
attacks).
(For specifics concerning the development fire and maneuver, and stormtroop tactics,
see Bradley J. Meyer, “Storm Troop Tactics,” SAW 7123: School of Advanced Warfighting
Selected Readings for Defense in Depth, (AY 2001-02), pp. 1-49, specifically, pp. 14-20).

Fires
Covering Fire—Fire used to protect friendly troops from enemy direct fires. (FM101-5-
1)
Destruction Fire—fire delivered for the sole purpose of destroying material objects.
(JP 1-02)
Direct-fire—gunfire delivered on a target, using the target itself as a point of aim for
either the gun or the director. (JP 1-02)
Indirect-Fire—fire delivered on a target that is not itself used as a point of aim for the
weapons or the director. (JP 1-02)
Marching Fire, or Firing While in Motion—organic fires delivered by attacking
infantry while advancing. (Balck, Tactics, vol. I, p. 381-2)
Neutralization Fire—fire which is delivered to render the target ineffective or unusable.
(JP 102)
Suppression Fire—fire delivered to temporarily degrade an opposing force or the
performance of a weapons system below the level needed to fulfill its mission objectives.
(JP 1-02)

Tactical Formations
Close-Order, Line and Column, or Linear Formations— rigid, linear formations based
on the tactics of Frederick the Great and Napoleon. Traditionally, soldiers were arrayed (at
a specified interval and distance) in three ranks. The first line was the firing line, followed
by a line of supports. The supports bolstered the firing line with rifle/musket fire, and/or
manpower. The last rank, the reserves, replaced casualties and exploited any gaps in the
enemy line created by the first two lines. (Bradley J. Meyer, “Storm Troop Tactics,” SAW
7123: School of Advanced Warfighting Selected Readings for Defense in Depth, (AY
2001-02), pp. 20-2).
Skirmish Line, Extended-Order, or Open-Order—an irregular infantry formation.
Although essentially linear, a skirmish line does not maintain precise alignment between
soldiers. Companies, platoons, sections, squads, and individual soldiers advance by a
series of rushes. Soldiers are afforded the flexibility to fire, take cover, and conduct
limited individual maneuver. Compared to close-order formations, the skirmish line was
difficult to control in battle due to the dispersion and individual movement of troops.
(Bradley J. Meyer, “Storm Troop Tactics,” SAW 7123: School of Advanced Warfighting
Selected Readings for Defense in Depth, (AY 2001-02), pp. 20-2).

Levels of War
Strategy (and the strategic-level of war)—defines those activities that focus directly on
achieving national policy objectives. (MCDP-1)
Operational art (and the associated operational-level of war)—describes the actions
that link the strategic and tactical levels. The operational level of war) deals with the art
and science of winning campaigns—such as whether to engage an enemy in battle, or
refuse battle in support of higher aims. (MCDP-1)
Tactics (and the tactical-level of war)—refers to the concepts and methods used to
accomplish a particular mission in either combat or other military operations. Tactics
focus on the application of combat power to defeat an enemy force in combat at a
particular time and place. (MCDP-1)

Warfighting Doctrines/Philosophies
Maneuver Warfare—a warfighting philosophy that seeks to shatter the enemy’s
cohesion through a variety of rapid, focused, and unexpected actions which create a
turbulent and rapidly deteriorating situation with which the enemy cannot cope. (MCRP 5-
12C)
Defense-in-depth—the siting of mutually supporting defense positions designed to
absorb and progressively weaken attack, prevent initial observations of the whole position
by the enemy, and to allow the commander to maneuver the reserve. (JP 1-02)
Position Defense—the type of defense in which the bulk of the defending force is
disposed in selected tactical localities where the decisive battle is to be fought. Principal
reliance is placed on the ability of the forces in the defended localities to maintain their
positions and to control the terrain between them. The reserve is used to add depth, to
block, or restore the battle position by counterattack. (JP 1-02)
All above definitions were derived or directly taken from:
Joint Staff, Joint Publication 1-02: Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and
Associated Terms, (Joint Staff, 2001), U. S. Marine Corps, MCDP-1: Warfighting,
(Headquarters United States Marine Corps, 1997), Department of the Army, FM101-5-1:
Operational Terms and Symbols, (Headquarters, Department of the Army, 1985), and/or
U. S. Marine Corps. MCRP-5-12C: Marine Corps Supplement to the Department of
Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms. Washington D.C.: Headquarters
United States Marine Corps, 1998 Historical military terminology was taken from Bradley
J. Meyer, “Storm Troop Tactics,” SAW 7123: School of Advanced Warfighting Selected
Readings for Defense in Depth, (AY 2001-02), pp. 14-2; and, Balck, Tactics, vol. I, p. 381-
2.
REQUEST FROM THE PUBLISHER

Thank you so much for reading our book, we hope you really enjoyed it.
As you probably know, many people look at the reviews on Amazon before they decide to
purchase a book.
If you liked the book, could you please take a minute to leave a review with your
feedback?
60 seconds is all I’m asking for, and it would mean the world to us.
Thank you so much,
Pickle Partners Publishing

BIBLIOGRAPHY
NAPOLEONIC SKIRMISHER TACTICS
Catton, Bruce. Grant takes Command, 3rd ed. New York, NY: Little, Brown and Co.,
1994.
Chandler, David G. The Campaigns of Napoleon: The Mind and Method of History’s
Greatest Soldier. New York, NY: Scribner, 1966.
Elting, John R. Swords Around a Throne: Napoleon’s Grand Armée New York, NY: Da
Capo Press, 1997.
Paret, Peter. “Napoleon and the Revolution in War,” in Makers of Modern Strategy
from Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age, ed. Peter Paret. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1986.
Rothenberg, Gunther E. The Art of War in the Age of Napoleon. Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press, 1978.

CIVIL WAR
Alexander, Bevin. Lost Victories: The Military Genius of Stonewall Jackson, 2nd ed.
Edison, NJ: The Blue & Grey Press, 1996.
Ambrose, Stephen E. Upton and the Army, 2nd ed. Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State
University Press, 1992.
Griffith, Paddy. Battle Tactics of the Civil War. New Haven, CN: Yale University Press,
1989.
Jaynes, Gregory and the editors of Time-Life Books. The Killing Ground: Wilderness
to Cold Harbor, 2nd rev. ed., The Time-Life Civil War Series. Alexandria, VA: Time-Life
Books, Inc., 1987.
Upton, Emory, Major General, USA. Infantry Tactics, Double and Single Rank,
adapted to American Topography and Improved Firearms. New York, NY: Greenwood
Press, 1968; reprint of 1874 original by D. Appleton & Co.
——-Armies of Asia and Europe Embracing Official Reports on the Armies of Japan,
China, India, Persia, Italy, Russia, Austria, Germany, France, and England. New York.
NY: Greenwood Press, 1968; reprint of 1878 original by D. Appleton & Co.

WARS OF GERMAN UNIFICATION/PRUSSIAN DOCTRINE
Addington, Larry H. The Blitzkrieg Era and the German General Staff, 1865-1941.
New Brunswick, NJ Rutgers, 1971.
Balck, Wilhelm, Lieutenant General, German Army. Development of Tactics—World
War, trans. Harry Bell. Fort Leavenworth, KS: The General Service Schools Press, 1922.
—— Tactics, vol. I-II, trans. Lt Walter Krueger. Fort Leavenworth, KS: U.S. Cavalry
Association, vol. I, 1915; vol. II, 1914.
Barnett, Correlli. The Swordbearers: Supreme Command in the First World War.
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1963.
von Boguslawski, Albrecht. Tactical Deductions From the War of 1870-71, trans. Col.
Lumley Graham. London: Henry S. King & Co., 1872.
Corum, James S. The Roots of Blitzkrieg: Hans Von Seeckt and German Military
Reform. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 1992.
Craig, Gordon A. The Politics of The Prussian Army, 1640-1945. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press, 1955.
Dupuy, T. N., Colonel, USA. A Genius For War: The German Army and General Staff,
18071945. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1977.
Gudmundsson, Bruce I. Stormtroop Tactics: Innovation in the German Army, 1914-
1918. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers, 1989.
Howard, Michael. The Franco-Prussian War: The German Invasion of France, 1870-
1871. New York, NY: Routledge, 1961.
Hughes, Daniel J. ed. Moltke on the Art of War: Selected Writings. Novato, CA:
Presidio Press, 1993.
Lupfer, Timothy T., Captain, USA. The Dynamics of Doctrine: The Changes in
German Tactical Doctrine During the First World War. Fort Leavenworth, KS: U.S. Army
Command and General Staff College, 1981.
Meyer, Bradley J. Operational Art and the German Command System in World War I.
Dissertation for Degree Doctor of Philosophy in the Graduate School of the Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH: Ohio State University, 1988; Advisor: Prof. Williamson
Murray.

—— “Storm Troop Tactics.” SAW 7123: School of Advanced Warfighting Selected
Readings for Defense in Depth: The Breakthrough Battle. Quantico, VA: Marine Corps
University, School of Advanced Warfighting (AY 2001-02), 2001, pp. 1-49 (original
document page numbering; [section 4 of 5 selected reading sections]).
Wagner, Arthur L., Lieut.-Col., USA. The Campaign of Königgrätz: A Study of the
Austro-Prussian Conflict in Light of the American Civil War. Kansas City, MO: Hudson-
Kimberly Publishing Co., 1899; reprinted by American Military University for LW516
Course.
Wallach, Jehuda L. Dogma of the Battle of Annihilation: The Theories of Clausewitz
and Schlieffen. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group, 1986; American Military
University reprint.
White, Charles E. The Enlightened Soldier: Scharnhorst and the Militärische
Gesellschaft in Berlin, 1801-1805. Westport, CN: Praeger, 1989.

ANGLO-BOER WAR
Belfield, Eversley. The Boer War. London: Archon Books, 1975.
Gudmundsson, Bruce I. “A Lesson from the Boers.” Military History Quarterly,
Summer 1989, vol. 1, number 4, pp. 34-5.
The Historical Section of the Great General Staff, Berlin, The War in South Africa,
vols. I-II, trans. vol. I, Col. W. H. H. Waters, R.A., C.V.O.; vol. II, Col. Hubert du Cane,
R.A., M.V.O. London: John Murray, 1906-1907.
Stone, Jay and Erwin A. Schmidt. The Boer War and Military Reforms. New York, NY:
Atlantic Research and Publications Inc., 1988.
Pakenham, Thomas. The Boer War. New York, NY: Random House, 1979.

RUSSO-JAPANESE WAR
Connaughton, Richard. The War of the Rising Sun and the Tumbling Bear: A Military
History of the Russo-Japanese War 1904-5. New York, NY: Routledge, 1988.
The Historical Section of the Committee of Imperial Defense. The Official History of
the Russo-Japanese War, vol. I-V. London: Harrison and Sons, Parts I-V, 1909; Part V,
1910.
The Historical Section of the German General Staff. The Russo-Japanese War, vol. I-
VI, trans. Lieut. Karl von Donat, German Army. London: Hugh Rees, Ltd., vols. I-VI,
1908-13.
Kearsey, A., Lieutenant-Colonel, D.S.O. A Study of the Strategy and Tactics of the
Russo-Japanese War, 1904, Up to 24th August, Illustrating the Principles of War and the
field Service Regulations. Aldershot: Gale & Polden, ltd, Wellington Works, no
publication date listed.
Kuhn, Joseph E., Major, Corps of Engineers, USA. Reports of Military Observers
Attached to the Armies in Manchuria during the Russo-Japanese War, Part III.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office for the War department, Office of the
Chief of Staff, 1906.
McClernand, Edward, Lt.-Col. and Capt. William V. Judson, USA. Reports of Military
Observers Attached to the Armies in Manchuria during the Russo-Japanese War, Part V.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office for the War department, Office of the
Chief of Staff, 1907.
de Negrier, General. Lessons of the Russo-Japanese War, trans. E. Louis Spiers.
London: Hugh Rees Ltd., 1906.
Soloviev, L. Z., Captain, 34th East Siberian Rifle Regiment, Russian Army. Actual
Experiences in War: Battle Action of the Infantry; Impressions of a Company Commander.
Washington, D.C.: War Department. Office of the Chief of Staff, 1906.
Taburno, J. The Truth About the War. Kansas City, MO: Franklin Hudson Publishing
Co., 1905.
War Department, Office of the Chief of Staff, Second (Military Information) Division,
General Staff. Epitome of the Russo-Japanese War, General Staff No. 11. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1907.

Wood, Oliver E., Lieut.-Colonel, USA. From the Yalu to Port Arthur: An Epitome of
the First Period of the Russo-Japanese War. Kansas City, MO: Franklin Hudson
Publishing Co., 1905.

GENERAL SOURCES
Bethell, H.A., Colonel, R.A. “A comparison of British, French, and German methods of
the employment of artillery in the field (including application of fire generally), together
with deductions as to the system best suited to our own army in a European campaign.”
The Journal of the Royal Artillery, August 1912, pp. 163-178.
Bidwell, Shelford and Dominick Graham. Fire-Power: British Army Weapons and
Theories of War, 1904-1945. London: George Allen & Unwin, 1982.
Bird, W. D., Brevet Major. “Infantry Fire Tactics.” Journal of the United States Infantry
Association, April 1906, vol. II, no. 4, pp. 154-166.
Colin, J., Commandant of the French War School. The Transformation of War, trans.
Brevet-Major L. H. R. Pope-Hennessy. Westport, CN: Greenwood Press (Reprint of 1912
Hugh Rees, Ltd, London), 1977.
Dooner, J. G., Captain, RFA. “Tactical Co-operation between Artillery and the other
arms.” The Journal of the Royal Artillery, May 1912, vol. 39, number 2, pp. 33-40.
Griffith, Paddy. Battle Tactics of the Western Front: The British Army’s Art of Attack,
191618. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1994.
—— Forward into Battle: Fighting Tactics from Waterloo to the Near Future. Novato,
CA: Presidio, 1990.
Gudmundsson, Bruce I. On Artillery. Westport, CN: Praeger, 1993.
Handel, Michael. “Men Against Fire: The Doctrine of the Offensive in 1914,” in
Makers of Modern Strategy from Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age, ed. Peter Paret.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1986.
Henderson, G. F. R., Colonel, C.B. The Science of War: A Collection of Essays and
Lectures, 1892-1903, ed. Captain Neill Malcolm, D.S.O. London, Longmans, Green, and
Co., 1905.
House, Jonathan M., Captain, USA. Toward Combined Arms Warfare: A Survey of 20th-
Century Tactics, Doctrine, and Organization. Fort Leavenworth, KS: U.S. Army
Command and General Staff College, 1984.
Jamieson, Perry D. Crossing the Deadly Ground: United States Army Tactics, 1865-
1899. Tuscaloosa, AL: The University of Alabama Press, 1994.

May, E. S., Major, R.H.A. Field Artillery with the Other Arms: Its Employment,
Illustrated from Military History, and its Re-armament with Quick-Firing Guns Discussed.
London: Sampson Low, Marston & Company, 1898.
Millet, Allan R. and Peter Maslowski. For the Common Defense: A Military History of
the United States of America. New York, NY: The Free Press, 1984.
Strachan, Hew. European Armies and the Conduct of War, 7th print. London: Unwin
Hyman, 1983. (Specifically, chapter 8, “Technology and its Impact on Tactics”).
Travers, Tim. The Killing Ground, The British Army, the Western Front and the
Emergence of Modern Warfare, 1900-1918, 3rd ed. New York: Routledge, 1993.
U.S. Army Command and General Staff College. RB 20-18: Selected Readings in
Military History: Evolution of Combined Arms Warfare. Fort Leavenworth, KS: Combat
Studies Institute, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 1983.
U.S. Army Military History Institute, and U.S. Army Center of Military History. CMH
Pub 70-23: Changing an Army: An Oral History of General William E. DePuy, USA (ret),
Colonel Romie L. Brownlee and Brigadier General William J Mullen III, interviewers.
Washington, D.C.: Center for Military History, 1979 Interview with 1985 Afterthoughts.

DOCTRINAL PUBLICATIONS
Department of the Army. FM101-5-1: Operational Terms and Symbols. Washington,
D.C.: Headquarters, Department of the Army, 1985.
Joint Staff. Joint Publication 1-02: Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and
Associated Terms. Washington D.C.: Joint Staff, 2001.
U. S. Marine Corps. MCRP-5-12C: Marine Corps Supplement to the Department of
Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms. Washington D.C.: Headquarters
United States Marine Corps, 1998.
U. S. Marine Corps. MCDP-1: Warfighting. Washington D.C.: Headquarters United
States Marine Corps, 1997.
[1] Wilhelm Balck, Development of Tactics—World War, (General Service Schools Press, 1922), p. 9. (Hereafter,
Balck, Development of Tactics—World War).
[2] Balck, Development of Tactics—World War, p. 1; quoting the 1806 writings of Field Marshal von Gneisenau.
[3] Jay Stone and Erwin A. Schmidl, The Boer War and Military Reforms, (Atlantic Research and Publications
Inc., 1988), p. 289.
[4] From the dust jacket of, Richard Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and the Tumbling Bear: A Military
History of the Russo-Japanese War 1904-5, (Routledge, 1988), p. (rear dust jacket). (Hereafter, Connaughton, The
War of the Rising Sun and the Tumbling Bear).
[5] Wilhelm Balck, Development of Tactics—World War, p. 9.
[6] Specifically, the German WW I army has been credited with the development of tactical (and operational)-
level maneuver warfare and combined arms techniques such as: defense-in-depth, infiltration/stormtroop tactics,
hurricane artillery barrages, etc. (See references by Gudmundsson and Lupfer). For a description of maneuver
warfare and combined arms principles, see Appendix D.
[7] The German Wars of Unification consisted of the Prussian-Danish War of 1864, The Prussian-Austrian War
of 1866 and the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71. (Jehuda L. Wallach, Dogma of the Battle of Annihilation: The
Theories of Clausewitz and Schlieffen, (Greenwood Publishing Group, 1986), p. 35).
[8] Peter Paret, “Napoleon and the Revolution in War,” in Makers of Modern Strategy from Machiavelli to the
Nuclear Age, ed. Peter Paret, (Princeton University Press, 1986), pp. 138-142.
[9] Although the Boer War had demonstrated the importance of dispersed infantry tactics to the British army,
pre-WWI marksmanship experimentation at the School of Musketry at Hythe had proven the value of achieving a
superiority of firepower through dense firing lines. It was commonly believed that dense formations could better
provide concentrated, mass fire. Additionally, concerns over the reliability of soldiers in loose formations and
maintaining control on the battlefield also supported the retention of dense formations. U.S. professional journals
repeated these findings. (Major W. D. Bird, “Intantry Fire Tactics,” Journal of the United States Infantry
Association, April, 1906, pp. 156-8).
[10] James S. Corum, The Roots of Blitzkrieg: Hans Von Seect and German Military Reform, (University Press of
Kansas, 1992), pp. 6-7; Bruce I. Gudmundsson, Stoormtroop Tactics: Innovation in the German Army, 19141918,
(Praeger Publishing, 1989), p. 8.
[11] Captain Jonathan M. House, Toward Combined Arms Warfare: A Survey of 20th-Century Tactics, Doctrine,
and Organization, (U.S. Army Command and Staff College, 1981), pp. 7-8; Paddy Griffith, Battle Tactics of the

Civil War, (Yale University Press, 1989), pp. 24-7 (Hereafter, Griffith, Battle Tactics of the Civil War); Michael
Handel, “Men Against Fire: The Doctrine of the Offensive in 1914,” in Makers of Modern Strategy from
Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age, ed. Peter Paret. Princeton, (Princeton University Press, 1986), p. 511.
[12] Griffith, Battle Tactics of the Civil War, pp. 20-21.
Note: Griffith’s introduction asserts that the American Civil War is often perceived as the “first major
conflict of the industrial era” (p. 20). He cites several authors to demonstrate that this view is a common belief
among scholars and historians. However, the central theme of Griffith’s work disagrees with the assertion that
Civil War tactics were greatly altered by firepower and technology.
[13] House, Toward Combined Arms Warfare, pp. 7-8; Allan R. Millet and Peter Maslowski, For the Common
Defense: A Military History of the United States of America, The Free Press, 1984, p. 122-4; Griffith, Civil War, pp.
26-7; Paddy Griffith, Forward into Battle: Fighting Tactics from Waterloo to the Near Future, (Presidio, 1990), pp.
78-9.
Also, the American army’s post-war employment of close-order tactics is illustrated by the army’s post-war
doctrinal texts; namely, Major General Emory Upton’s, Infantry Tactics, Double and Single Rank, adapted to
American Topography and Improved Firearms.
Notes: Although Griffith acknowledges the advent of the rifled-musket, he does not believe that it resulted in
“revolutionized tactics”. (Griffith, Civil War, p. 189) In his, Forward into Battle, pp. 78-9, Griffith again states that
the Civil War era rifled-musket did not substantially alter the nature of combat. However, many authors,
including the Alexander and House, claim that the advent of rifled musketry was decisive on the battlefield.
[14] House, Toward Combined Arms Warfare, p. 8.
[15] Colonel G. F. R. Henderson, C.B. Great Britain, “Tactics of the Three Arms Combined,” RB 20-18: Selected
Readings in Military History: Evolution of Combined Arms Warfare, (Combat Studies Institute, U.S. Army
Command and General Staff College, 1983), pp. 34-5; direct quotations and entire observation.
(Publishers Note: Originally published in the Encyclopedia Britannica Supplement, 1902. Extracted from The
Science of War: A Collection of Essays and Lectures, 1891-1903, (Longmans, Green, and Co., 1919), pp. 70-86)
[16] House, Toward Combined Arms Warfare, p. 8.
[17] House, Toward Combined Arms Warfare, pp. 8, 17; Balck, Development of Tactics—World War, p. 11;
Gudmundsson, On Artillery, (Praeger, 1993), pp. 20-21.
[18] Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and the Tumbling Bear, pp. 220-1.
[19] The Russian army entered the conflict employing close-order infantry tactics and did not emphasize the
massing of artillery. (Covered later in this essay).
[20] For an explanation of pre-World War I German command doctrine, see Appendix B.
[21] On Russian reliance on Dragomirow shock tactics, The Historical Section of the German General Staff, The
Russo-Japanese War, Vol. I: TheYalu, trans. Lieut. Karl von Donat, German Army, (Hugh Rees, Ltd., 1908), pp.
59-60. (Hereafter, German General Staff. The Russo-Japanese War, Vol. I: TheYalu); on the German influence on
the Japanese army, Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and the Tumbling Bear, p. 17; both topics covered in,
Balck, Tactics Vol. I, p. 340-1
[22] Balck, Development of Tactics—World War, p. 12.
[23] Doctrinal frontages: battalion, 280 meters; regiment, 700 meters; brigade, 1,067 meters; division, 2,130
meters (German General Staff. The Russo-Japanese War, Vol. I: TheYalu, p. 60).
[24] German General Staff. The Russo-Japanese War, Vol. I: TheYalu, pp. 59-64.
[25] The Historical Section of the German General Staff. The Russo-Japanese War, Vol. I: TheYalu, p. 59.
[26] The Historical Section of the Committee of Imperial Defense, The Official History of the Russo-Japanese
War, Vol. I, (Harrison and Sons, 1909), pp. 28. (Hereafter, British Official History, Part I); Lieutenant-Colonel A.

Kearsey, D.S.O, A Study of the Strategy and Tactics of the Russo-Japanese War, 1904, Up to 24th August, Illustrating
the Principles of War and the field Service Regulations, Gale & Polden, ltd, Wellington Works, (no publication date
listed), p. 4.
[27] Captain L. Z. Soloviev, 34th East Siberian Rifle Regiment. Actual Experiences in War: Battle Action of the
Infantry; Impressions of a Company Commander. (War Department, Office of the Chief of Staff, 1906), p. 6 for
both direct quotation; pp. 6, 9-10 for paragraph information; p. 14, for rifle fire casualty statistic.
[28] Soloviev, pp. 9-10.
[29] Soloviev, pp. 26-7; German General Staff. The Russo-Japanese War, Vol. I: TheYalu, pp. 59-60.
[30] Soloviev claimed that not a single successful battle was fought during the Manchurian campaign without
employing a bayonet charge. He also stated that the Japanese did not yield a single position at Liaoyang due to
fire alone. He asserted that despite high losses from rifle and artillery fire, the Russians did not yield any positions
due to firepower alone. (Soloviev, p. 23-4.)
[31] Soloviev, pp. 22-4; on faith in bayonet charge over firepower, German General Staff. The Russo- Japanese
War, Vol. I: TheYalu, pp. 59-60; Balck, Tactics Vol. I, p. 382.
[32] Captain Carl Reichman, 17th Infantry, USA, Observer with the Russian Army, “Resume of Military
Observations,” RB 20-18: Selected Readings in Military History: Evolution of Combined Arms Warfare, (Combat
Studies Institute, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 1983), pp. 57.
Publisher’s Note: Extracted from Reports of Military Observers Attached to the Armies in Manchuria During the
Russo-Japanese War.
[33] British Official History, Part II: From the Battle of the Ya-lu to Liao-yang, Exclusive, pp. 101-3.
[34] British Official History, Part V: Sha Ho, p. 145; Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and the Tumbling
Bear, pp. 217-9.
[35] Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and the Tumbling Bear, pp. 217-9.
[36] British Official History, Part V: Sha Ho, pp. 160-1.
[37] General de Negrier, Lessons of the Russo-Japanese War, trans. E. Louis Spiers, (Hugh Rees Ltd., 1906), pp.
61-3; Richard Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and the Tumbling Bear: A Military History of the Russo-
Japanese War 1904-5, (Routledge, 1988), p. 74.
[38] British Official History, Part I, pp. 23.
[39] Major Joseph E. Kuhn,, USA, Corps of Engineers, Reports of Military Observers Attached to the Armies in
Manchuria during the Russo-Japanese War, Part III, (Government Printing Office for the War Department,
Office of the Chief of Staff, 1906), pp. 15-17; General de Negrier, pp. 67-8, 70-1; Kearsey, A Study of the Strategy
and Tactics of the Russo-Japanese War, pp. 4-6 (Japanese extended order interval, rushes, and use of cover); J.
Colin, Commandant of the French War School, The Transformation of War, trans. Brevet-Major L.H.R. Pope-
Hennessy, (Greenwood Press (Reprint of 1912 Hugh Rees, Ltd, London), 1977), pp. 58-9.
[40] Kuhn, Reports of Military Observers Attached to the Armies in Manchuria during the Russo-Japanese War,
Part III, pp. 15-18; General de Negrier, pp. 67-8, 70-1; Kearsey, A Study of the Strategy and Tactics of the Russo-
Japanese War, pp. 4-6 (Japanese extended order interval, rushes, and use of cover); J. Colin, Commandant of the
French War School, The Transformation of War, trans. Brevet-Major L.H.R. Pope-Hennessy, (Greenwood Press
(Reprint of 1912 Hugh Rees, Ltd, London), 1977), pp. 58-9.
[41] Kuhn, pp. 17-18.
[42] Taburno, The Truth About the War, (Franklin Hudson Publishing Co., 1905), pp. 31, 33; describing the
Battle of Mukden.
[43] Soloviev, pp. 25, 27; General de Negrier, p. 63.

[44] Soloviev, pp. 28-9; Kuhn, pp. 228-29; Lt.-Col Edward McClernand and Capt. William V. Judson, Reports of
Military Observers Attached to the Armies in Manchuria during the Russo-Japanese War, Part V, (Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office for the War department; Office of the Chief of Staff, 1907), pp. 98-9; General
de Negrier, p. 52.
[45] Kuhn, p. 16.
[46] A rapid Japanese pursuit resulted in the surrender of the entire Russian rear guard and the capture of
twenty-one of their twenty-four supporting artillery pieces. (British Official History, Part I, on attack on Yalu, pp.
68-9; and Japanese pursuit, pp. 76-7).
[47] British Official History, Part I, on attack on Yalu, pp. 68-9; and Japanese pursuit, pp. 76-7; on initial
Japanese extended-order interval, German General Staff. The Russo-Japanese War, Vol. I: TheYalu, p. 219; on the
Japanese extended order interval, rushes, and use of cover, Kearsey, A Study of the Strategy and Tactics of the
Russo-Japanese War, pp. 4-6; J. Colin, The Transformation of War, trans. Brevet-Major L.H.R. Pope-Hennessy,
pp. 58-9.
[48] British Official History, Part II: From the Battle of the Ya-lu to Liao-yang, Exclusive, p. 107.
[49] British Official History, Part IV: Liao-Yang, pp. 57-8; p. 75; Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and the
Tumbling Bear, p. 144.
[50] British Official History, Part V: Sha Ho, pp. 82-3.
[51] Griffith, Forward into Battle, p. 71; referencing General Ian Hamilton’s, A Staff Officer’s Scrapbook.
[52] British Official History, Part V: Sha Ho, pp. 50-51; 97; German General Staff. The Russo-Japanese War, Vol.
I: The Battle on the Scha-ho, 1910, pp. 128-32; Balck, Tactics, Vol. I, p. 343..
[53] The British Official History claims the skirmish line halted only once on the attack on Temple Hill (11 Oct),
and between 2-3 times on the next attack (12 Oct). The German Official History states that the Temple Hill attack
was conducted in a series of rushes. However, the British official History seems to agree with the description
offered by General Hamilton. (See endnote for references).
[54] British Official History, Part V: Sha Ho, pp. 50-51; 97; German General Staff. The Russo-Japanese War, Vol.
I: The Battle on the Scha-ho, 1910, pp. 128-32.
[55] German General Staff. The Russo-Japanese War, Vol. I: The Battle on the Scha-ho, p. 129.
[56] Kuhn, pp. 218-20.
[57] Kuhn, p. 227.
[58] Kuhn, p. 231.
[59] U.S. Field Service Regulations, 1913, (Article IX: Combat, par. 260-1), from Selected Readings, pp. 8890.
[60] Tim Travers, The Killing Ground: The British Army, the Western Front and the Emergence of Modern
Warfare, 1900-1918, (Routledge, 1993), p. 48.
[61] Travers, p. 45; quoting General Hamilton’s, Compulsory Service (London, 1910), pp. 121-2.
[62] Henderson, “Tactics of the Three Arms Combined,” Selected Readings, p. 39.
[63] U.S. Field Service Regulations, 1913, (Article IX: Combat, par. 266), from Selected Readings, p. 92-3.
[64] Shelford Bidwell and Dominick Graham, Fire-Power: British Army Weapons and Theories of War, 1904-
1945, (George Allen & Unwin, 1982), p. 36; quoting Imperial War Museum, Maxse papers. F.I. Maxse, “Battalion
organisation” [British spelling and capitalization], RUSI, Vol. 56, 1912, p. 53.
[65] J. Colin, Commandant of the French War School, The Transformation of War, trans. Brevet-Major L.H.R.
Pope-Hennessy, (Greenwood Press (Reprint of 1912 Hugh Rees, Ltd, London), 1977), pp. 87-8; direct quotation,

p. 88; On the emergence of light infantry and skirmishers prior to and during the Napoleonic era, see: Hew
Strachan, European Armies and the Conduct of War, 7th print, (Unwin Hyman, 1983), pp. 27-32; and, Gunther E.
Rothenberg, The Art of War in the Age of Napoleon, (Indiana University Press, 1978), pp. 20-1; reference to ‘horde
tactics’, David G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon: The Mind and Method of History’s Greatest Soldier,
(Scribner, 1966), p. 67; referring to swarm tactics, John R. Elting, Swords Around a Throne: Napoleon’s Grand
Armee, (Da Capo Press, 1997), pp. 534-5.
[66] As previously stated, seemingly valid reasons for the retention of dense infantry formations had been
demonstrated by marksmanship experimentation at the British School of Musketry at Hythe, in addition to the
existence of several social and psychological concerns. (Major W. D. Bird, “Intantry Fire Tactics,” Journal of the
United States Infantry Association, April, 1906, pp. 156-8).
[67] Soloviev, pp. 10-11.
[68] Soloviev, p. 14.
[69] Bradley J. Meyer, “Storm Troop Tactics,” SAW 7123: School of Advanced Warfighting Selected Readings for
Defense in Depth, (AY 2001-02), Marine Corps University School of Advanced Warfighting, 2001, pp. 1-49;
specifically, pp. 14-20 (section 4; original document page numbers).
[70] Colonel Henderson does not specifically mention the use of machineguns, but states that rifle fire “can be
controlled with the same ease as that of machine guns,” leading the reader to believe he advocated the
employment of machineguns in the same role. Additionally, Henderson refers to using “mechanical appliances” to
control the long-range fire of the infantry rifle, probably referring to clinometers, used to control the angle of fire.
(Henderson, “Tactics of the Three Arms Combined,” Selected Readings, p. 38).
In contrast to Henderson’s theory, Major E.H. May in 1898 wrote that long-range rifle fire from magazine
rifles was tested as ineffective by British Army tests. However, in light of the accuracy of the rifle fire
demonstrated in the Boer and Russo-Japanese Wars, Henderson’s theory still seems valid. (Major E.S. May,
R.H.A, Field Artillery with the Other Arms, p. 161).
[71] Henderson, “Tactics of the Three Arms Combined,” Selected Readings, p. 38.
[72] British Official History, Part IV: Liao-Yang, pp. 57-8; p. 75.
[73] British Official History, Part V: Sha Ho, p. 96.
[74] Soloviev, p. 12; Figure 2 displays a diagram of the stated maneuver.
[75] Taburno, The Truth About the War, (Franklin Hudson Publishing Co., 1905), pp. 121-22.
[76] Kuhn, pp. 106-8; McClernand and Judson, Reports of Military Observers Attached to the Armies in
Manchuria during the Russo-Japanese War, Part V, pp. 95-6.
[77] For example, General William E. DePuy summarized the difference between tactics that employed organic
fires produced by the maneuver element while on the move (or marching fires), and covering fires from a separate
fire element. (DePuy did not use the terms ‘fire’ and ‘maneuver’ elements). The fire element maintained
suppressive fire to cover the movement of the maneuver element using organic rifle and machinegun fire.
Obviously, the attack should be coordinated and supported by additional fires from mortars and artillery, if
available. DePuy noted that as late as the outset of WW II, army officers incorrectly believed that marching fires
could provide enough firepower (in and of itself) to carry an attack, rather than augmenting the fires of a
supporting base of fire and external supporting arms. For example, General George S. Patton stated that
marching fire was the “proper way to advance.” (U.S. Army Center of Military History. CMH Pub 70-23:
Changing an Army: An Oral History of General William E. DePuy, p. 10; Perry D. Jamieson, Crossing the Deadly
Ground: United States Army Tactics, 1865-1899, The University of Alabama Press, 1994, pp. 147-8).
[78] On direct-fire support to final charge, Major E.S. May, R.H.A, Field Artillery with the Other Arms: Its
Employment, Illustrated from Military History, and its Re-armament with Quick-Firing Guns Discussed, (Sampson
Low, Marston & Company, 1898), pp. 48-9; on firing in motion, Balck, Tactics, Vol. I, p. 381-2; on marching fire,
Perry D. Jamieson, Crossing the Deadly Ground: United States Army Tactics, 1865-1899, The University of
Alabama Press, 1994, pp. 147-8.

[79] The later acquisition of the light machine guns was aimed at providing the infantry with a man-portable,
organic weapon that could suppress the enemy close in, after the supporting artillery fire was lifted. Essentially, it
would give the infantry an organic weapon for use by a designated supporting fire element to cover the maneuver
of a complimentary maneuver (or shock) element. (For a description of fire and maneuver, or Storm Troop
tactics), see Bradley J. Meyer, “Storm Troop Tactics,” School of Advanced Warfighting Selected Readings for
Defense in Depth, Marine Corps University School of Advanced Warfighting, AY2001-02, pp. 1-49, specifically,
pp. 14-20; advent of machineguns to support stormtroop tactics, pp. 33-4, 40).
[80] Bidwell and Graham, pp. 22-3; direct quotation from p. 23; on debate over light machineguns prior to WW
I and their final adoption in 1917-18, pp. 49, 52.
[81] The FSR did not use the terms fire and maneuver, base of fire, or combined arms. These contemporary
terms are being applied to the concepts expressed in the FSR.
[82] U.S. Field Service Regulations, 1913, (Article IX: Combat, par. 260,261), from Selected Readings, pp. 88, 90.
[83] U.S. Field Service Regulations, 1913, (Article IX: Combat, par. 261), from Selected Readings, p. 90.
[84] Once again, the specific term—base of fire—was not employed. However, the task assigned to position
infantry was theoretically similar.
[85] U.S. Field Service Regulations, 1913, (Article IX: Combat, par. 261), from Selected Readings, pp. 90-1
[86] Gudmundsson, On Artillery, pp. 4-5.
[87] Gudmundsson, On Artillery, p. 7; Bidwell and Graham, pp. 12, 14.
[88] Bidwell and Graham, pp. 56-7.
[89] Gudmundsson, On Artillery, p. 21; quoting from the Reglementprovisoire de manoeuvre de l’artillerie de
campagne, 1911.
[90] Unmasked position—guns are not concealed and have a line of sight to the target; Masked position—guns
are concealed and do not have line of sight to the target; Semi-masked—a transition between the previous
positions where the gun positions are concealed but a gunner in close proximity can lay the piece for direction.
(Balck, Tactics, Vol. II, pp. 272, 324).
[91] Balck, Tactics, Vol. II, pp. 272, 324.
[92] Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and the Tumbling Bear: A Military History of the Russo- Japanese
War 1904-5, p. 20.
[93] Gudmundsson, On Artillery, p. 20; Soloviev, p. 19; Kuhn, p. 33; de Negrier, p. 45; Warfield, “Notes on Field
Artillery,” from Selected Readings, p. 115; on the poor ability of artillery to target counter-battery fire on enemy
batteries during the war, J. Taburno, pp. 119-20.
[94] Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and the Tumbling Bear, pp. 92-3, 96-7.
[95] Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and the Tumbling Bear, pp. 92-3, 96-7; British Official History, Part
II: From the Battle of the Ya-lu to Liao-yang, Exclusive, pp. 38; Balck, Tactics, Vol. I, p. 223.
[96] Noting the effects of ‘The Battle of Vafangu’, or Telissu, de Negrier, pp. 42-3; Shelford Bidwell, and
Dominick Graham. Fire-Power: British Army Weapons and Theories of War, 1904-1945, (George Allen & Unwin,
1982), p. 10.
[97] Warfield, “Notes on Field Artillery,” from Selected Readings, p. 125: Warfield’s comments concerning turn
of the century artillery theory specifically address lessons from the Spanish-American War (1898-1900), but are
applicable to this topic as well.
[98] Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and the Tumbling Bear, p. 152.
[99] Gudmundsson, On Artillery, p. 23; Colonel, H.A. Bethell, R.A., “A comparison of British, French, and

German methods of the employment of artillery in the field (including application of fire generally), together with
deductions as to the system best suited to our own army in a European campaign,” The Journal of the Royal
Artillery, August 1912, pp. 168-9.
[100] German artillery commanders, from division to battery, were given “considerable latitude” to change
targets during battle. Even battery commanders could modify targets in emergency situations. (Colonel, H.A.
Bethell, R.A., “A comparison of British, French, and German methods of the employment of artillery,” The
Journal of the Royal Artillery, August 1912, p. 172).
[101] Gudmundsson, On Artillery, p. 23; Balck, Tactics, Vol. II, p. 296; Bidwell and Graham, p. 11; on latitude
afforded German artillery commanders, Bethell, “A comparison of British, French, and German methods of the
employment of artillery,” The Journal of the Royal Artillery, August 1912, p. 172..
[102] Gudmundsson, On Artillery, pp. 23-4; direct quotation from p. 24.
[103] Warfield, “Notes on Field Artillery,” from Selected Readings, p. 114; Taburno, p. 120.
[104] Japanese had a ratio of 3 field artillery pieces per 1,000 troops as compared to 5 per 1,000 in the Russian
army.
Also, the maximum range of the Japanese field artillery was 5,500 meters as opposed to the maximum
Russian range of 6,400 meters. Russian guns fired 8 rounds per minute, compared to 4-5 shots per minute of the
Japanese pieces. The Russian round was larger than the Japanese projectile (15 pounds vs. 11 pounds). (Kuhn,
Reports of Military Observers in Manchuria, pp. 30-31; Lt.-Col Edward McClernand and Capt William V. Judson,
Reports of Military Observers Attached to the Armies in Manchuria during the Russo-Japanese War, Part V,
Government Printing Office for the War department; Office of the Chief of Staff, 1907, pp. 212, Taburno, p. 120).
[105] Gudmundsson, On Artillery, pp. 17-8.
[106] German General Staff. The Russo-Japanese War, Vol. I: TheYalu, pp. 59-64.
[107] An example of typical Russian artillery inefficiency is highlighted by the poor support rendered during the
Russian counterattack at Manju Yama (3 September 1904). Although Japanese reports estimated that
approximately forty guns supported the attack, a total of 152 Russian pieces were involved. However, several
batteries acted independently rather than under the command of the Corps. Also, batteries ceased fire and
displaced without any coordination with the needs of the infantry. (British Official History, Part IV, p. 98).
[108] Gudmundsson, On Artillery, pp. 18-19.
[109] However, one Russian observer at Mukden claimed that Japanese indirect-fire artillery, despite massive
bombardments, was largely ineffective and estimated that only two percent of Russian casualties were caused by
enemy artillery. This is the only reference found that disparaged the effectiveness of Japanese artillery. (Taburno,
The Truth About the War, p. 119).
[110] Kuhn, p. 35: In terms of casualties caused by artillery, the reference compares overall Russian losses of
20% to the Japanese Second Army’s losses (actually 6.99%)at Liaoyang to show that the Russian artillery was
not as effective against Japanese infantry in the field. Japanese losses to Russian artillery during the siege of Port
Arthur were estimated at twenty percent. The author cites these figures as the only reliable figures to which he
had access.
[111] Gudmundsson, On Artillery, pp. 18-19; General de Negrier, pp. 44-5; Taburno, p. 120.
[112] The cited example occurred during the Battle of Liaoyang on 30-31 August 1904. Kuhn offers additional
examples demonstrating the ability of the Japanese to effectively concentrate their artillery fires such as the
attack on Chaohuatun (7 March, 1905) when the fire of 108 guns was concentrated on a single position. During
the attacks on Port Arthur, the Japanese concentrated the fires of 72 pieces on the village of Shihliho on 12
October 1904. (Kuhn, Reports of Military Observers in Manchuria, pp. 32-3).
[113] Kuhn, pp. 32-3; Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and the Tumbling Bear, p. 151.
[114] British Official History, Part I, pp. 23

[115] Soloviev, p. 18.
[116] Kuhn, p. 33.
[117] Taburno, p. 121-2, relating an incident that occurred at the Battle of Mukden.
[118] This tactic was successfully employed at the Battle of Telissu (14 July 1904), and is described below.
(Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and the Tumbling Bear, pp. 92-3, 96-7).
[119] Gudmundsson, On Artillery, p. 20.
[120] Kuhn, pp. 18, 34; Soloviev, p. 17.
[121] Gudmundsson, On Artillery, p. 20; Soloviev, p. 19; In a contradictory statement, Soloviev stated that
Russian artillery fire was extremely effective at silencing Japanese artillery batteries. He stated that as a result of
their counter-battery fire, the Russian infantry was exposed to (relatively) light enemy artillery fire at the Battle
of Mukden,.
[122] Kuhn, pp. 18, 34.
[123] British Official History, Part I, pp. 68-9; Kearsey, A Study of the Strategy and Tactics of the Russo- Japanese
War, pp. 33-4; German General Staff. The Russo-Japanese War, Vol. I: TheYalu, pp. 218-9; on Corps artillery
organization and placement of artillery, Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and the Tumbling Bear, pp. 54-5,
57-8, 60; War Department, Office of the Chief of Staff, Second (Military Information) Division, General Staff,
Epitome of the Russo-Japanese War, General Staff No. 11, (Government Printing Office, 1907), pp. 6-7, 11.
(Hereafter, War Department, Epitome of the Russo-Japanese War).
[124] British Official History, Part I, on attack on Yalu, pp. 68-9; and Japanese pursuit, pp. 76-7; on initial
Japanese extended-order interval, German General Staff. The Russo-Japanese War, Vol. I: TheYalu, p. 219.
[125] British Official History, Part IV: Liao-Yang, pp. 22-24; direct quotation from p. 22.
[126] British Official History, Part IV: Liao-Yang, pp. 57-8; p. 75; Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and
the Tumbling Bear, p. 144.
[127] British Official History, Part V: Sha Ho, p. 84; German General Staff. The Russo-Japanese War, Vol. I: The
Battle on the Scha-ho, 1910, pp. 208-210.
[128] British Official History, Part V: Sha Ho, pp. 116-7.
[129] One dramatic example from the Russo-Japanese War is offered. During the Japanese attack on Liao-yang
(30 August 1904), two batteries (16 guns) of the Russian 9th Artillery Brigade fired all day on a Japanese artillery
position in full view of the artillery observation post. Throughout a period of two days, the Brigade fired 5,000
rounds. However, the Japanese battery continued to reply intermittently and was never put out of action for a
long period of time. (British Official History, Part IV: Liao-Yang, p. 56 and footnotes).
[130] Gudmundsson, On Artillery, p. 24; Balck, Tactics, Vol. I, p. 353; Bidwell and Graham, pp. 11-2; on inability
to destroy indirect-fire artillery positions and its effect on tactics, Captain J.G. Dooner, RFA, “Tactical
Cooperation between Artillery and the other arms,” The Journal of the Royal Artillery, May 1912, Vol. 39, number
2, p. 33; J. Colin, Commandant of the French War School, The Transformation of War, trans. Brevet-Major
L.H.R. Pope-Hennessy, (Greenwood Press (Reprint of 1912 Hugh Rees, Ltd, London), 1977), p. 51.
[131] Lieutenant General Wilhelm Balck, German Army, Tactics, Vol. I, trans. Lt Walter Krueger, (U.S. Cavalry
Association, 1915, Vol. I; 1914, Vol. II), Vol. I, pp. 353-5. (Hereafter, Balck, Tactics, Vol. I or II); Henderson,
“Tactics of the Three Arms Combined,” Selected Readings, pp. 37-8; On necessity of service arm coordination,
Dooner, “Tactical Co-operation between Artillery and the other arms,” The Journal of the Royal Artillery, May
1912, Vol. 39, number 2, p. 34.
[132] Bidwell and Graham, pp. 20-1, 27; referring to the Field Artillery Training manual of 1914; direct
quotation, p. 20.
[133] Balck relates that German pre-World War I doctrine was based on the revised drill regulations of 1906.

These regulations, though revised several times, were based on the Drill Regulations of 1888. (Balck, The
Development of Tactics—World War, pp. 16, 22-3).
[134] Balck, Tactics, Vol. I, p. 352, quoting German F.A.D.R., Para. 364.
[135] Balck, Tactics, Vol. I, p. 353; Balck, Development of Tactics—World War, pp. 22-3.
[136] Wilhelm Balck, Development of Tactics—World War, pp. 22, 242.
[137] Henderson, “Tactics of the Three Arms Combined,” Selected Readings, p. 38; “Combat,” RB 20-18:
Selected Readings in Military History: Evolution of Combined Arms Warfare, (Combat Studies Institute, U.S. Army
Command and General Staff College, 1983, pp. 84-5. (Extracted from Field Service Regulations, 1913, United
States Army, Article IX, par. 251-54, Washington D.C., Government Printing Office, 1913, pp. 158-176). Hereafter,
U.S. Field Service Regulations, 1913 from Selected Readings.
[138] U.S. Field Service Regulations, 1905, (Article VI: Combat, par. 274), from Selected Readings, p. 76; U.S.
Field Service Regulations, 1913, (Article IX: Combat, par. 251), from Selected Readings, p. 84.
[139] U.S. Field Service Regulations, 1913, (Article IX: Combat, par. 251), from Selected Readings, p. 85; This
paragraph is nearly identical to the paragraph in U.S. Field Service Regulations, 1905, (Article VI: Combat, par.
278), from Selected Readings, pp. 77, with only minor punctuation, grammatical, and semantic differences.
[140] The FSR, 1913 does not specify direct or indirect-fire.
[141] U.S. Field Service Regulations, 1913, (Article IX: Combat, par. 260), from Selected Readings, p. 88.
[142] U.S. Field Service Regulations, 1913, (Article IX: Combat, par. 260), from Selected Readings, p. 88.
[143] U.S. Field Service Regulations, 1913, (Article IX: Combat, par. 258), from Selected Readings, pp. 86-7.
[144] U.S. Field Service Regulations, 1913, (Article IX: Combat, par. 258-260), from Selected Readings, pp. 86-9.
[145] U.S. Field Service Regulations, 1913, (Article IX: Combat, par. 261), from Selected Readings, p. 88
[146] U.S. Field Service Regulations, 1913, (Article IX: Combat, par. 260), from Selected Readings, p. 88.
[147] U.S. Field Service Regulations, 1913, (Article IX: Combat, par. 260), from Selected Readings, p. 88.
[148] U.S. Field Service Regulations, 1913, (Article IX: Combat, par. 261), from Selected Readings, pp. 90-1.
[149] Artillery was directed to fire over the heads of friendly infantry when necessary. At ranges of 5,000-6,000
yards, the artillery fire was directed to continue until friendly infantry approaches within 400 yards of the impact
area. At shorter ranges, from 2,500-3,500 yards the artillery fire could continue to within 300 yards of friendly
troops. One source credits the British artillery doctrine as supporting fires to within 100 yards of the friendly
infantry. However, ultimately, it was left to the discretion of the infantry commander as to whether the “close
support of the bursting projectile, with an occasional shrapnel or shell burst among themselves, is preferred to the
full effect of the enemy’s unhindered fire.” (Warfield, “Notes on Field Artillery,” from Selected Readings, p. 125;
For doctrine of other nations see, Balck, Tactics, Vol. I, pp. 379-80, Vol. II, pp. 343-48; and see article by Col. H.A.
Bethell, “A comparison of British, French, and German methods of the employment of artillery,” RJA, Aug. 1912,
p. 171).
[150] U.S. Field Service Regulations, 1913, (Article IX: Combat, par. 261-4), from Selected Readings, p. 91-2;
Captain A. B. Warfield, Field Artillery, USA, “Notes on Field Artillery,” from RB 20-18: Selected Readings in
Military History: Evolution of Combined Arms Warfare, (Combat Studies Institute, U.S. Army Command and
General Staff College, 1983), p. 125.
[151] Balck, Tactics, Vol. I, pp. 379-80; I am quoting Balck, not Lord Kitchener; Balck, Tactics, Vol. II, pp. 343-
348; Techniques of close artillery support is also described in, Bethell, “A comparison of British, French, and
German methods of the employment of artillery,” The Journal of the Royal Artillery, August 1912, p. 175. Here,
Bethel recommends continuing artillery fire to within 100 yards of friendly troops.
[152] Balck, Tactics, Vol. I, p. 380.

[153] Kuhn, pp. 122-3, 126-127; War Department, Epitome of the Russo-Japanese War, pp. 29-30.
[154] Though viewed as ineffective by contemporary standards, the creeping barrage was considered a state of
the art supporting arms procedure during the early stages of WW I. The objective of the creeping barrage was to
neutralize enemy objectives to cover the advance of attacking infantry, not to destroy enemy targets. The creeping
barrage technique consisted five to six successive lines of shellfire that shifted in unison to proceed the infantry
advance by approximately 2,000 yards. However, primitive communications technology often resulted in
divergence between the timing of the artillery barrage and the advance of the infantry. Nevertheless, the creeping
barrage was found effective during the Boer War (See Appendix B), Russo-Japanese War (stated above), and the
early stages of WW I. Specifically, observers noted the effectiveness of the creeping barrage at such WW I battles
Neuve Chapelle (1915), Loos (1915), and at the attack on Le Sars (Somme, 1916). By 1917, the creeping barrage
concept had developed into mature fire support plans supported by thousands of artillery pieces with numerous
aircraft and machineguns. The 1917 Battles of Arras, Messines, and Third Ypres demonstrated ‘mature’ fire
support coordination in the employment of massive amounts of supporting fires to assist the infantry attack.
(Paddy Griffith, Battle Tactics of the Western Front, pp. 65-7, 85-7, 142-6).
[155] Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and the Tumbling Bear, p. 184.
[156] Kuhn, pp. 126-7; British Official History, Part III: The Siege of Port Arthur, pp. 71-2; War Department,
Epitome of the Russo-Japanese War, p. 34.
[157] Kuhn, pp. 134-6 relate the 26-30 Nov. attacks; War Department, Epitome of the Russo-Japanese War, pp.
37-8; British Official History, Part III: The Siege of Port Arthur, pp. 81-90, describe the costly attacks, conducted
in close-order throughout November, 1904.
[158] Kuhn, p. 138 notes the change in infantry tactics; British Official History, Part III: The Siege of Port
Arthur, pp. 91-99 describe the costly attacks on 203 Meter Hill; Lieut.-Colonel Oliver E. Wood, USA, From the
Yalu to Port Arthur: An Epitome of the First Period of the Russo-Japanese War, (Franklin Hudson Publishing Co.,
1905), pp. 181-2; on attack on Hill 203, Connaughton, The War of the Rising Sun and the Tumbling Bear, pp. 200-
1; War Department, Epitome of the Russo-Japanese War, p. 38.
[159] Kuhn, pp. 138 notes the change in infantry tactics; pp. 141-44 relate the attacks on 31 Dec 1904 - 1 Jan.
1905; British Official History, Part III: The Siege of Port Arthur, pp. 121-2, and Wood,, From the Yalu to Port
Arthur, pp. 197-8, describe the attacks on the Wangtai.
[160] As previously stated the Germans in WW I eventually divided infantry assault units into maneuver (or
shock) elements and fire elements to support the final attack. (Meyer, “Storm Troop Tactics,” School of Advanced
Warfighting Selected Readings for Defense in Depth, Marine Corps University School of Advanced Warfighting,
AY2001-02, pp. 1-49, specifically, pp. 14-20).
This advanced conceptualization was not realized during the Russo-Japanese War. However, the above listed
rudimentary concepts, later encompassed by German WWI tactical advances, were evident prior to the First
World War.
[161] Earlier examples of successful employment of small-unit tactics include the Japanese assault at Yen-tao-
niu-lu and La-ta-shan (12 & 13 October 1904, respectively) and the Russian attack on One Tree Hill (16 October
1904).
[162] Examples of the successful employment of base of fire techniques include: the Boer War’s Battle of
Driefontein (10 March 1900); and the Russo-Japanese War’s assaults on the Liao-yang fords (31 August 1904),
Hill 774 (12 October 1904), and the Japanese army’s reliance on machinegun fire to cover the movement of troops
during the Port Arthur campaign.
[163] Balck, Tactics, Vol. I, pp. 351-55, 378-81; Vol. II, pp. 401-9.
[164] Earlier cited examples and, Dooner, “Tactical Co-operation between Artillery and the other arms,” The
Journal of the Royal Artillery, May 1912, Vol. 39, number 2, pp. 37-8.
[165] Stone and Schmidl, p. 253.
[166] Travers, p. 43-5; direct quotation, p. 43.

[167] Direct quotation, Travers, p. 45; Paragraph information, pp. 43-49, specifically, close-order formations to
maintain morale, p. 49.
[168] Gudmundsson, Stormtroop Tactics, p. 24.
[169] Specifically, the American FSR, 1913 and the British pre-WW I doctrines placed heavy emphasis on the
use of position infantry and improvement of infantry-artillery coordination. (British examples cited previously by
G. F. R. Henderson). Nearly all Western army doctrines stressed the importance of infantry-artillery cooperation
to support assaults against prepared positions. These early attempts to support infantry assaults with firepower
demonstrate the doctrinal adoption of rudimentary fire and maneuver and combined arms techniques.
[170] Captain Jonathan M. House, Toward Combined Arms Warfare: A Survey of 20th-Century Tactics, Doctrine,
and Organization, (U.S. Army Command and Staff College, 1981), pp. 7-8; Griffith, Battle Tactics of the Civil War,
(Yale University Press, 1989), pp. 24-7; Michael Handel, “Men Against Fire: The Doctrine of the Offensive in
1914,” in Makers of Modern Strategy from Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age, ed. Peter Paret. Princeton, (Princeton
University Press, 1986), p. 511.
[171] Griffith, Battle Tactics of the Civil War, pp. 20-21.
Note: Griffith’s introduction asserts that the American Civil War is often perceived as the “first major
conflict of the industrial era” (p. 20). He cites several authors to demonstrate that this view is a common belief
among scholars and historians. However, the central theme of Griffith’s work disagrees with the assertion that
Civil War tactics were greatly altered by firepower and technology.
[172] The American army’s post war employment of close order tactics is illustrated by the army doctrinal texts
listed in below in this essay; namely, Major General Emory Upton’s, Infantry Tactics, Double and Single Rank,
adapted to American Topography and Improved Firearms.
[173] Captain Jonathan M. House, Toward Combined Arms Warfare: A Survey of 20th-Century Tactics, Doctrine,
and Organization, (U.S. Army Command and Staff College, 1981), pp. 7-8; Allan R. Millet and Peter Maslowski,
For the Common Defense: A Military History of the United States of America, The Free Press, 1984, p. 122-4;
Griffith, Civil War, pp. 26-7; Paddy Griffith, Forward into Battle: Fighting Tactics from Waterloo to the Near
Future, (Presidio, 1990), pp. 78-9.
[174]Note: Although Griffith acknowledges the advent of the rifled-musket, he does not believe that it
resulted in “revolutionized tactics”. (Griffith, Civil War, p. 189) In his, Forward into Battle, pp. 78-9, Griffith again
states that the Civil War era rifled-musket did not substantially alter the nature of combat. However, many
authors, including the Alexander and House, claim that the advent of rifled musketry was decisive on the
battlefield.
Millet and Maslowski, For the Common Defense, p. 123; Bevin Alexander, Lost Victories: The Military Genius of
Stonewall Jackson, (Henry Holt and Company, 1992), pp. 2-3; Stephen E. Ambrose, Upton and the Army, 2nd ed.,
(Louisiana State University Press, 1992), p. 58.
[175] Ambrose, p. 60.
[176] Perry D. Jamieson, Crossing the Deadly Ground: United States Army Tactics, 1865-1899,(The University of
Alabama Press, 1994), pp. 1-2.
[177] Alexander, pp. 4-5; Ambrose, pp. 58, 81; on artillery, Millet Maslowski, For the Common Defense, p. 124.
[178]Note: As previously stated, Griffith again disputes the claim that the advent of the Minnie Ball greatly
affected the tactics of the cavalry and artillery, Civil War, p. 189.
Alexander, pp. 5-6: House. pp. 7-8; Ambrose, pp. 58-9; Ambrose uses the Battle of Gettysburg to demonstrate the
superiority of the defense in Civil War battles, especially in terms of artillery.
[179] Griffith, Civil War, pp. 60, 152.
[180] Ambrose, pp. 58-9.
[181] Though the systematic use of skirmisher tactics predated the Napoleonic era, increased troop reliability

and morale of the nationalist armies of the French Revolution allowed expanded modes of reconnaissance,
patrolling, and pursuit. Napoleon was able to exploit the tactical freedom achieved by skirmisher formations and
reconnaissance parties to outpace his rigidly controlled enemies. Loosely controlled skirmisher formations
depended on the initiative of the individual soldier to disorient the enemy army and screen friendly operations
prior to main body’s attack. Skirmishers proved an extremely useful tool, especially during Napoleon’s early
campaigns. (Chandler, Elting, Rothenberg; See bibliography)
[182] Griffith, Civil War, pp. 99; citing General Winfield Scott’s Infantry Tactics or Rules for the Exercise and
Manoeuvers of the United States Infantry (1935) as the standard doctrine of American armies prior to the Civil
War.
[183] Griffith, Civil War, pp. 100-1; citing Lieutenant Colonel William J. Hardee’s, Rifle and Light Infantry
Tactics for the Exercise and Manoeuvres of Troops when acting as Light Infantry or Riflemen, as the most widely
used tactical text during the Civil War.
[184] Griffith, Civil War, pp. 155-6.
[185] Bruce Catton, Grant takes Command, 3rd ed., (Little, Brown and Co., 1994), pp. 220-21.
[186] Ambrose, pp. 29-31; Gregory Jaynes and the Time-Life editors, The Killing Ground: Wilderness to Cold
Harbor, 2nd rev. ed., (Time-Life Books, Inc., 1987), pp. 89-91.
[187] Ambrose, pp. 31-3; Jaynes, The Killing Ground, pp. 90-92 (Upton’s attack), 92-105 (II Corps’ attack).
[188] Colonel G. F. R Henderson, C.B., The Science of War: A Collection of Essays and Lectures, 1892-1903, ed.
Captain Neill Malcolm, D.S.O., (Longmans, Green, and Co., 1905), p. 149. (Hereafter, Henderson, The Science of
War).
[189] Griffith, Civil War, pp. 103-4; Major General Emory Upton, Infantry Tactics, Double and Single Rank,
adapted to American Topography and Improved Firearms, (Greenwood Press, NY, 1968 Reprint), pp iv. (Hereafter,
Upton, Infantry Tactics); Ambrose, pp. 63; Jamieson, pp. 6-10.
Note: In the manual’s foreword, the army acknowledges the fact that it covers single-rank formations
“specifically adapted to the use of the breech-loaders” (p. iv), and attests that skirmisher formations are “superior
for offense or defense to any existing system.” (p. iv). The manual includes an entire section on orders for the
deployment of skirmishers from a column formation and its advance.
[190] Upton, Infantry Tactics, p. viii.
[191] Griffith, Civil War, p. 104; for specific guidance to officers and NCOs concerning skirmishers initiative
and morale see Upton, Infantry Tactics, p. 117, 131-2; Ambrose, pp. 63-4.
[192] Breech-loading arms allowed soldiers to reload without moving to the rear. Therefore, a single line
formation could now maintain a continuous, high rate of fire. Thus, the reduced density of a single skirmisher line
would theoretically reduce casualties while still maintaining a high volume of fire in the attack. (Ambrose, Upton
and the Army, p. 60; Jamieson, Crossing the Deadly Ground, p. 10).
[193] Major General Emory Upton, Armies of Asia and Europe Embracing Official Reports on the Armies of
Japan, China, India, Persia, Italy, Russia, Austria, Germany, France, and England, (New York. NY: Greenwood
Press, 1968; reprint of 1878 original by D. Appleton & Co), pp. 312-13. (Hereafter, Upton, Armies of Asia);
Ambrose, pp. 60, 79; Jamieson, pp. 93-4.
[194] Paddy Griffith, Forward into Battle: Fighting Tactics from Waterloo to the Near Future, (Presidio, 1990), p.
66. (Hereafter, Griffith, Forward into Battle
[195] A skirmisher squad was designated as a four-man team, not the present-day squad organization.
162 Ambrose, pp. 64-5.
[196] Ambrose, pp. 64-5.
[197] Several of Upton’s observations, especially concerning the effect of breechloaders on the battlefield, were
validated by the events of the Franco-Prussian War. Additionally, Upton later derived several of his tactical

precepts by studying the Prussian Army following the War of 1870. At the tactical level he recommended that the
US Army adopt the Prussian organization of a four-company battalion and the employment of the company
column for the maneuver of the supports and reserves on the battlefield. Strangely, he disagreed with the
Prussian doctrine of flank attacks believing that although it was successful against the inferior armies of France
and Austria, it would lead to disaster if attempted against ‘superior’ British or Russian troops. Missing the larger
implications of the Franco-Prussian War, he wrote that “no new principles in strategy or grand tactics have been
established, and the only important change in minor tactics is the use of skirmishers to an extent heretofore
unknown in Europe, but for which both parties would have been prepared if they had studied our civil war.”
(Ambrose, Upton and the Army, pp. 83-4).
[198] Upton, Armies of Asia, pp. 315-6.
[199] Jamieson, Crossing the Deadly Ground, pp. 101-3.
[200] Jamieson, Crossing the Deadly Ground, pp. 103-5,108, direct quotation, p. 104, citing the Army Navy
Register..
[201] Griffith, Civil War, pp. 61, 65-6.
[202] Jamieson, Crossing the Deadly Ground, pp. 7-9.
[203] Griffith, Civil War, pp. 61, 65-6; Addington, p. 4.
[204] Captain A. von Boguslawski (Colonel Lumley Graham, trans.), Tactical Deductions from the War of 1870-
71, (Henry S. King & Co., 1872), pp. 56-7; Paddy Griffith, Forward into Battle, p. 57.
Note: Griffith states that several observers credit the Prussian victory at Sadowa to the ability of the Prussian
soldiers to fire from the prone position as a result from being equipped with the Dreyse ‘needle-gun’.
[205] Bruce I. Gudmundsson, On Artillery, p. 2; Griffith, Forward into Battle, p. 82; Bidwell and Graham, p. 1;
on Dreyse ‘needle-gun’ and chassepot, Hew Strachan, European Armies and the Conduct of War, 7th print, (Unwin
Hyman, 1983), pp. 112-3, 115; Colonel T. N. Dupuy, USA A Genius For War: The German Army and General Staff,
1807-1945, (Prentice Hall, 1977), pp. 76; Lieut.-Col Arthur L Wagner, USA, The Campaign of Koniggratz: A Study
of the Austro-Prussian Conflict in Light of the American Civil War, (Hudson-Kimberly Publishing Co., 1899), pp.
19-20 (reprinted by American Military University for LW516 Course, AY 99-00).
[206] Wagner, The Campaign of Koniggratz, pp. 103-5.
[207] Though not stated in contemporary terms, the general observation that the lessons of the Franco-
Prussian War demonstrated a need for doctrinal and tactical change is drawn from the work of Boguslawski’s,
Tactical Deductions from the War of 1870-71, pp. v-viii (Translators’ Preface by Col Lumley Graham), 155-7.
Both the author and translator describe the necessity to modify close-order tactics in light of the increase level
of firepower due to rifled and breech-loading weapons. The term combined arms is used to describe the increased
integration of service arms.
Also see, Strachan, on infantry transition from close-order to skirmish line, pp. 114-7, on increased
importance to artillery and combined arms support to infantry, pp. 117-9.
[208] Boguslawski, pp. 154-7.
[209] Although cavalry would still play an important role on the battlefield, the tactical trends of the American
Civil War were confirmed. The increased vulnerability of cavalry to firepower would mean that cavalry would
rarely carry out the decisive battlefield attack. The role of cavalry was now relegated to the secondary supporting
roles of screening, reconnaissance, and raids. (Boguslawski, p. xv; Translator’s Preface by Col Lumley Graham,
88-9).
[210] Boguslawski, pp. 66-7; Strachan, on infantry transition from close-order to skirmish line, pp. 114-7, on
increased importance to artillery and combined arms support to infantry, pp. 117-9.
[211] Boguslawski, pp. 154-7; Dupuy, pp. 90-1; the definition of Napoleonic Grand Tactics, Chandler, The
Campaigns of Napoleon, pp. 178-9.

[212] For example, at the Battle of Sedan the Germans were able to mass 80 percent of their guns, 540 total, into
one Grand battery.(Gudmundsson, On Artillery, pp. 1-2)
[213] German four-pound 80mm pieces had a range of 3,800 meters as opposed to the French 86.5mm 3,150
meters. Additionally, the unreliable fusing of French ordnance prevented detonation at ranges in excess of 2,950
meters. (Gudmundsson, On Artillery, pp. 1-2)
[214] Gudmundsson, On Artillery, pp. 1-2.
[215] Captain A. B. Warfield, Field Artillery, USA, “Notes on Field Artillery,” from RB 20-18: Selected Readings
in Military History: Evolution of Combined Arms Warfare, (Combat Studies Institute, U.S. Army Command and
General Staff College, 1983), p. 110. (Hereafter, Warfield, “Notes on Field Artillery,” from Selected Readings). In
comparison, Boguslawski states that the normal firing position for German artillery was from 20003000 paces
from the enemy. (Boguslawski, p. 59).
[216] Gudmundsson, On Artillery, pp. 2-3; Michael Howard, The Franco-Prussian War: The German Invasion of
France, 1870-1871, ( Routledge, 1961), pp. 96 (footnote), 103.
[217] Gudmundsson, On Artillery, p. 3; quoting Prussian field artillery regulations; Balck, Tactics, Vol. I, pp.
352; Boguslawski, pp. 101-104, describes the Prussian practice of deploying guns well forward, even when under
heavy enemy fire; also, Bethell, “A comparison of British, French, and German methods of the employment of
artillery,” The Journal of the Royal Artillery, August 1912, p. 171.
[218] Boguslawski, pp. viii; (Translator’s Preface by Col Lumley Graham).
[219] Boguslawski, pp. viii (Translator’s Preface by Col Lumley Graham), 76-7.
[220] The Prussians were organized in four company battalions with two companies deployed forward as
skirmishers. The remaining two companies often remained in close-order company columns well to the rear. This
formation allowed them to maneuver in any direction, over uneven terrain, while still maintaining the ease of
control offered by close-order formations. (Ambrose, Upton and the Army, p. 83; Boguslawski, pp. 171-2)
[221] Boguslawski, pp. viii; (Translator’s Preface by Col Lumley Graham), pp. 76-7.
[222] Boguslawski, pp. viii (Translator’s Preface by Col Lumley Graham), 76-9, 160-1; direct quotation from p.
162.
[223] Boguslawski, p. 79.
[224] Boguslawski, pp. viii-x; (Translator’s Preface by Col Lumley Graham).
[225] Boguslawski, pp. viii-xiii; Translator’s Preface by Col Lumley Graham.
[226] Stone and Schmidl, pp. 252-3; Balck, Tactics, Vol. I, p. 75-8,
[227] Gudmundsson, Stormtroop Tactics, p. 8; Gudmundsson, “A Lesson from the Boers,” Military History
Quarterly, summer 1989, Vol. 1, number 4, p. 34.
[228] Henderson, The Science of War, p. 139.
[229] Henderson faulted the Prussians for disregarding the fundamentals of combat. He stated that the Prussian
penchant for initiative and aggressiveness was often made at the expense of the “principles of war,” claiming that
the standard practice of “preparing the attack by a heavy artillery fire was habitually neglected” since the senior
commanders never allowed the artillery enough time to complete their bombardments. As an example,
Henderson asserts that the huge Prussian losses at Spicheren and Worth were exacerbated by the Prussian failure
to allow the artillery to properly prepare the battlefield prior to the attack. The infantry attack was commenced
at the same time as the artillery began its preparation fire. (Henderson, The Science of War, pp. 140-1)
Additionally, he claimed that the Prussians abandoned the Napoleonic practice of advancing with infantry
formations composed of three lines in order to give the formation the depth necessary to continue the attack by
constantly providing reinforcements. The Prussian abandonment of this principle, he asserted, resulted in
indecisive infantry actions which the Prussians strove to remedy with extended-order tactics. In fact, Henderson

claimed that the Prussian emphasis on outflanking enemy positions resulted in an over-extension of their lines,
causing them to be too weak. (Henderson, The Science of War, pp. 144-5).
[230] Henderson, The Science of War, pp. 146-7.
[231] Henderson, The Science of War, p. 164.
[232] Henderson, The Science of War, p. 164.
[233] Henderson, The Science of War, p. 142.
[234] Henderson, The Science of War, p. 152.
[235] Henderson, The Science of War, pp. 152-3.
[236] Henderson, The Science of War, pp. 372-4; direct quotation, p. 373.
[237] Paragraph information from Boguslawski, pp. x-xiv; Translator’s Preface by Col Lumley Graham; direct
quotation from p. xiii.
[238] Boguslawski, p. xiv; Translator’s Preface by Col Lumley Graham.
[239] Boguslawski, p. 151.
[240] White, p. 139; Craig, p. 63.
[241] Daniel J. Hughes, ed., Moltke on the Art of War: Selected Writings, (Presidio Press, 1993), p. viii, from
foreword by Gunther E. Rothenberg.
[242] Larry H. Addington, The Blitzkrieg Era and the German General Staff, 1865-1941, (Rutgers University
Press, 1971), pp. xi, 4; Daniel J. Hughes, ed., Moltke on the Art of War: Selected Writings, (Presidio Press, 1993), p.
viii, foreword by Gunther E. Rothenberg; Wallach, pp. 41-2.
[243] Addington, p. 6.
[244] Addington, p. 6; Boguslawski, pp. 58-60. Although the author does not attribute the doctrinal
developments directly to Moltke, the realization of the strength of the tactical defense and strategic offence are
cited.
[245] Addington, p. 4.
[246] Addington, pp. 1, 4, 8.
[247] The reference (Boguslawski) states that the Battles of Weissenburg, Worth, and Vionville were fought
using this operational doctrine. It lists the Battle of Spicheren as an exception since the advanced guard became
unintentionally decisively engaged upon contact with the enemy. (Boguslawski, pp. 58-60)
[248] Boguslawski, pp. 58-60.
[249] However, Boguslawski notes that it is often necessary to execute “a fairly sharp attack in front … to hold
[the enemy] fast” in order to ensure that he cannot detect and reorient on the turning movement during its
movement. (Boguslawski, pp. 60-61)
[250] Addington, pp. 1, 4, 8.
[251] Addington, p. 6.
[252] Addington, pp. 4,6; Balk, Development of Tactics—World War, p. 7.
[253] Moltke’s rationale for keeping his armies dispersed until the time of battle was highlighted prior to the
Battle of Könniggrätz (1866) due to logistical complications. After the juncture of the Prussian First Army with
the Army of the Elbe (following the Battle of Münchengrätz), the task of supplying 100,000 men, concentrated in
an area of twenty miles, proved to be extremely difficult for the Prussian supply system. The strain of this task

confirmed the validity of Moltke’s operational theory even prior to the Franco-Prussian War. (LtCol Arthur L.
Wagner, The Campaign of Koniggratz: A Study of the Austro-Prussian Conflict in Light of the American Civil War,
Hudson-Kimberly Publishing Co., 1899, p. 46).
[254] Hughes, pp. 11-12, 56; Bradley J. Meyer, Operational Art and the German Command System in World
War I. (Dissertation for Degree Doctor of Philosophy in the Graduate School of the Ohio State University, 1988),
p. 4.
[255] Hughes, p. ix, foreword by Gunther E. Rothenberg, 124.
[256] Hughes, p. 76-78, 132-3; Holborn, 290-91.
[257] Corelli Barnett, The Swordbearers: Supreme Command in the First World War (Indiana University Press,
1963), p. 50; Meyer, Operational Art and the German Command System in World War I, p. 7.
[258] Meyer, Operational Art and the German Command System in World War I, p. 7.
[259] Meyer, Operational Art and the German Command System in World War I, pp. 1, 7.
[260] Meyer, Operational Art and the German Command System in World War I pp. 102, 109.
[261] Meyer, Operational Art and the German Command System in World War I. pp. 128-29.
[262] Barnett, p. 44.
[263] Meyer, Operational Art and the German Command System in World War I, pp. 130-32.
[264] Corum, pp. 6, 12.
[265] Eversley Belfield, The Boer War, (Archon Books, 1975), p. 30.
[266] Belfield, pp. 30-1; Jay Stone and Erwin A. Schmidl, The Boer War and Military Reforms, (Atlantic
Research and Publications Inc., 1988), p. 15.
[267] Belfield, pp. 33, 35-6.
[268] Stone and Schmidl, p. 17.
[269] Jay Stone and Erwin A. Schmidl, The Boer War and Military Reforms, (Atlantic Research and Publications
Inc., 1988), p. 14.
[270] Belfield, pp. 35-6.
[271] Historical Section of the Great General Staff, Berlin, The War in South Africa, Vol. I, trans. Vol. I, Col. W.
H. H. Waters, (John Murray, 1907), pp. 24-5. (Hereafter, German General Staff, The War in South Africa, Vol. I
or Vol. II); and, Stone and Schmidl, pp. 14-15. (referencing, G. F. R. Henderson, Science of War).
[272] Specifically, British battlefield regulations directed that infantry advances be conducted by formations
consisting of three lines. The first was to pin the enemy force for the assault made by the second line. The third
line was to pursue the enemy or, in the case of failure, cover the retreat. Infantry fire was to be opened at 450
meters from the enemy position, as opposed to the German doctrine of 600-1000 meters. (Stone and Schmidl, The
Boer War and Military Reforms, pp. 13-4).
[273] Stone and Schmidl, pp. 13-4; German General Staff, The War in South Africa, Vol. I, pp. 26-8.
Note: A misprint in the first chapter of Stone and Schmidl’s, The Boer War and Military Reforms, refers to the
British Drill Book of 1986. It was assumed the author was referring to the Drill Book of 1896 referred to later in
the text.
[274] German General Staff, The War in South Africa, Vol. I, pp. 26-9.
[275] Stone and Schmidl, p. 33.

[276] Balck, Development of Tactics—World War, p. 11; Gudmundsson, On Artillery, pp. 20-21.
[277] Belfield, p. 37; Stone and Schmidl, p. 41.
[278] Belfield, p. 48; Balck, Tactics Vol. I, p. 340.
[279] The quarter column formation is a close-order rectangular formation. This particular formation had 90
lines of 40 men apiece, with a frontage of 45 yards by 330 yards deep. At Magersfontein, the commander planned
on advancing to within 300-500 yards of the Boer positions before deploying to an extended-order formation with
a frontage of 2,500 yards. (Belfield, pp. 54-9)
[280] Lord Methuen lost 7% of his division. Specifically, the Highland Brigade lost 60% of its officers and 37%
of its ranks. (Belfield, pp. 58-9).
[281] Belfield, p. 54-9.
[282] Stone and Schmidl, pp. 42.
[283] Although the 1889 Drill Book advised that artillery not be employed within 1,700 yards of the enemy
positions, the British artillery at Colenso moved to within 700 yards and was rendered useless by heavy rifle fire.
(Stone and Schmidl, p. 44).
[284] Stone and Schmidl, pp. 43-4; Gudmundsson, On Artillery, p. 9.
[285] The Boer commander “Koos” de la Rey believed it was wasteful to defend strong points from defensive
positions on the crest of kopjes. In such cases, defending infantry fire was directed downwards which resulted in
wasteful, inaccurate “plunging fire”. Additionally, once the enemy advance reached the base of the hill, the
opposing infantry were often protected by a “dead zone” which offered them a relatively safe area to regroup
before continuing the attack. In response to this observation, De la Rey directed his defenders to dig individual
fighting positioned on plains proceeding, or the forward slope, of a defensive position. (Belfield, pp. 38-9).
[286] Belfield, pp. 38-9; Stone and Schmidl, pp. 34-5..
[287] Belfield, pp. 41-5; Stone and Schmidl, pp. 41-2.
[288] Stone and Schmidl, pp. 35-6.
[289] For principles of German defense-in depth tactics, see, Lupfer, pp. 11-21.
[290] Therefore, the correct balance between density and firepower had yet to be determined. Later, the correct
troop density was exhibited at the Battle of Driefontein in March 1900. At Driefontein the firing line was
gradually reinforced from supports during its advance. (German General Staff, The War in South Africa, Vol. II,
p. 49).
[291] This was attributed to poor pre-assault reconnaissance resulting in a lack of knowledge as to the location
of enemy entrenchments. (German General Staff, The War in South Africa, Vol. I, pp. 219-223)
[292] On Battle of Paardeberg, German General Staff, The War in South Africa, Vol. I, pp. 219-223; Footnote on
Driefontein from, The War in South Africa, Vol. II, p. 49; on weakness of skirmish line, Balck, Tactics, Vol. I, p.
238..
[293] Stone and Schmidl, pp. 34-5.
[294] As previously stated, five Boer guns opposed forty-four British guns at Colenso; at Pieters Hill ten Boer
pieces defended against seventy British; at Paardeberg, six Boer guns opposed ninety-one British. (Gudmundsson,
On Artillery, p. 9.)
[295] The Boer heavy artillery engaged enemy at 6,000 to 10,0000 yards, medium guns at 4,000 to 6,000 yards,
and light at 3,000 to 4,000 yards. All these ranges were larger than the British army was able to counter from its
similar pieces. (Stone and Schmidl, pp. 34)
[296] Gudmundsson, On Artillery, pp. 9-10.

[297] Gudmundsson, On Artillery, pp. 12-3.
[298] A Shanze was approximately five feet deep with overhead cover to protect from shrapnel. In addition to
emphasizing camouflage, dirt from the firing pit was piled in the rear to eliminate the silhouette. (Stone and
Schmidl, pp. 34-5)
[299] Stone and Schmidl, pp. 34-5.
[300] Belfield, p. 104, 115-6, 150, 164.
[301] Gudmundsson, On Artillery, p. 13.
[302] Stone and Schmidl, p. 82; attack on Harts’ Hill by series of rushes, German General Staff, The War in
South Africa, Vol. II, p. 266; Balck, Tactics, Vol. I, p. 95.
[303] Stone and Schmidl, p. 82; Thomas Pakenham, The Boer War, (Random House, 1979), pp. 363, 380-2; on
the initial bombardment of Hart’s Hill, German General Staff, The War in South Africa, Vol. II, pp. 277-8.
Strangely, except the initial bombardment, the German general Staff study does not mention the rolling barrage
referred to by the other two sources.
[304] Warfield, “Notes on Field Artillery,” from Selected Readings, p. 113; on British tendency to cease artillery
fire during the infantry attack, German General Staff, The War in South Africa, Vol. II, p. 329.
[305] Each battalion had a frontage of 250 meters, with a depth of 120 meters. There were 20 paces between
each line. This was a significant change over the previously used quarter column with a Brigade frontage of 45
yards by 330 yards with deployment occurring at 300-500 yards as at Magersfontein. (Stone and Schmidl, pp. 81;
Belfield, pp. 54-9)
[306] Stone and Schmidl, pp. 81-2; German General Staff, The War in South Africa, Vol. II, pp. 9-10.
[307] German General Staff, The War in South Africa, Vol. II, pp. 49-51.
[308] Stone and Schmidl, on infantry tactics, pp. 79-80; abolishing drill positions and conservation of
ammunition, pp. 116-17; on abolishing artillery reconnaissance., pp. 45, 87.
[309] Stone and Schmidl, pp. 84-5, 91.
[310] Predicted fire is defined as using indirect-fire to shoot concentrations without preliminary ranging rounds.
This requires such advances as accurate maps, the assessment of meteorological conditions, accurate survey
procedures, and the inclusion of the individual characteristics of each gun. (Bidwell and Graham, Firepower, p. 9)
[311] Bidwell and Graham, pp. 9-10.
[312] Stone and Schmidl, p. 86-7.
[313] Stone and Schmidl, pp. 89-90, 246; Bidwell and Graham, p. 28.
[314] Travers, p. 63-4; Bidwell and Graham, p. 30.
[315] After their experiences in the Russo-Japanese War, the Russian army followed the trend. Russian doctrine
extended their skirmisher interval to two and one half to three meters. Only France maintained its reliance on
dense skirmisher formations. (Balck, Development of Tactics—World War, pp. 201-2). However, as discussed
earlier, there was resistance to thin skirmisher formations due to an associated reduction in firepower. (See Part
V. Conclusion)
[316] Balck, Development of Tactics—World War, pp. 201-2.
[317] Stone and Schmidl, p. 82.
[318] Stone and Schmidl, pp. 116-7, quoting the British manual.
[319] Stone and Schmidl, pp. 81-2.

[320] Stone and Schmidl, pp. 83, 89-90.
[321] Trimmel also noted that regardless of advanced tactics, the Boers were still able to counter these
techniques by withdrawing before becoming decisively engaged.
[322] Stone and Schmidl, p. 206.
[323] Stone and Schmidl, pp. 204-5, 207.
[324] Stone and Schmidl, pp. 206-7.
[325] Stone and Schmidl, p. 208; citing Heft 32, pp. 22, 33-4; Heft 33, pp. 100-103.
[326] Stone and Schmidl, pp. 245, 249-50; citing the reforms advocated by Austrian Generals such as Field
Marshal Ferdinand Siedler and Major (later General) Gustav Smekal.
[327] Stone and Schmidl, pp. 209-10; citing an unnamed review of Trimmel’s observations.
[328] Stone and Schmidl, pp. 247, 254-5.
[329] Stone and Schmidl, pp. 255-6.
[330] Balck, Development of Tactics—World War, pp. 28, 33.

