
Illegal Immigration

Recent Titles in the
CONTEMPORARY WORLD ISSUES
Series
LGBT Youth Issues Today: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Science and Political Controversy: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Nuclear Power: A Reference Handbook, second edition
Harry Henderson
Internet Censorship: A Reference Handbook
Bernadette H. Schell
School Violence: A Reference Handbook, second edition
Laura L. Finley
GMO Food: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Wind Energy: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Profiling and Criminal Justice in America: A Reference Handbook,  
second edition
Jeff Bumgarner
Fracking: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Cyber Warfare: A Reference Handbook
Paul J. Springer
Healthcare Reform in America: A Reference Handbook, second edition
Jennie Jacobs Kronenfeld and Michael Kronenfeld
Cloning: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Hate Crimes: A Reference Handbook, third edition
Donald Altschiller

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital 
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollu-
tion, and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, schol-
ars, and nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, 
clearly written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good 
starting point for research by high school and college students, 
scholars, and general readers as well as by legislators, business-
people, activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an 
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical 
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary 
source material, a forum of authoritative perspective essays, 
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index. 
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will 
find the information they need to have a better understanding 
of the social, political, environmental, and economic issues fac-
ing the world today.

This page intentionally left blank

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND MEDICINE
CONTEMPORARY  WORLD  ISSUES
Illegal Immigration
A REFERENCE HANDBOOK
Second Edition
Michael C. LeMay

Copyright © 2015 by ABC-CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by 
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or 
otherwise, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, 
without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
LeMay, Michael C., 1941–
  Illegal immigration : a reference handbook / Michael C. LeMay. — 
Second edition.
    pages cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-1-4408-4012-8 (acid-free paper) — ISBN 978-1-
4408-4013-5 (ebook)  1.  Illegal aliens—United States.  2.  Illegal 
aliens—Government policy—United States.  3.  United States—
Emigration and immigration—Government policy.  I.  Title. 
  JV6483.L46 2015
  325.73—dc23      2015019015
ISBN: 978-1-4408-4012-8
EISBN: 978-1-4408-4013-5
19  18  17  16  15    1  2  3  4  5
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO
An Imprint of ABC-CLIO, LLC
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116–1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper 
Manufactured in the United States of America

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND MEDICINE
Contents
Preface, xiii
1	
Background and History, 3
Introduction: The Scope and Nature of Unauthorized 
Immigration, 3
The Roots of the Problem, 6
Changes in Legal Immigration: Setting the Stage for 
Illegal Immigration, 10
The Crisis of Border Control: Illegal Immigration and 
Enactment of IRCA, 12
Border Security and Antiterrorism Concerns, 23
Creating the Department of Homeland Security: 
Dissolving the INS, 27
Conclusion, 34
References, 35
2	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 41
Introduction, 41
Current Domestic-Policy Concern: Amnesty or Earned 
Legalization Issue of the Unauthorized, 42
vii

viii	
Contents
Incorporation of Illegal Immigrants and  
Their Children, 52
Border Control and Management Issues, 57
The Cost of Illegal Immigration, 63
Guest-Worker Issues, 66
Restructuring the INS into the DHS, 69
Immigration and Related Policy Issues, 72
Solutions, 75
References, 76
3	
Perspectives, 91
Introduction, 91
On Hospitality to the Stranger: Some Moral 
Implications of Immigration Reform: The Rev. Canon 
Pablo Ramos, 91
Examining the Adequacy and Enforcement of U.S. 
Immigration Laws: Jessica Vaughan, 95
Should the United States Enact Tougher Laws to Stem 
Illegal Immigration?: Karen K. Clark, 99
In Opposition to Birthright Citizenship: Judith Ann 
Warner, 105
In Support of Maintaining Birthright Citizenship:  
Judith Ann Warner, 110
Mitigating Federal Immigration Law: Inclusion at the 
Local Level: Roberto Suro, 116
Obama’s “Executive Action” on Immigration and 
Judicial Review: Alemayehu G. Mariam, 122
Resolving the Issue of Illegal Immigration—A Question 
of Balance: David E. Krahl, 127

	
Contents	
ix
4	
Profiles, 137
Introduction, 137
Biographies, 138
Directory of Organizations and Agencies, 173
National Government Agencies and  
Organizations, 173
International Organizations, 180
Domestic Advocacy Agencies and Organizations/
NGOs and Nonprofits, 182
Immigration Research Centers and Think Tanks, 206
References, 213
5	
Data and Documents, 219
Introduction, 219
Data, 219
Table 5.1: Comparison of Legal and Illegal  
Immigration Trends over Time, 219
Table 5.2: Estimated Unauthorized Mexican-Born 
Immigrant Population Compared to All 
Unauthorized Immigrants, Assorted Years, 
1995–2012, 221
Table 5.3: Estimated Unauthorized Immigrants 
in the U.S. Labor Force, Assorted Years, 
1995–2012, 221
Table 5.4: Unaccompanied Alien Children  
Encountered, by Fiscal Year, Country of  
Origin, 2009–2014, 222
Table 5.5: Trends in Removals, 2011–2013, 222
Table 5.6: Gallup Poll Trend Line, “Do You Think 
Immigration Is a Good Thing or a Bad Thing for 
the U.S. Today?,” 2001–2014, 223

x	
Contents
Table 5.7: Gallup Poll Trend Line, 2001–2014, 
“Should Immigration Be Kept at Its Present 
Level, Increased, or Decreased?,” 223
Table 5.8a: Gallup Poll Trend Line, 2006–2014, 
“What Should Be the Main Focus of U.S.  
Government in Dealing with Illegal  
Immigration?,” 224
Table 5.8b: Gallup Poll Trend Line, 2006–2011, 
“What Should U.S. Policy Be Toward Illegal  
Immigrants Residing in the United States?,” 224
Figure 5.1: U.S. Customs and Border Patrol,  
Sector Map, 2013, 225
Figure 5.2: Department of Homeland Security  
Organizational Chart, 226
Documents, 227
Executive Summary Recommendations of  
the Select Commission on Immigration  
and Refugee Policy, 1981, 227
The Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, 
229
Summaries of Laws on Immigration, 237
References, 278
6	
Resources, 281
Introduction, 281
Selected Print Resources, 282
Books, 282
Leading Scholarly Journals, 308
Reports and Government Documents, 316
Nonprint Resources, 320

	
Contents	
xi
7	
Chronology, 335
Precursor Legislation: Setting the Stage for  
Things to Come, 335
The Revolving-Door Era, 1965–2000, 341
The Storm-Door Era: 2001–?, 348
References, 351
Glossary, 357
Index, 365
About the Author, 381

This page intentionally left blank

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND MEDICINE
Preface
Illegal Immigration: A Reference Handbook, Second Edition, 
defines the concept and analyzes the flow of unauthorized immi-
gration to the United States since 1970. It focuses on why illegal 
immigration and the reform of immigration policy regarding 
it continue to be such a vexing political problem—what is well 
described as a policy conundrum. What makes good (that is, 
popular) politics on the issue often results in bad policy (that 
is, inefficient or ineffective policy). The gaps and failures as well 
as unanticipated consequences of provisions in legal immigra-
tion contribute significantly to the illegal immigration flow. 
It demonstrates the extent of the problem of unauthorized 
immigration—its causes and effects. This second edition adds a 
chapter comprising original essays that offer various perspectives 
on the issue. It adds a significant discussion of the groups who 
lobby or agitate politically to either reform immigration policy 
or oppose such reform, several of whom have arisen since the 
election of President Barack Obama in 2008. Still other groups 
had been politically active but until recent years had not entered 
the political fray over immigration policy reform. These pro 
and con groups struggle to determine the nature and content of 
illegal immigration policy that has resulted in the current stale-
mate on the issue in the U.S. Congress. Moreover, it recognizes 
that immigration policy regarding both legal and unauthorized 
immigration is inherently intermestic policy—one that involves 
both domestic and international concerns. Immigration policy 
xiii

xiv	
Preface
has significant political consequences for and across a number 
of related policy areas. Whatever the Congress does on immi-
gration law, whatever executive actions the president takes on 
the matter, and whatever court decisions have been rendered on 
cases involving the issue have implications for U.S. international 
relations. And often what other nation-states do or fail to do 
in their policy profoundly affects the illegal immigration flow. 
Developments on the international scene, moreover, are in con-
stant flux and contribute to the flow of migration across national 
boundaries. Unauthorized immigration waxes and wanes in 
response to such events, which serve as push factors in the flow. 
This makes the problem increasingly difficult in complexity and 
scope, thereby making policy responses all the more difficult.
The unauthorized immigration issue has been on the 
national political and policy agenda, largely unabated, since 
1970. Sometimes the issue is on the front-burner of American 
political discourse; and sometimes it is on the back-burner. But 
it is nearly always on the agenda of government and politics at 
one or several levels of government in the federal system. It is 
an issue that is substantive in its importance and timely in its 
impact on the culture, economy, and politics of American soci-
ety. The undocumented immigration flow, largely across the 
nation’s southern border, moreover, contributes to a collective 
perception of national identity—a sense of peoplehood—often 
in ways that engender fear and resistance to change among a 
significant portion of the population. In recent years threats 
from international terrorism and from epidemic diseases that 
become pandemic in nature have fueled xenophobia and 
increased calls for restrictions in immigration. Since 2001, a 
sense of “Fortress America” has permeated the political debate 
and policy making on the issue. Immigration policy regard-
ing both the legal and, especially, the unauthorized flow has 
become an important element in our homeland security and 
defense policy making.
The United States is one of the leading and, in absolute num-
bers of persons entering, the leading immigration-reception 

	
Preface	
xv
nation in the world. Its population now includes significant 
numbers of permanent residents who come from nearly 200 
nations of origin. Since the United States began counting them, 
legal immigrants have exceeded 75  million. Added to those 
numbers are an estimated 11–12 million unauthorized immi-
grants. The decade 2000–2010 has seen exceptionally high lev-
els of immigration. The recession of 2009–2013, the nation’s 
most severe economic downturn since the Great Depression of 
the 1930s, was politically all the more stressful as a result of the 
issue and illegal immigration flow.
Today, American politics struggles with heightened fears 
that unauthorized immigration overburdens public educa-
tion, health care, prison, public health, and welfare systems, 
especially at state and local government levels. There have been 
significant increases in fears that the unauthorized immigrant 
flow contributes to terrorist cells or brings in with it the newly 
emerging “hot virus” disease epidemics. Such fears suggest that 
the current era of immigration policy making may well be 
described as the “storm-door era.”
This second edition concentrates on those trends and policy 
developments since 2000. It offers answers to essential questions 
about illegal immigration to the United States and inherently 
connected issues that are accessible to high school students, 
undergraduate students, general readers, and individuals who 
are interested in topics such as immigration, border security, 
and human rights issues. It examines the history of illegal immi-
gration in the United States, describing in detail its key issues 
and events. It explores the myriad of problems and controversies 
that are linked to the issue of illegal immigration, and explains 
how politicians, policy makers, and policy implementers have 
tried, and continue to grapple with, efforts to solve them. It sur-
veys the complex history of illegal immigration in a manner that 
helps the reader identify the key issues in an easy-to-understand 
fashion. The perspectives chapter allows a broad range of voices, 
from all sides of the issue, to be heard. These voices add crucial 
and diverse perspectives to that of the author’s expertise.

xvi	
Preface
The economic and political instability in Mexico and Central 
American countries such as El Salvador, Guatemala, and Hon-
duras has led to a huge influx of unauthorized immigration. 
Other nations have contributed to the spike in both legal and 
illegal immigrants, particularly those from China, India, the 
Philippines, and the Dominican Republic. These new migrants 
often experience very perilous journeys through hostile envi-
ronments, risking their lives and expending precious and 
extensive resources in an effort to find a better life. A significant 
portion of the American populous, however, is outraged by the 
illegal immigration flow and by the immigrants’ very presence. 
They label illegal immigrants criminals. Such critics cite vex-
ing problems like poverty, unemployment, crime, security, and 
public health risks that are exacerbated by the illegal immigra-
tion influx. They feel those problems must be addressed and 
seriously mitigated before the nation attempts to care for those 
entering the borders illegally. Other Americans feel sympathy 
for illegal immigrants, especially the children who come unac-
companied by adults, citing the dangerous circumstances in 
their home countries from which they are escaping. They hold 
the position that, given those circumstances, aiding those chil-
dren and other unauthorized entrants is a humanitarian issue.
This second edition addresses a host of questions with respect 
to illegal immigration. Who is coming illegally and why? How 
does one become illegal? What events created the economic dis-
parities that compel them to leave their nation of origin? Does 
the United States have any responsibility for taking care of the 
more than 11 million persons unauthorized to be here? Are 
illegal immigrants a benefit or a burden? Do they help or harm 
the economy and infrastructure of the United States? Should 
and can the United States secure its borders, as is called for by 
many politicians, especially those on the “right” of the political 
spectrum? Should the United States be more lenient and allow 
for “earned legalization” of the millions of persons here ille-
gally? Should we adhere to our long-standing tradition of being 
a “country of immigrants” and a place of asylum for refugees? 

	
Preface	
xvii
Is there really a difference between amnesty and earned legal-
ization? Are illegal immigrants criminals by the very fact of 
their illegal status? Is it ethical to demand more deportations? 
Should the United States maintain its current immigration 
policy position of preference for family unification? Or, should 
it tilt immigration law in the direction of aiding the economy? 
What, if anything, can the government do to pass immigration 
reform? Will such reforms actually help, or will they simply 
serve as an incentive, drawing still more illegal migration?
Chapter  1 discusses the background and history of ille-
gal immigration to the United States. It provides a thorough 
examination of the economic, political, and social contexts sur-
rounding the phenomenon, and discusses key moments along 
the timeline of the flow. It examines the development of public 
policy aimed at coping with immigration more broadly, pro-
viding the context to better understand current events. It shows 
why the topic of illegal immigration matters, and demonstrates 
the importance of the issue. Information in the chapter pro-
vides insights from current works and studies of the issue. It 
is synthesized and presented in a manner both comprehensive 
and unbiased for the reader’s consumption, better enabling 
them to form their own judgments on the issues.
Chapter 2 outlines the most problematic situations related 
to illegal immigration, and why the issue poses such a policy 
conundrum. It addresses the efforts taken by governments at 
all levels and branches of government to cope with these prob-
lems, detailing the specific actions taken. Finally, it discusses 
proposed solutions to the problems on the agenda of govern-
ment, particularly at the national level.
Chapter 3 comprises eight essays by scholars and other indi-
viduals who are involved in the issue. It brings together key 
voices from diverse disciplinary contexts. These voices repre-
sent various positions on all sides of the matter and enrich the 
perspective that the author is able to provide.
Chapter 4 describes the key individuals and organizations 
involved in the illegal immigration discourse. The chapter 

xviii	
Preface
profiles nongovernmental actors and organizations that advo-
cate for or against the various policy proposals to resolve the 
policy conundrum of illegal immigration. They are the “stake-
holders” in the policy debates on the issue who must be involved 
in any solutions to the problems.
Chapter  5 offers data and documents gathered from the 
illegal immigration debate. Examination of these data helps 
to answer the following questions: Who is entering the coun-
try undocumented, and from where are they coming? How 
do persons who enter with documents become unauthorized 
and thereby illegal immigrants, and from where do they come? 
How many such immigrants establish successful lives here? 
How many estimated deaths have occurred in failed attempts 
to cross the border? How many people are being deported, and 
what are the effects of those deportations? How much money 
is being spent to care for illegal immigrants? How are those 
costs borne differentially by the levels of government in the 
U.S. federal system? How much money is flushed into the U.S. 
economy by illegal immigrants? Do they benefit the Social 
Security system? What are the economic impacts of the illegal 
immigration flow on border towns and regions, as well as on 
the United States as a whole?
Chapter  6 is a resource chapter, presenting an annotated 
bibliography of print and electronic resources especially rel-
evant to the issue. The primary resources are books and Inter-
net sources, but other items useful for further research by the 
reader include magazines, government reports and statistics, 
and other print and nonprint resources.
A chronology of the key moments in the history of illegal 
immigration is then provided.
Finally, a glossary provides easy access to definitions of the 
key terms used in the illegal immigration debate. The glossary 
is followed by a comprehensive index. The book closes with 
a brief “About the Author” page indicating the author’s bona 
fides for writing the book.

Illegal Immigration


3
1	
Background and History
Introduction: The Scope and Nature of Unauthorized 
Immigration
More than 75 million legal immigrants (also known as autho-
rized immigrants or permanent resident aliens) have entered the 
United States since the country began keeping count in 1820. 
Since 1970, an estimated 10 to 15 million persons have entered 
or have become unauthorized immigrants (also known as ille-
gal immigrants). Current estimates of illegal immigrants in the 
United States place their number at about 11.5 million (Pew 
Hispanic Research Center 2014a). The presence of so many 
immigrants who remain in the shadows of the population has 
revived decades-old concern about the ability of the United 
States to control the borders. The issue of illegal immigration 
is once again at the forefront of American politics and on the 
agenda of the national government and even some state govern-
ments as a serious problem needing to be addressed. There is 
widespread consensus that the immigration system is broken.
To better understand the nature and scope of the problem a 
few terms need clarification. A person may become an unauthor-
ized, or illegal, immigrant in several ways. Undocumented immi-
grants are those who enter the country without paperwork, a visa 
A Mexican migratory laborer, employed under the Bracero Program, har-
vests tomatoes in southern California. The Bracero workers who came for 
nine months during the Bracero programs’ years of operation, 1942–1964, 
established the chain migration networks that influenced the illegal immi-
gration flow from 1970 to date. (AP Photo)

4	
Illegal Immigration
or legal authorization. They are commonly referred to as illegal 
aliens. They enter the country from both its northern and south-
ern borders. They are often pejoratively referred to as wetbacks, 
a slang term deriving from the fact that so many of them came 
across the southern border and the Rio Grande River. Another 
way to become unauthorized is by becoming a visa-overstayer. 
These are migrants who enter the United States with paper-
work, a temporary visa of some sort, like a tourist visa or stu-
dent visa, and who subsequently stay in the country after the visa 
has expired. Migrants can also become unauthorized when they 
enter with a conditional visa and then break the conditions of 
the visa. A good example is a person who enters on a student visa 
and then fails to attend school, or who takes a job, which he or 
she is not allowed to do with a student visa. Still another way to 
become an unauthorized or illegal immigrant is by entering with 
fraudulent papers. Finally, a person can become an unauthorized 
or illegal immigrant by committing a crime after entry, thereby 
being subject to deportation, and then failing to depart (Infor-
mation Plus 2014). Among the approximately 11 million unau-
thorized immigrants, roughly 60  percent are undocumented 
entrants, while the remaining 40 percent are overstayers, fraudu-
lent entrants, or persons failing to depart when under orders to 
do so (Pew Hispanic Research Center 2014b).
Two further terms useful to the discussion of policies aimed 
at the illegal immigration problem refer to why persons become 
international migrants who intentionally seek permanent resi-
dence in a country other than their nation of birth or origin. 
These terms distinguish between factors influencing their deci-
sions to migrate. Push factors are those reasons that compel per-
sons to emigrate from their nation of origin (LeMay 2013a: 5). 
Push factors include events such as wars, widespread epidemic 
diseases, extreme and widespread poverty in a country with a 
failed economy, or ethnic, racial, or religious persecution. Push 
factors may lead individuals to conclude they must emigrate or 
face death. Pull factors are reasons that draw millions of migrat-
ing persons to a particular country, like the United States. Pull 
factors are exemplified by subsidized travel, an abundance of 

	
Background and History	
5
opportunity, a rich and developing economy, political stability 
and widespread participation, and numerous freedoms, such as 
from cultural, ethnic, political, racial, or religious persecution 
generally well afforded in the United States (LeMay 2013a: 5; 
LeMay 2007; LeMay, 1987). Pull factors often are like the flip 
side of the coin of push factors.
A worldwide explosion of population that grows exponen-
tially, coupled with enormous poverty and extremely high 
levels of unemployment and political turmoil experienced by 
many so-called Third World nations, drives ethnic and reli-
gious tensions. Natural disasters are another push factor com-
pelling international migration. The United Nations estimates 
that there are more than 15 million refugees worldwide (www.
unhcr.org/51c071816.html, accessed February 7, 2015).
This distinction between push and pull factors is signifi-
cant analytically precisely because policy makers in the receiv-
ing nation (like the United States) can do little if anything in 
their public policy that will directly affect push factors, other 
than raising or lowering refugee rates. Most policies that can 
affect international migration driven by push factors must be 
by multinational organizations, such as the United Nations, 
the World Health Organization, UNICEF, the World Bank, 
and so on. However, their policies can only recommend 
actions to receiving countries; they cannot compel agreement 
or compliance. Illegal immigration to the United States is 
an especially vexing problem because the United States is a 
First World economy that shares a porous, 2,000-mile border 
with the Third World country of Mexico. Mexico has a deeply 
troubled economy. It, too, experiences a significant flow of 
illegal migration across its southern border by persons flee-
ing Central American nations like El Salvador, Guatemala, 
and Honduras, the vast majority of whom are intentionally 
just passing through Mexico on their way seeking to enter the 
United States (LeMay 1994; Hammermesh and Bean, 1996; 
Kiser and Kiser, 1979).
This chapter will discuss the background and history of 
the issue, focusing particularly on the trend toward increasing 

6	
Illegal Immigration
numbers of illegal entries since 2000, and on the greater disper-
sion in recent years of the unauthorized immigrant population. 
No longer are most unauthorized immigrants clustered in just 
a handful of border states, nor even the 10 states that have been 
characterized as gateway states (Zuniga and Hernandez-Leon 
2005; LeMay, 1987). Illegal immigration is no longer a 
border-states problem, as today some 30 states have significant 
and growing percentages of their population in unauthorized 
status. It is now truly a national problem. This chapter will 
summarize and explain the trend, covering different points of 
view as to the nature and impact of unauthorized immigration, 
and will touch upon possible solutions—some tried with little 
success, and others proposed but not yet enacted.
The Roots of the Problem
Unfortunately, illegal immigration arises out of problems in 
the legal immigration system and policy enacted for its imple-
mentation. Moreover, it is the result, more often, of push fac-
tors than of pull factors. Current legal immigration policy is 
established by the act of October 3, 1965, the Immigration and 
Naturalization Act of 1965 (79 Stat. 911).
Gaps, flaws, and unanticipated consequences with current 
legal immigration law and policies form the basis for the nature 
and scope of the illegal flow. In a very real sense, one cannot 
grasp the development of the unauthorized immigration flow 
without first understanding the impact of the Bracero Program 
and its demise in 1964.
Unauthorized immigration to the United States increased 
exponentially after 1970. The Bracero Program was a tempo-
rary worker program that allowed U.S. employers—mostly 
agriculture producers and the railroads—to import workers 
from Mexico on a nine-month basis in a given year. It began 
in 1942, during World War II, as a measure to cope with the 
severe labor shortage in agriculture when millions of workers 
left the farms for the high-wage wartime production jobs in 

	
Background and History	
7
metropolitan areas. Other workers left to serve in the armed 
forces, which grew to millions in uniform. Then, the rapidly 
expanding postwar economy continued the need for and even 
expansion of the Bracero Program. Congress passed the Agri-
cultural Act of 1949, which codified the program (63 Stat. 
1051), and the influx peaked in the mid-1960s with annual 
totals around 350,000. The program ended in 1964, when it 
was stopped as part of an agreement to pass the Immigration 
and Naturalization Act of 1965 (LeMay 2004: 266; Calavita 
1992; Craig 1971; Information Plus 2006). Organized labor 
and various patriotic and restrictionist groups argued that the 
program was getting out of hand. Their lobbying on the issue 
resulted in the program’s termination in 1964. The controlled 
entry of temporary farm and railroad workers was replaced by 
the flow of undocumented immigrants, especially from Mex-
ico, who were essentially the same workers who had partici-
pated in the Bracero Program (Muller and Espanshade 1985; 
LeMay and Barkan 1999; LeMay 2007; LeMay 1987).
Numerous studies noted the importance of Mexican immi-
gration patterns established during the Bracero period, which 
essentially set up chain migration flows that persisted long 
after the end of the Bracero Program (Andreas 2000; Busta-
mente 1981; Calavita 1992; Chiswick 1982; Crockroft 1986; 
Conover 1987; Craig 1971; Kiser and Kiser 1979; Kirstein 
1977; Massey et al. 1990; Nevins 2002). These undocumented 
immigrants filled a niche in the economic-wage structure of 
the U.S. economy. Their wages were low enough to allow the 
employer to make a profit. Faced with the end of this cheap 
labor flow, employers had few options. They could move opera-
tions overseas or across the border, replace their workers with 
machines, hire illegal immigrants, or go out of business. With 
the demise of the program, in California only lettuce and cit-
rus growers raised wages to attract domestic workers. Tomato 
growers switched to mechanical harvesters. Asparagus growers 
moved to Mexico, and marginal growers in all crops simply 
closed down and sold their farms. When the 1965 immigration 

8	
Illegal Immigration
law imposed a new preference system with a 20,000 per coun-
try limit, hundreds of thousands of workers who had been 
coming to work for nine months simply continued to come 
but without documentation. Their numbers quickly grew to an 
estimated half-million per year. These workers knew where to 
find work and places to live. Former Bracero workers passed on 
that knowledge to kinfolk and village compatriots.
Likewise, employers who had legally hired workers through 
the Bracero Program continued to hire them after it ended. 
From 1965 until the enactment of the Immigration Reform and 
Control Act of 1986 (IRCA), it was illegal for workers to come 
to the United States without documents—a civil law—but it 
was not illegal for employers to hire them. A provision known 
as the “Texas Proviso” in the 1952 McCarran-Walter Act 
exempted employers of illegal aliens from the harboring pro-
visions of the law, then using the quota system (Glazer 1985: 
52–53; LeMay 1994: 10). Employers knew and valued the 
former Bracero workers and accepted their recommendations 
for hiring their compatriots. The undocumented flow simply 
replaced those entering under the temporary worker provision, 
except they did not return to Mexico after nine months of sea-
sonal work. Increasingly after 1970, they came and remained 
permanently as unauthorized immigrants (LeMay 1994: 26–27;  
Suro 2015).
The consistency of the flow from Mexico to a few specific 
states, termed “gateway states,” showed a clear pattern of state 
of residence from 1940 to 2000, as is their gradual dispersion 
to nongateway states after enactment of IRCA in 1986.
The undocumented flow exacerbated the job and income 
problems of blacks, legal residents of Hispanic origin, and 
other secondary job market workers by reducing the number 
of such jobs available to them, depressing wages for those jobs 
they did hold, and impacting working conditions (Papademe-
triou and Miller 1984; Phillips and Massey 1999; Zuniga and 
Hernandez-Leon 2005; Hammermesch and Bean, 1996; Kiser 
and Kiser, 1979; LeMay, 1987).

	
Background and History	
9
Push factors propelled the rising flow. As noted in the Final 
Report of the Select Commission on Immigration and Refugee 
Policy (SCIRP):
One of the greatest pressures for international migration 
is and will be the world population growth. Projections of 
this growth show more than a 50 percent increase from 
1975 to the year 2000, from 4 billion to 6.35 billion. It 
has been estimated that 92 percent of this growth will take 
place in countries whose resources are least able to 
accommodate the needs of new population. . . . World 
economic and political instability would be threatened by 
the sudden, large-scale population moves which could 
result from widespread political or economic chaos in 
developing nations. (1981: 19–20)
Rising push factors induced waves of migration that had 
long-term impact and were more powerful than any other 
factors—especially pull factors. The changing flow of legal and 
unauthorized immigration resulted in a growing concern in the 
news media, in public opinion polls, and within government of 
the inadequacy of immigration laws to meet the new challenges 
and to “control the borders” (SCIRP 1981: 10; Bean and Sul-
livan 1985: 67–73; LeMay 1989: 8–10).
More immigrants, legal and unauthorized, entered the 
United States between 2000 and 2005 than in any other 
five-year period in U.S. history—an estimated 8  million. 
Nearly half, 3.7 million, entered illegally, according to Census 
Bureau data reviewed by the Center for Immigration Studies. 
In 2005, Arizona and New Mexico declared states of emer-
gency in an effort to cope with problems of crime and financial 
exigencies that their respective governors (both Democrats) 
linked to massive illegal immigration. The immigrant popula-
tion set a record at 35.2 million in March 2005, greater than 
those of the immigrant wave of 1910. Immigrants today com-
prise about 12 percent of the total U.S. population. Chapter 5 

10	
Illegal Immigration
presents tables and figures detailing the number of immigrants 
by state, ranked by their share of the population of that state, 
and numbers arriving after 2000.
Changes in Legal Immigration: Setting the Stage  
for Illegal Immigration
The Immigration and Naturalization Act of 1965 changed legal 
immigration from the quota system to a preference system. 
Whereas the quota system reflected the racism of the 1920s, 
the 1965 act reflected the changed attitude that was more open 
to immigration as national policy makers struggled with reeval-
uating many national laws in the civil rights era, immigration 
law included. The post–World War II need to modify the quota 
system, exemplified in the use of special acts, nonquota immi-
gration policies, and refugee/escapee laws, amply demonstrated 
the need for comprehensive reform of immigration policy. 
Healthy economic conditions in the early 1960s enabled even 
organized labor to favor a more liberal immigration policy. The 
1965 act replaced the quota system with a seven-category pref-
erence system that allocated visas for each foreign state on a 
first-come, first-served basis with a cap of 20,000 visas per year. 
The categories were:
1.	 First preference: unmarried sons and daughters of U.S. citizens
2.	 Second preference: spouse and unmarried sons and daugh-
ters of permanent resident aliens
3.	 Third preference: members of the professions and scientists 
and artists of exceptional ability
4.	 Fourth preference: married sons and daughters of U.S. 
citizens
5.	 Fifth preference: brothers and sisters of U.S. citizens
6.	 Sixth preference: skilled and unskilled workers in short 
supply
7.	 Seventh preference: refugees

	
Background and History	
11
Worldwide events soon outstripped the ability of the law to 
accommodate refugees and its annual limit of 20,000 visas 
per country was also applied to immigrants from the Western 
Hemisphere nations, which previously had none. These provi-
sions resulted in enormous pressures for immigrants to arrive 
in the United States “through the back door.” Long waiting lists 
for legal visas began to backlog into scores of years, prompting 
many to come as undocumented immigrants. The number of 
undocumented border crossings soon swelled to what began to 
be called a flood of illegal immigrants.
In 1970 the Immigration and Naturalization Service 
(INS), within which the Border Patrol agency was housed, 
apprehended about a quarter-million undocumented persons 
attempting to cross the porous, 2,000-mile southern border. 
By 1986 that number had risen to nearly 2 million. SCIRP 
estimated the total unauthorized immigrant population as of 
1978 at between 3.5 and 6 million. Hispanics, especially those 
from Mexico, and then from Central America, made up the 
bulk of the undocumented. Roughly two-thirds of the undocu-
mented were Mexicans driven north by grinding poverty and 
enormous unemployment at home. Many were former Bracero 
workers or relatives of those who had come in the period of the 
program, 1942–1964.
Mexican immigrants, who made up about 60  percent of 
Hispanic immigrants, especially the undocumented ones, came 
from rural and small-town areas, fleeing dire poverty. They 
often exhibited a “sojourner” attitude since they resided close 
to their native areas. They frequently returned to their place of 
origin, thereby keeping strong family, social, and cultural ties. 
Whereas earlier immigrant waves were eager to naturalize, hav-
ing come expecting to remain permanently, and often having 
cut off formal ties with their countries of origin, Mexicans, and 
particularly the undocumented, considered the border a mere 
nuisance rather than a barrier. They moved back and forth, 
retaining strong ties with their homeland and slowing their rate 
of naturalization.

12	
Illegal Immigration
Estimates of the number of illegal immigrants at any time 
vary considerably and are best viewed as “guestimates,” since 
persons of illegal status do not identify themselves for fear 
of deportation. The numbers vary, too, seasonally. Figure 5.1 
shows the estimated number of unauthorized immigrants in 
the United States from 1986 to 2014, based on estimates from 
several sources. Thus, the total number of illegal immigrants 
rose from about 3.2 million in 1986 to 9.3 million in 2002, to 
11.2 million in 2012. In 2000, about two-thirds of the unau-
thorized immigrants resided in six so-called gateway states: 
California (with 27  percent), Texas (13  percent), New York 
(8 percent), Florida (7 percent), Illinois (6 percent), and New 
Jersey (4 percent) (Information Plus 2006). The Pew Hispanic 
Research Center estimated that by 2009 the total number had 
risen to 11.3 million and then fell to 11.2 million in 2012 (Pew 
Hispanic Research Center 2014a).
The Crisis of Border Control: Illegal Immigration  
and Enactment of IRCA
Rising levels of unauthorized immigration and apprehensions 
of undocumented persons attempting to cross the borders led 
to a growing sense that the United States had lost control of its 
borders. Widespread dissatisfaction with the INS was soon reg-
istered in the news media and general public opinion polls, and 
within government at all levels of the federal system. During 
the Iranian hostage crisis, which lasted nearly two years dur-
ing the Carter administration, the nation was shocked to learn 
that the INS did not even know how many Iranian students 
were living in the country, let alone how many were doing so 
illegally (by overstaying their visas or by accepting employment 
while on student visa status). Many Iranians whom the INS 
was able to identify as being subject to deportation failed to 
attend deportation hearings or to leave when ordered to do so. 
Several hundreds of thousands were estimated to overstay their 
visas annually (SCIRP 1981: 8–9).

	
Background and History	
13
Organized labor agitated to deal with what they viewed as a 
threat from illegal aliens during the mid- to late 1970s, a period 
when the economy was mired in stagflation: increasing unem-
ployment, rising cost of living, and a recession that hit lower-wage 
jobs particularly hard. Rep. Peter Rodino (D-NJ), from a state 
hard-hit by the recession, was convinced by the American Federa-
tion of Labor–Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO), 
the International Garment Workers Union, and by the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), 
which viewed illegal immigration as especially threatening to the 
status and jobs of urban blacks, to propose an employer sanc-
tions amendment to the Immigration and Naturalization Act 
of 1965, eliminating the Texas Proviso (Perotti 1989: 83–84; 
LeMay 1994: 29–34). The Texas Proviso had favored growers of 
agricultural crops and employers of unauthorized immigrants by 
exempting them from criminal action for hiring undocumented 
workers, although it was still a breach of civil law for workers 
themselves to immigrate without documents.
Sen. Edward Kennedy (D-MA), Rep. Peter Rodino, and 
Rep. Joshua Eilberg (D-PA) linked employer sanctions with 
limited legalization (an amnesty provision) and antidiscrimina-
tion provisions. However, Sen. James Eastland (D-MS), a lead-
ing advocate in the Senate of the interests of growers, opposed 
the employer sanctions approach. With support of such lobby-
ing groups as the National Council of Agricultural Employers 
and the American Farm Bureau Federation, Eastland insisted 
that any reform of immigration law that did not have a foreign 
workers (also known as “guest-workers”) program would make 
it unacceptable to growers and other employers. Essentially, 
this coalition of political forces wanted to replace the illegal 
immigrant labor force with guest-workers in an expanded H-2 
temporary workers program. At the time, Senator Eastland was 
the powerful chairman of both the Senate Judiciary Committee 
and of its subcommittee on immigration and naturalization. 
He effectively killed the Kennedy-Rodino-Eilberg-sponsored 
bill by stalling it in committee.

14	
Illegal Immigration
In 1977, the Carter administration became involved. Presi-
dent Carter appointed as his new Secretary of Labor, F. Ray 
Marshall, an economist at the University of Texas, who had 
long been interested in the issue. The Carter administration, 
however, was somewhat split on the question, as was the Con-
gress. Secretary Marshall and U.S. Attorney General Griffin Bell 
favored limited amnesty and development of a tamper-proof 
worker-eligibility card. The commissioner of the INS, Leonel 
J. Castillo, and various White House aides led the fight for a 
generous amnesty program but deplored the civil-liberty impli-
cations of a worker-eligibility card.
Rodino was frustrated that, despite the recommendations 
of two presidential commissions (one appointed by President 
Ford and one by President Carter) for an approach similar to 
his (that is, blending employer sanctions, legalization, and 
strong border enforcement measures), nothing would pass the 
Senate over the intransigent opposition of Senator Eastland. 
President Carter and the U.S. Congress established a joint 
presidential-congressional commission, the Select Commission 
on Immigration and Refugee Policy (SCIRP). Sen. Edward 
Kennedy, then made chairman of the judiciary committee, 
viewed SCIRP as the means to carve out a pivotal role in any 
legislation on immigration reform. SCIRP studied the issue 
thoroughly and issued its final report in 1981, which ran more 
than 450 pages, and its supplemental staff report, in excess of 
900 pages. The commission’s recommendations covered the full 
spectrum of issues involving the illegal immigration debates.
SCIRP recommended closing the back door to undocu-
mented immigration while opening slightly the front door 
to accommodate more legal immigration. The final report 
stressed the need to define immigration goals more sharply, 
and to set forth procedures to ensure fair and efficient adjudi-
cation and administration of U.S. immigration law aimed at 
increasing legal and reducing unauthorized immigration. The 
report maintained that continued immigration was in the best 
national interest while recognizing the limited ability to absorb 

	
Background and History	
15
effectively large numbers of immigrants. It emphasized that 
the first priority was to bring unauthorized immigration under 
control. It recommended modest increases in legal immigration 
by expediting clearance of the huge backlogs, which would ease 
family reunification pressures. It recommended an increase in 
annual legal immigration from 270,000 to 350,000. It stressed 
enforcement of existing law by imposing an employer sanctions 
provision and by increasing the size of the Border Patrol, and 
coupled those with an amnesty program and a restructuring 
of the immigration bureaucracy and procedures of legal immi-
gration. Each of its recommendations had been articulated in 
prior immigration reform discourse. SCIRP, by linking them 
together, legitimized the duality of the employer sanctions/
legalization approach. It said, in essence, that one could not 
work without the other. Employer sanctions would “demag-
netize” the pull of the U.S. economy. Amnesty would bring 
the current undocumented immigrant population out of the 
shadows. SCIRP’s final report set the agenda for all subsequent 
discussions of and proposals to reform immigration law, add-
ing its weight to proposals that previously had been stymied in 
committee.
SCIRP’s emphasis on the problem of undocumented immi-
gration as “the most pressing problem” shaped and limited 
the debates in Congress and much of the news media over 
immigration policy reform. It stated flatly: “Most U.S. citizens 
believe that the half-open door of undocumented/illegal immi-
gration should be closed” (SCIRP 1981: 104).
The Reagan administration, which had just assumed office, 
responded to the SCIRP report by establishing its own Task 
Force on Immigration and Refugee Policy in March  1981. 
Headed by Attorney General William French Smith, it soon 
made its recommendations to the new president:
1.	 Amnesty. It recommended aliens living in the United States 
illegally since January  1, 1980, be permitted to remain, 
becoming eligible for resident-alien status after having been 

16	
Illegal Immigration
in the country for 10 years, at which time they could seek 
naturalization. It estimated the number of such immigrants 
at 5 million.
2.	 Guest-worker program. It recommended allowing 50,000 
Mexicans to enter the United States annually to work tem-
porarily and, over the course of several years, to increase the 
number gradually up to hundreds of thousands annually.
3.	 Employer sanctions. It recommended that employers who 
“knowingly” hire more than four illegal aliens be fined up 
to $1,000 per violation.
4.	 Enforcement. It recommended a 50 percent increase in the 
INS budget and recommended the addition of 1,500 new 
officers to the Border Patrol to enhance enforcement of 
immigration and labor laws.
5.	 Boat people. In response to a wave of “economic refugees” 
from Haiti, it recommended that boats carrying Haitians be 
intercepted and that detention camps be set up to hold as 
many as 6,000 people, pending their deportation hearings.
6.	 Legal immigration limits. It recommended increasing the 
annual limit for legal immigration to 610,000, with spe-
cial preference to those from Canada and Mexico (LeMay 
2004: 14–15; LeMay and Barkan 1999: 278–279).
By fall of 1981, the House and Senate judiciary subcommit-
tees on immigration, chaired respectively by Rep. Romano 
Mazzoli (D-KY) and Sen. Alan Simpson (R-WY), had crafted 
the recommendations of the SCIRP report and the Reagan ad-
ministration’s Task Force into legislative proposals they con-
sidered essential as incentives to cooperation among the many 
groups competing over the illegal immigration reform issue. 
The measures were introduced to their respective chambers in 
March 1982. After committee hearings, the bills were reported 
out in mid-May. The Senate passed the Simpson bill by 81 
to 19 in August 1982. The House bill, saddled with several 
critical amendments, required introduction of a clean version, 

	
Background and History	
17
sponsored by Rep. Romano Mazzoli and Rep. Hamilton Fish 
Jr. (R-NY). After passage of the Senate version, the full House 
Judiciary Committee approved the Mazzoli–Fish version in 
mid-September.
Since the House and Senate versions differed, Speaker of the 
House, Tip O’Neill (D-MA), referred the House bill sequentially 
to four committees: Education and Labor, Agriculture, Ways 
and Means, and Energy and Commerce. The bill finally reached 
the Rules Committee in December, during the lame-duck ses-
sion of the 97th Congress. When it finally reached the House 
floor, 300 amendments had been filed. It died on the floor.
In 1983, Simpson and Mazzoli renewed their efforts to craft 
a compromise, reintroducing versions of bills nearly identical 
to those passed in 1982. Agricultural interests, led by the Farm 
Labor Alliance and advocated by Fish, developed a guest worker 
program. Rep. Edward Roybal (D-CA), a leading member of the 
Congressional Hispanic Caucus, introduced an alternative bill 
emphasizing tough enforcement of existing labor laws and mini-
mum wage laws to clamp down on the hiring of unauthorized 
immigrants as a substitute for the employer sanctions approach.
These bills moved slowly through their respective chambers. 
Once again, the Senate progressed more rapidly, with senators 
Simpson and Kennedy working out compromises on key provi-
sions. In the House, the Mazzoli bill again moved sequentially 
through four committee referrals. Representatives Mazzoli and 
Rodino, with the support of the Reagan administration and 
House Republican leadership, pressed for quick floor action. 
However, political complications from the pending 1984 elec-
tions led to obstructive amendments, and the bill did not pass 
until June 1984, and then by a slim margin (216–211). Since 
its provisions differed from the Senate version, the bills were 
sent to a House-Senate conference committee, where it failed 
to achieve an acceptable compromise and died.
In May 1985 Simpson introduced a new version of his bill, 
without the sponsorship in the House by Mazzoli. Rodino 
introduced a bill similar to the version that died in conference 

18	
Illegal Immigration
committee. The two chambers again passed differing versions. 
The Reagan White House, naturally, supported the Senate ver-
sion sponsored by Senator Simpson. The Senate Judiciary Com-
mittee rejected all attempts by Senate Democrats to make the 
Senate version more like the House version. After the conference 
committee again appeared to be stymied, the bill seemed to be a 
corpse on its way to the morgue. But a small group of legislators 
involved in the illegal immigration reform battles refused to let 
it die. In October 1986 they fashioned some key compromises 
enabling passage. Rep. Charles Schumer (D-NY) met with Rep-
resentatives Fish and Hamilton, Rep. Howard Berman (D-CA), 
Rep. Leon Panetta (D-CA), and Rep. Dan Lungren (R-CA). 
They fine-tuned key provisions and led House members to agree 
on a package of provisions, including numerous points designed 
to protect the rights of temporary workers. They secured Sena-
tor Simpson’s approval of the compromises, and after a decade 
of dealing with the issue, Congress finally passed the measure. 
By the time, the Mexican economy had deteriorated further 
and push factors have led to 1.8 million border apprehensions 
by the INS—a historic high. With the midterm elections over, 
and in view of the growing conservative political mood of the 
nation, opponents of the measure concluded that continued 
resistance might lead to an even more restrictive bill in 1987. 
The Hispanic Caucus split on the bill—and voted five for and 
six against passage. That split by the Hispanic Caucus members 
enabled the Congressional Black Caucus to split on the bill as 
well: ten for and eight opposed (LeMay 1994).
The House passed the compromise conference bill by a vote 
of 238 to 172 on October 15, 1986. The Senate approved it 63 
to 24 on October 17, 1986. President Reagan signed it into law 
on November 6, 1986, as the Immigration Reform and Control 
Act of 1986 (IRCA). The long and bumpy road to enactment 
was followed by an equally bumpy road to implementation of 
a complex law whose very compromises crafted to ensure its 
passage led to complications and unintended consequences. 
Employer sanctions proved ineffective in demagnetizing the 

	
Background and History	
19
pull of the U.S. economy. IRCA allowed for 14 documents 
to be accepted as valid proof of a person’s eligibility to work. 
This fact simply fueled a phony-document industry, enabling 
illegal aliens to continue coming and employers to continue 
hiring them without fear of legal penalty for “knowingly hir-
ing” unauthorized workers. Enforcement problems by the INS, 
coupled with massive use of counterfeit documents, resulted 
in a decline in undocumented aliens successfully crossing the 
border that lasted but a very brief period. Within a year after 
its passage, illegal immigration was back up to pre-IRCA levels.
Although IRCA authorized a 50 percent increase in Border 
Patrol staff, actual increases fell far short due to difficulties in 
recruiting and expanding training staff and facilities. More-
over, as the Border Patrol increased in size, so too did its duties. 
After 1986, the interdiction of illicit drug traffic across the bor-
ders became a prime focus (in response to the 1986 Omnibus 
Anti-Drug Law). Border Patrol agents shifted their emphasis 
from alien apprehension and smuggling to work with the Drug 
Enforcement Agency on Operation Alliance. The Border Patrol 
also reallocated the number of staff being used to guard refugee 
camps and to identify, prosecute, and deport alien criminals 
(Bean, Vernez, and Keely 1989: 44).
Annual alien apprehensions climbed from the tens of thou-
sands in the late 1960s to nearly a half-million by 1970, to 
three-quarters of a million by 1985. By the time IRCA was 
passed, the number was approaching 2 million annually (Fig-
ures 5.1 and 5.2). Legal immigration rose as well. The 1980 
census enumerated 5.6 million foreign-born persons who had 
entered during the 1970s. That number, of course, does not 
include persons who came but were not counted in the census. 
An estimate of 1 million uncounted is realistic. Thus, the net 
immigration during the 1970s totaled 6.6 million, exceeding 
the total immigration of the decade beginning in 1910, which 
had only been about 4.3 million. It is likely the net flow from 
1970 to 1980 was the highest level for any period in the twen-
tieth century (LeMay 1994: 22–23).

20	
Illegal Immigration
As the tide of illegal aliens increased to what was perceived 
as a “flood-level,” interest groups traditionally involved as well 
as new groups entered the battle over policy to restrict ille-
gal immigration. State governments entered the arena, placing 
new pressures on Congress to respond and to “fix the prob-
lem” of illegal immigration and border control. States receiving 
the bulk of illegal immigrants (Arizona, California, Colorado, 
Florida, Illinois, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, and 
Texas) pressured Congress. Three states, California, Florida, 
and Texas, sued the federal government in their respective 
district courts for the estimated billions of dollars that states 
had to bear for costs related to illegal immigrants and their 
children. They claimed enormous expenditures in education, 
health care, prisons, and welfare caused by illegal immigrant 
residents. They argued that the federal government, by failing 
to control the borders, was responsible for the increased costs 
borne by the states. In 1994, California attempted to reduce 
the draw of its economy and services to illegal immigration 
by passing an anti-immigration measure known as Proposition 
187. Using its initiative process, California voters passed the 
measure, officially entitled the “Save Our State Initiative,” by 
60 percent. It required state and local agencies to report to the 
INS any persons suspected of being illegal, and to prevent ille-
gal aliens from receiving benefits or public services in the state 
of California. It set off a trend of “devolution” of immigration 
policy to state and local agencies (Suro 2015; Motomura 2014; 
Rodriguez 2008, 2014).
The authors of Proposition 187 anticipated a federal court 
challenge to its constitutionality and were correct in their antic-
ipation. It was immediately brought to court by the League 
of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC), and the federal 
district court ruled that many of its provisions were uncon-
stitutional (LULAC et al. vs. Wilson et al. 908 F. Supp. 755 
C.D. Cal. 1995: 787–791). The court so ruled as many of its 
provisions were held to constitute state infringement on the 
federal government’s sole authority to enact immigration law, 

	
Background and History	
21
or were state actions preempting existing federal law. Despite 
the court’s actions, however, Congress did get the message sent 
by Proposition 187. It addressed yet again the illegal immigra-
tion problem.
In 1996, Congress passed and President Bill Clinton signed 
into law two measures enacting the major provisions of Propo-
sition 187. Congress passed a welfare reform act that contained 
several provisions aimed at illegal immigrants. Still other of the 
proposition’s provisions were folded into the omnibus fiscal 
1997 spending bill (Illegal Immigration Reform and Immi-
grant Responsibility Act of 1996, the IIRIRA, H.R. 3610, 
P.L. 104–208), which President Clinton signed into law on 
September 30, 1996.
As noted, the number of illegal immigrants entering the 
United States dipped slightly after the passage of IRCA, but 
then climbed again to reach and eventually exceed pre-IRCA 
levels. The number of unauthorized immigrants, estimated at 
3.2 million in 1986, rose to 9.3 million by 2002. The region 
of origin of these unauthorized residents shifted in signifi-
cant ways during this period as well. In 1986, a Congressio-
nal Research Service study found that among the 3.2 million 
unauthorized residents, 69 percent were from Mexico, 23 per-
cent were from Canada and South America, 6 percent were 
from Asia, and 2  percent were from Europe (these include 
both undocumented entrants and visa overstayers). By 2002 
the estimated 9.3  million unauthorized residents comprised 
57 percent from Mexico, 23 percent from other Latin Ameri-
can countries, 10 percent from Asia, 5 percent from Canada 
and Europe, and another 5 percent from all other sources.
The Pew Hispanic Research Center estimated that between 
2000 and 2004 another 3.1 million arrived, bringing the total 
of unauthorized residents to 10.3 million (see Camarota 2006). 
The center also estimated that, in 1990, 88 percent of all unau-
thorized residents lived in the six gateway states: California 
(45 percent of the total), New York (15 percent), Texas (11 per-
cent), Florida (9 percent), Illinois (4 percent), and New Jersey 

22	
Illegal Immigration
(4 percent). The remaining 12 percent resided in all the other 
states. By 2004, the estimated 10.3 million were even more 
dispersed: 62 percent resided in the big six states, with Califor-
nia at 24 percent, New York at 7 percent, Texas at 14 percent, 
Florida at 9 percent, and Illinois and New Jersey each at 4 per-
cent. The number residing in the remaining states had risen to 
39 percent. Between 2009 and 2012, the unauthorized popula-
tions changed in 21 states but remained relatively stable over-
all. Moreover, for the first time on record, more non-Mexicans 
than Mexicans were apprehended at U.S. borders in 2014 by 
the Border Patrol, according to a Pew Research Center analysis 
of more than 60 years of Border Patrol data (http://www.cbp.
gov/sites/default/files/documents). PEW data show that unau-
thorized immigrants from Mexico are crossing significantly less 
often than they did before the Great Recession.
Other studies estimated that in 2004 as many as 5 million 
workers were being paid “off-the-books,” comprising a “stealth 
workforce” that distorted official government economic statistics 
and projections, understating job growth, inflating U.S. produc-
tivity, and shortchanging tax revenues by an estimated $35 bil-
lion per year (Justich and Ng, in Information Plus 2006: 74).
In part to address these issues, Congress passed, in June 2000, 
the Immigration and Naturalization Service Data Manage-
ment Improvement Act (PL. 206–215). This law amended 
the IIRIRA of 1996. The 2000 amendment required an elec-
tronic system to be developed to integrate and provide access 
to the data on all arrivals and departures and to use such data 
to identify lawfully admitted nonimmigrants who might have 
overstayed their visits. A deadline of December 31, 2003, was 
set for all airports and seaports to have the system in place. 
Fifty land border ports, selected by the attorney general as hav-
ing the highest numbers of arrivals and departures, were given 
until December 31, 2004, to have such an operating system by 
December 2005 (Ibid.).
As will be seen more fully later, the events of the terror 
attacks of September 11, 2001, and subsequent disbanding of 

	
Background and History	
23
the INS and the creation of the DHS changed the implementa-
tion of the act of 2000.
Border Security and Antiterrorism Concerns
The attacks on the World Trade Center in New York City and 
the Pentagon in Washington, D.C., on September 11, 2001, 
resulted in sweeping changes in the law, changes aimed at com-
bating international and domestic terrorism, but with signifi-
cant implications for immigration policy directed at the illegal 
immigration problem. Enactment of these laws demarcate what 
we well might call the “storm-door era” of U.S. immigration 
policy and signal the erection of what has been called Fortress 
America. The disarray at the INS was made apparent by the 
9/11 attacks and sped up the process. Attorney General John 
Ashcroft ordered the INS to strictly enforce the rule requiring 
foreign visitors to file change-of-address forms that the national 
government was supposed to use to keep track of visitors. The 
INS had an existing backlog of some 2 million paper documents 
(its record-keeping not yet made electronic), piled up in boxes 
and stored in a warehouse in Kansas City. The attorney general’s 
directive resulted in the INS receiving 30,000 change-of-address 
forms per day, and the backlog quickly rose to 4 million docu-
ments. An INS report indicated an estimated 4 million foreign-
ers were in the country with expired visas. Adding to its misery 
and its reputation for utter ineptitude, the press soon revealed 
that the INS had sent letters to a Florida flight school approv-
ing the student visas for two of the 9/11 attackers, six months 
after the attacks! A government report on overall management in 
the Government Executive’s 2002 Federal Performance Report, 
which had ranked the U.S. Coast Guard at an A, gave the INS 
a D. Border Patrol officers were quitting faster than they could 
be replaced. INS investigators were rated as undertrained, over-
worked, and overstressed, and the information management of 
INS was assessed as abysmal. Many in Congress concluded that 
drastic restructuring was needed.

24	
Illegal Immigration
Less than a month after the attacks, on October 8, 2001, 
President Bush issued Executive Order 13228. It established 
the Office of Homeland Security within the Executive Office of 
the President (Relyea 2003). In Congress, Sen. Joseph Lieber-
man (D-CT) introduced a bill (S. 1534) to establish the DHS 
as a cabinet-level department. He and Rep. Mac Thornberry 
(R-TX) later introduced a more elaborate version, in May 2002 
(S. 2452, and H.B. 4660). President Bush responded to politi-
cal pressure to do more than what E.O. 13228 could accom-
plish. A team from the administration drafted an alternative to 
Senator Lieberman’s bill. Mitchell Daniels Jr., director of the 
Office of Management and Budget, Tom Ridge, appointed to 
head the Office of Homeland Security in the White House, 
Andrew Card Jr., the White House Chief of Staff, and Alberto 
Gonzales, the White House Counsel, met and drafted the pres-
ident’s departmental plan in late April. It was formally intro-
duced as H.R. 5005 on June 24, 2002 (Relyea 2003: 617).
More than any other action, however, the USA Patriot 
Act and the law to establish the DHS most characterize the 
storm-door era and symbolize Fortress America. Within six 
weeks of the 9/11 attacks, a jittery Congress, then virtually 
exiled from their offices by an anthrax contamination inci-
dent and confronted by dire warnings of more terrorist attacks 
soon to come, responded to President Bush’s demands for a 
new arsenal of antiterrorism measures, some directly linked 
to illegal immigration, which many feared was an avenue for 
international terrorist cells to infiltrate into the United States. 
For three weeks, from the initial outbreak of anthrax contami-
nation on October  4, 2001, Congress and the public were 
unable to obtain clear information about the attack from the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Fear and 
threat exceeded actual damage. Despite vigorous objections 
from civil liberty organizations at both ends of the political 
spectrum, Congress overwhelmingly approved the USA Patriot 
Act, which stands for Uniting and Strengthening America 
by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and 

	
Background and History	
25
Obstruct Terrorism Act, by a vote of 356 to 66 in the House, 
and by 98 to 1 in the Senate. The hastily drafted, complex, and 
far-reaching law spans 342 pages but was passed with virtually 
no public hearing or debate, and was accompanied by neither 
a conference committee nor a committee report. On Octo-
ber 26, 2001, the act was signed into law by President George 
W. Bush (Torr 2004: 43–44).
The USA Patriot Act granted powers to the attorney general 
and the Justice Department that restricted the civil liberties 
of U.S. citizens, broadened the terrorism-related definitions 
in the 1965 Immigration and Naturalization Act, expanded 
the grounds of inadmissibility to include aliens who publicly 
endorsed terrorist activity, and gave the national government 
broad powers to monitor students and resident aliens and to 
detain and expedite the removal of noncitizens even suspected 
of having links to terrorist organizations. In short, the attorney 
general simply had to certify them as being threats to national 
security on whatever grounds. Critics charged that the law 
legalized racial profiling of Middle Easterners. (Parts of the act 
are excerpted in Chapter 5, Data and Documents.)
Advocates of the law argued that it was essential to catch 
terrorists and deter further acts of terrorism. Led by Vice Presi-
dent Dick Cheney, its proponents called for coercive interroga-
tion of suspected terrorists to find and control enemy cells in 
our midst. They argued its sweeping new powers were essential 
to penetrate Al Qaeda. These included expanded surveillance, 
the use of informants, revisions of the search and seizure pro-
cedures, the use of secret wiretaps, and arrests and detention 
of suspected terrorists, uninhibited by the prior web of laws, 
judicial precedents, and administrative rules that its propo-
nents argued had hamstrung law enforcement officials in deal-
ing with the new terrorist threat. Soon after its enactment, the 
Department of Justice (DOJ) announced that it had broken up 
terrorist cells in Portland, Detroit, and Buffalo, and charged 17 
individuals with terrorism-related activities. The DOJ targeted 
terrorist financing (Torr 2004: 29).

26	
Illegal Immigration
Critics of the law argued it was far too sweeping and a dan-
gerous intrusion on civil liberty protections. They saw it as a 
threat to constitutional checks and balances, to open govern-
ment, and to the rule of law. They viewed those threats as being 
greater than any posed by terrorists. “Not since the World War 
II internment of Japanese Americans have we locked up so 
many people for so long with so little explanation” (Chang, 
cited in Torr 2004: 16). They held that the Patriot Act evades 
the Fourth Amendment by enabling officials to conduct “sneak 
and peek” searches, covert searches of a person’s home or office 
conducted without notice to the person. Mass arrests in secrecy 
and without judicial oversight outraged civil libertarians. The 
exercise of unilateral authority by the executive, establishing 
secret tribunals and breaching attorney-client communications 
without court order, was, in their eyes, a threat to patriotic dis-
sent, a threat to liberty, and a threat to equality. And, in point 
of fact, nonterrorists who have been affected by the Patriot 
Act have mostly been immigrants. In the months after 9/11, 
some 1,200 immigrants, mostly Muslim, were rounded up 
by the police and the INS across the nation. Many were held 
for months without access to lawyers or even without charges 
brought against them before an immigration judge. Some were 
summarily deported for visa violations. Only a few were subse-
quently charged with any crime, and most were released months 
later as totally innocent, swept up in the postattack hysteria. 
The Patriot Act makes aliens deportable for wholly innocent 
association with a terrorist organization by defining a terror-
ist organization in such broad terms that any group that used 
or threatened to use violence could be so construed. The pro-
scription on political association potentially encompasses every 
organization that has been involved in a civil war or a crime of 
violence, from a prolife group that threatened and sometimes 
killed abortion-clinic workers, to the African National Con-
gress, the Irish Republican Army, or the Northern Alliance in 
Afghanistan (U.S. ally against the Taliban in Afghanistan). An 
estimated 1,500 to 2,000 persons were apprehended under the 

	
Background and History	
27
act, their identities still secret. Indeed, even their numbers can 
only be guessed at, as the government stopped issuing daily 
number counts after November 30, 2001, which was then at 
1,182. No one of those detained was ever charged with any 
involvement in the 9/11 attacks. Most were cleared by the FBI 
of any involvement in terrorism (Etzioni and Marsh 2003: 
37–38).
Creating the Department of Homeland Security: 
Dissolving the INS
On November 19, 2002, Congress passed the Homeland Secu-
rity Act, establishing the Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS). It abolished the INS, restructuring its jurisdiction and 
functions into the new behemoth department composed of 
22 agencies subsumed into it. Many the law’s provisions dra-
matically changed the ways in which immigration policy was 
implemented, highlights of which are in Chapter 5, Data and 
Documents (LeMay 2004: 27–28).
The DHS launched the National Security Entry-Exit Reg-
istration System (NSEERS). It comprised three elements— 
point-of-entry registration, special registration, and exit/
departure controls—aimed at preventing future 9/11-type 
attacks. The special registration component created a national 
registry for temporary foreign visitors (nonimmigrant aliens, 
such as tourists and international students) coming from 25 
designated countries listed by the attorney general as support-
ers and exporters of international terrorism, and others who 
met a combination of intelligence-based criteria that identified 
them as potential security risks.
NSEERS addressed several security-related deficiencies in 
immigration policy and procedures. Beginning in 2003, all com-
mercial carriers by air or sea were required to submit detailed 
passenger lists electronically before an aircraft or vessel arrived 
in or departed from the United States. Some of its provisions 
were suspended in December 2003, such as the need for aliens 

28	
Illegal Immigration
residing in the United States to register each year (the govern-
ment had millions of such forms backlogged and stored, unpro-
cessed, in warehouses in Kansas, and simply could not keep up 
with the paperwork). Other provisions of NSEERS remained 
in place, including requiring foreign nationals from Iran, Iraq, 
Libya, Syria, and Sudan to go through special registration at 
ports of entry and to report to immigration officials before 
departing the country; foreign nationals from other countries 
were registered if Customs and Border Protection officers (a new 
bureau within the DHS) warranted it necessary based on ques-
tioning upon arrival. Individuals from more than 160 countries 
had been registered in the NSEERS program by January 2005. 
The system provides detailed information about the background 
and purpose of the individual’s visit to the United States, as well 
as departure confirmation (Information Plus 2006: 75).
In April 2002 the Justice Department issued a report on visa 
overstays, substantiating the fact that between 40 and 50 per-
cent of unauthorized immigrants were not persons who had 
crossed the borders without documentation, but rather were 
persons who entered with proper documents as temporary 
visitors and then failed to depart when required to do so. The 
report set the nonimmigrant overstayer population as growing 
by at least 125,000 per year (Department of Justice 2002).
The Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) bureau 
of the DHS is responsible for collecting documents from 
incoming travelers, but airline and shipping lines are respon-
sible for collecting departure forms and sending such forms 
to ICE. Departure forms may have gone unrecorded, either 
because they were not collected or they were collected by the 
airlines and shipping lines but were not sent to ICE or the 
forms were sent to ICE but were incorrectly recorded. Such 
problems make an accurate assessment of the numbers of over-
stays difficult. In 2004 the General Accounting Office (GAO) 
reported that DHS estimated the number of visa overstays to 
be 2.3 million per year as of 2000. The GAO report noted 
that this figure did not account for an unknown number of 

	
Background and History	
29
short- and long-term overstays from Mexico and Canada, inas-
much as citizens from Canada admitted for up to six months 
and Mexican citizens with border-crossing cards entering the 
border in the Southwest for a stay of less than 72 hours are 
exempt from the visa admissions procedures. The GAO also 
faulted the tracking system that identified those who entered 
the country on visas but did not accurately track when, or if, 
those persons actually left the country (GAO-04-82, 2004).
Understandably, the tracking system is confronted by huge 
numbers. In 2003, the DHS reported 33 million arrivals at 
U.S. ports of entry. Those did not include Mexican and Cana-
dian business or pleasure visitors. Of those nearly 33 million, 
an estimated 79 percent departed before their authorized stay 
had expired. There were no departure records for nearly 15 per-
cent of all who arrived by land and sea (Information Plus 2006: 
76). In the post 9/11 investigations, the GAO, in a report in 
May 2004, noted that of the six hijackers who flew the planes 
involved in the 9/11 attacks, two were overstays and one had 
violated a student visa by not attending school. In response, the 
DHS began an ongoing, multiagency effort it called Operation 
Tarmac, to identify unauthorized foreign nationals working in 
places vulnerable to terrorism, such as the baggage and security 
areas of airports.
The GAO report, Operation Tracking, found that as of 
2004, a total of 195 airports had been investigated and nearly 
6,000 businesses had been audited. In checks on employment 
eligibility forms (known as I-9 forms) of some 385,000 work-
ers around the country, the DHS found nearly 5,000 unau-
thorized workers. Of more than 600 unauthorized workers 
arrested, 30 percent were overstays. Perhaps not surprisingly, 
but certainly ironically, one of the busiest ports of entry for 
such unauthorized workers was Houston’s Bush International 
Airport. Ten unauthorized workers were from countries identi-
fied as “of special interest” under the NSEERS program, and 
five of those were overstays, according to the GAO report 
(GAO-04-82, 2004).

30	
Illegal Immigration
Alarmingly, the GAO noted many unauthorized workers had 
access to supposedly secure areas and were employed by the air-
ports themselves, by airlines, or by support service companies 
in jobs such as aircraft maintenance, airline cabin service atten-
dants, airplane fueling personnel, baggage handler, and prede-
parture screener. One was even working in the airport badge 
office. Such individuals used phony Social Security numbers and 
identity documents to obtain airport jobs and security badges. 
Operation Tarmac found unauthorized employees at critical 
infrastructure sites, such as nuclear plants, sensitive national 
landmarks, military installations, and the Alaska pipeline, and 
also at the 2002 Olympics in Salt Lake City and at the Super 
Bowl game. Seventy-nine unauthorized workers were arrested 
at the 2003 Super Bowl in San Diego, according to the GAO 
report. Of those, eight were overstays and twelve came from 
countries included in NSEERS special registration category.
On May 11, 2003, President Bush signed into law the mea-
sure passed by Congress by a vote of 308 to 58 in the House and 
100 to 0 in the Senate, known as the Real ID Act of 2003 (Pub. 
1, 109–13, 119 Stat. 302). This law set national standards that 
sought to insure the authentication and insurance procedures 
of state licenses, identification cards, and several related issues 
pertaining to applications for asylum and deportation for ter-
rorism activity, and included provisions waiving laws that 
would interfere with the construction of physical barriers at 
the borders. It mandated states to comply with its provisions. 
By April 2008, however, all 50 states applied for extension of 
the May 11, 2008, date set for compliance. By October 2009, 
25 states approved resolutions not to participate in the pro-
gram. Many critics opposed the law as unnecessary intru-
sion of civil rights and a constitutional violation of the Tenth 
Amendment. The act remains controversial and several bills 
have been introduced since 2010 to amend it (LeMay 2013c: 
13, 68). It prompted a period of state and local actions exem-
plifying a period of “cooperative federalism” to either cooper-
ate with harsher federal enforcement of immigration policy or 

	
Background and History	
31
try to mitigate federal immigration policy, wherein states and 
localities work to integrate a system of policy making rather 
than claiming exclusive prerogatives (Rodriguez 2008, 2014; 
Illinois.gov 2005; Suro 2015; Tomas Rivera Policy Institute 
(TRPI) 2014). Between 2001 and 2011, as many as 16 states 
acted to mitigate the harsher aspects of the IIRIRA (National 
Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL) 2005, 2011).
The Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 
2004 (PL 108–458, 118 Stat. 3638) was passed in the House 
by a vote of 336–75, and in the Senate by 96–2, and signed 
into law by President Bush on December 17, 2004. A lengthy 
measure at 235 pages, it created a Director of National Intelli-
gence and authorized 2,000 additional Border Patrol agents to 
the DHS per year for five years. It gave the federal government 
broader authority for surveillance of noncitizens, including the 
so-called lone wolf terrorists inspired by but not associated with 
radical Islamic terrorist groups like Al Qaeda, Al Qaeda in the 
Arabian Peninsula, or the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS).
On October  26, 2006, President Bush signed the Secure 
Fence Act (Pub. L. 109–367). The bill had passed the House 
by a vote of 283–138, and the Senate by 90–18, mostly on 
partisan voting, with Republicans supporting the measure and 
Democrats opposing it. The act approved $1.2 billion to con-
struct a 700-mile fence along the Mexican-United States bor-
der (none was suggested for the even longer northern border 
with Canada). Critics argued it would take $4.8 billion more 
to actually build the fence along the entire southern border and 
that it would strain U.S.-Mexican relations, disrupt the envi-
ronment and wildlife, and increase the danger of immigrants 
trying to cross, and be ineffectual in stopping illegal immigra-
tion. By 2009, 613 miles of fencing were constructed spanning 
from California to Texas. In 2010, another bill was introduced 
to require the DHS to build another 353 miles, although 
that measure stalled in the Congress and the Great Recession 
and subsequent actions to drastically cut budget deficits have 
doomed its passage since then.

32	
Illegal Immigration
In March 2006, Congress enacted a law renewing, with minor 
amendments, the USA Patriot Act, commonly referred to as 
Patriot Act II. It changed regulations making it easier for DHS 
to remove aliens, increasing the number of aliens expelled or who 
voluntarily departed since 2002, due both to enforcement by the 
DHS and as a result of the Great Recession 2008–2009. Unau-
thorized immigration peaked nationally in 2007, at 12.2 mil-
lion. It declined in 2008–2009, during the Great Recession, and  
has stabilized since 2009 at 11.2 million (http://www.pewhispa 
nic.org/2014/11/18/unauthorized-immigrant-total). The Great 
Recession demonstrated that events like severe economic reces-
sion work to “demagnetize” the draw of the U.S. economy far 
more effectively than does any legislation enacted to do so.
Progressives in Congress have been proposing annually 
since 2001 a bill for the enactment of what became known as 
the Dream Act (Development, Relief, and Education of Alien 
Minors). In May 2011, then Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid 
(D-NV) introduced the bill that had bipartisan support in the 
Senate but was staunchly opposed by House Republicans as an 
amnesty program. If passed, the bill would have granted con-
ditional permanent residency to unauthorized alien students of 
good moral character who graduated from U.S. schools, having 
lived in the country for at least five years, and completed two 
years of military service or were enrolled in a two- or four-year 
institution of higher learning. The Congressional Budget Office 
(CBO) estimated the act would reduce deficits by $1.4 billion 
over the 2011–2020 period, and increase government revenues 
by a projected $2.3 billion over 10 years. A University of Cali-
fornia Los Angeles (UCLA) study estimated that, if enacted, the 
Dream Act would generate between $1.4 trillion and $3.6 trillion 
in taxable income over a 40-year period (LeMay 2013c: 15–16). 
A number of groups made up a coalition to push for passage of 
the Dream Act, beginning with the Coalition of Humane Immi-
gration Rights of Los Angeles and then the California Dream 
Network and expanding nationally into United We Dream.

	
Background and History	
33
In 2010 the state of Arizona, led by Governor Jane Brewer, 
passed a law mandating state and local police officers to demand 
anyone stopped who was suspected of being in the state ille-
gally to show their papers certifying they were here legally. The 
law was immediately challenged, and the U.S. Supreme Court, 
in Arizona v. United States (132 S. Ct. 2492), struck down the 
law as unconstitutional.
Since 2008, the U.S. Congress has been stalemated over 
immigration reform, including comprehensive legal immigra-
tion reform and regarding the Dream Act and various bills intro-
duced to “crack down at the border.” When Congress refused 
to act on bills to amend the 287(g) program established by the 
IIRIRA, granting local law enforcement agencies for the first 
time the authority to screen people for their immigration sta-
tus, President Obama used executive action two times, in 2009 
and 2012, to mitigate aspects of the IIRIRA. Then, with respect 
to the Dream Act, President Obama issued executive actions 
in 2012 and 2014. In 2012 he issued the Deferred Action for 
Childhood Arrivals (DACA), which granted temporary, con-
ditional legal residency status to students who complied with 
the conditions of the Dream Act proposals (Preston 2014). In 
November 2014, President Obama issued a new set of execu-
tive actions that broadened eligibility for DACA and created a 
new program—the Deferred Action for Parental Accountability 
(DAPA)—for parents of U.S. citizens and legal permanent resi-
dent aliens.
On June 27, 2013, the Senate passed S.744, a comprehen-
sive immigration reform measure, by a vote of 68–32. Intro-
duced by Sen. Charles Schumer (D-NY), it was a somewhat 
bipartisan approach (largely crafted by what became known as 
the Gang of Eight—four Democrat and four Republican sena-
tors long involved in immigration reform issues). The House 
had a similar Gang of Eight who sponsored a similar bill, but 
Speaker of the House John Boehner (R-OH) refused to bring 
the measure to a floor vote and the bill died in the House 

34	
Illegal Immigration
(htpp://www.immigrationpolicy.org; and http://www.politico.
com/2013/immigration-bill-2013-senatepass).
Conclusion
The renewed high levels of illegal immigration since 1970 pro-
foundly affected the United States in all manner of ways. Immi-
gration policy reform, for both legal and illegal immigration 
matters, remains on the agenda of government at all levels of 
the federal system. Immigration control issues are particularly 
of concern to the U.S. Congress, although since 2008 partisan 
bickering has stymied adoption of further legislation, especially 
regarding comprehensive immigration reform. Proponents of 
that approach advocate a large-scale temporary worker pro-
gram, increased beefing up of ICE and the DHS, some sort of 
earned legalization program, increased expedited removal, and 
better technology to track and control immigrants and visitors 
(LeMay 2013c: 16).
As this chapter has demonstrated, the politics of illegal 
immigration reform is complicated by the increasing spread 
of immigrants from the gateway states to more of the coun-
try and to more urban areas within 30 states. The shift in the 
composition of immigrants since 1970 from European nations 
of origin to those from Latin America and Asia has had pro-
found effects on a host of related public policy areas (Daniels 
1988, 2005; Motomura 2006; Navarro 2005; Reimers 1985; 
Yans-McLaughlin 1990).
The shift in the composition of preference immigrants has 
been both the result of and the cause for a series of changes in 
immigration law since 1970. Congressional enactments, court 
decisions, and executive actions have all shaped the immi-
gration policy, each having intended and unintended conse-
quences. Clearly, immigration policy will continue to impact 
the American economy, its culture and society, its politics, and 
a variety of related public policy issues, many of which are 
discussed further in Chapter 2, Problems, Controversies, and 
Solutions.

	
Background and History	
35
References
Andreas, Peter. 2000. Border Games: Policing the U.S.-Mexican 
Divide. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Bean, Frank D., and Teresa A. Sullivan. 1985. “Immigration 
and Its Consequences: Confronting the Problem.” Society 
22 (May/June): 67–73.
Bean, Frank D., George Vernez, and Charles B. Keely. 1989. 
Opening and Closing the Doors. Santa Monica, CA: Rand 
Corporation.
Bustamente, Antonio Rios, ed. 1981. Mexican Immigrant 
Workers in the United States. Los Angeles: UCLA, Chicano 
Studies Research Center.
Calavita, Kitty. 1992. Inside the State: The Bracero Program, 
Immigration, and the INS. New York: Routledge.
Camarota, Steven A. 2005. Economy Slowed, but Immigration 
Didn’t: The Foreign- Born Population, 2000–2004. 
Washington, DC: Center for Immigration Studies.
Chiswick, Barry R., ed. 1982. The Gateway: U.S. Immigration 
Issues and Policies. Washington, DC: American Enterprise 
Institute.
Conover, Ted. 1987. Coyotes: A Journey through the Secret 
World of America’s Illegal Aliens. New York: Vintage.
Craig, Richard B. 1971. The Bracero Program: Interest Groups 
and Foreign Policy. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Crockroft, James D. 1986. Outlaws in the Promised Land: 
Mexican Immigrant Workers and America’s Future. New 
York: Grove.
Daniels, Roger. 1988. Asian America: Chinese and Japanese in 
the United States. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Daniels, Roger. 2005. Guarding the Golden Door: American 
Immigration Policy and Immigration since 1882. New York: 
Hill and Wang.
Department of Justice. 2002. Follow-up Report on INS Efforts 
to Improve the Control of Immigrant Overstays. Report 

36	
Illegal Immigration
No. 1–2002–006. Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office.
Etzioni, Amitai, and Jason H. Marsh, eds. 2003. Rights v. 
Public Safety after 9/11: America in the Age of Terrorism. 
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
General Accounting Office. 2004. Overstay Tracking: A Key 
Component of Homeland Security and a Layered Defense. 
GAO-04–82. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing 
Office.
Glazer, Nathan, ed. 1985. Clamor at the Gates: The New 
American Immigration. San Francisco: ICS.
Hammermesh, Daniel S., and Frank D. Bean, eds. 1996. Help 
or Hindrance? The Economic Implications of Immigration 
for African Americans. New York: Russell Sage. http://
www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/document. www.politics.
com/2013/immigration-bill-2013-senate-pass. www.unhcr.
org/51/071816.html.
Illinois.gov.2005. “Gov. Blagojevich Announces Landmark 
Immigration Policy.” Springfield, IL: State of Illinois, 
Office of the Governor.
Information Plus. 2006. Immigration and Illegal Aliens: 
Burden or Blessing? Farmington Hills, MI: Thomson/Gale.
Information Plus. 2014. American Immigration: An 
Encyclopedia of Political, Social, and Cultural Changes. 
Farmington Hills, MI: Thomson/Gale.
Kirstein, Peter N. 1977. Anglo over Bracero: A History of 
the Mexican Workers in the United States from Roosevelt to 
Nixon. San Francisco: R and E.
Kiser, George C., and Martha W. Kiser. 1979. Mexican Workers in 
the United States. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
LeMay, Michael C. 1987. From Open Door to Dutch Door: An 
Analysis of U.S. Immigration Policy since 1820. New York: 
Praeger Press.

	
Background and History	
37
LeMay, Michael C. 1989. The Gatekeepers: Comparative 
Immigration Policies. New York: Praeger Press.
LeMay, Michael C. 1994. Anatomy of a Public Policy. New 
York: Praeger Press.
LeMay, Michael C. 2004. U.S. Immigration: A Reference 
Handbook. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO.
LeMay, Michael C. 2007. Illegal Immigration. Santa Barbara: 
ABC-CLIO.
LeMay, Michael C., ed. 2013a. Transforming America: 
Perspectives on Immigration, Vol. 1: The Making of a Nation 
of Nations, 1820–1865. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO.
LeMay, Michael C., ed. 2013b. Transforming America: 
Perspectives on Immigration, Vol. 2: The Transformation of a 
Nation of Nations, 1865–1945. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO.
LeMay, Michael C., ed. 2013c. Transforming America: Perspectives 
on Immigration, Vol. 3: Immigration and Superpower Status, 
1945 to Present. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO.
LeMay, Michael C., and Elliott Barkan, eds. 1999. 
U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Laws and Issues: 
A Documentary History. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Massey, Douglas S., Rafael Alarcon, Jorge Durand, and 
Humberto Gonzalez. 1990. Return to Aztlan: The Social 
Process of the International Migration from Western Mexico. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Motomura, Hiroshi. 2006. Americans in Waiting: The Lost 
Story of Immigration and Citizenship in the United States. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Motomura, Hiroshi. 2014. Immigration outside the Law. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Muller, Thomas, and Thomas Espanshade. 1985. The Fourth 
Wave. Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press.
Navarro, Armando. 2005. Mexican Political Experience in 
Occupied Aztlan. Lanham: Alamira Press.

38	
Illegal Immigration
NCSL. 2001. “Presentation at the Conference on Illegal 
Immigration.” Denver: National Conference of State 
Legislatures.
NCSL. 2011. “Undocumented Student Tuition: Federal 
Action.” Denver: National Conference of State Legislatures.
NCSL. 2014. “Undocumented Student Tuition: State 
Action.” Denver: National Conference of State Legislatures.
Nevins, Joseph. 2002. Operation Gatekeeper: The Rise of the 
“Illegal Alien” and the Making of the U.S.-Mexico Boundary. 
New York: Routledge.
Papademetriou, Demetrios, and Mark Miller, eds. 1984. The 
Unavoidable Issue. Philadelphia: Institute for the Study of 
Human Issues.
Perotti, Rosanna. 1989. “Beyond Logrolling: Integrative 
Bargaining in Congressional Policymaking.” Paper 
presented at the American Political Science Association 
Meeting, August 31–September 3, Atlanta, GA.
Pew Hispanic Research Center. 2005. “Immigration and the 
States.” A presentation by Roberto Suro, Director, Pew 
Hispanic Center, to the NCSL Regional Conference on 
Immigration and the States, Denver, CO, December 12.
Pew Hispanic Research Center. 2014a. “Unauthorized 
Immigrant Totals Rise in 7 States, Fall in 14.” http://www. 
perhispanic.org/2014/11/18/unauthorized-immigrant-totals.
Pew Hispanic Research Center. 2014b. “U.S. Border  
Apprehensions of Mexicans Fall to Historic Lows.” http:// 
www.pewhispanic.org/2014/12/30/u-s-borderApprehensions.
Phillips, Julia A., and Douglas S. Massey. 1999. “The New 
Labor Market: Immigration and Wages after IRCA.” 
Demography 36, no. 2: 233–246.
Preston, Julia. 2014. “Ailing Cities Extend Hand to 
Immigrants: National Desk.” New York Times, October 7, 
A.18.

	
Background and History	
39
Reimers, David. 1985. Still the Open Door: The Third World 
Comes to America. 	 New York: Columbia University Press.
Relyea, Harold. 2003. “Organizing for Homeland Security.” 
Presidential Studies Quarterly 33, no. 3 (September): 
602–624.
Rodriguez, Cristina M. 2008. “The Significance of the Local 
in Immigration Regulation.” Michigan Law Review 106 (4): 
567–642.
Rodriguez, Cristina M. 2014. “Negotiating Conflict through 
Federalism: Institutional and Popular Perspectives.” Yale 
Law Journal 123 (6): 2094.
Select Commission on Immigration and Refugee Policy 
(SCIRP). 1981. Final Report. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office.
Suro, Roberto. 2015. “California Dreaming: The New 
Dynamism in Immigration Federalism and Opportunities 
for Inclusion on a Variegated Landscape.” Journal of 
Migration and Human Security 3, no. 1: 1–25.
Torr, James D. 2004. Homeland Security. San Diego: 
Greenhaven Press.
TRPI. 2014. “New Laws Extend Privileges Regardless of 
Status.” Los Angeles, CA: Tomas Rivera Policy Institute, 
University of Southern California.
Yans-McLaughlin, Virginia, ed. 1990. Immigration 
Reconsidered: History, Sociology, and Politics. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Zuniga, Victor, and Ruben Hernandez-Leon. 2005. New 
Destinations: Mexican Immigration to the United States. New 
York: Russell Sage.


41
Introduction
Involved interest groups and legislators struggle over particu-
lar bills proposed for illegal immigration reform. They often 
describe the conflict as a battle to solve once and for all the 
immigration problem, or argue that the passage of a bill would 
result in a national calamity. However, conflict over illegal 
immigration reform is never really over, never fully won or lost, 
and never without unanticipated consequences.
Why is there a continuous struggle to achieve an immigra-
tion policy that satisfies national needs and effectively resolves 
an issue viewed as the most pressing problem? Why is a true res-
olution an illusion? Why does illegal immigration reform pose 
such a policy conundrum? The answer lies in the very “inter-
mestic” nature of illegal immigration-related policy (Manning 
1977). Conditions in the policy environment change. No 
sooner are some international problems or foreign policy con-
siderations dealt with than the world system changes. National 
policy makers cannot resolve the world’s international conflict 
2	
Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions
People from the San Diego side of the border touch their hands on the 
fence, above, as it separates a group on the Tijuana, Mexico side of the 
fence, during a cross-border Sunday religious service on July 13, 2013. As 
federal lawmakers thousands of miles away consider further sealing the bor-
der, many here on the ground are trying to blur the line and unite a region 
that was split apart by the security crackdown since the terrorist attacks on 
September 11, 2001. The fence has not stopped the illegal flow, but rather 
it has shifted the areas across which illegal immigrants flow. (AP Photo/ 
Gregory Bull)

42	
Illegal Immigration
nor set policy for other sovereign nation-states. In a global envi-
ronment, what other nations do or fail to do affects the dynam-
ics of illegal immigration and worldwide immigration flows. 
The failure of a nation to achieve a sound economy pushes its 
citizens to migrate. Foreign civil wars and domestic strife gener-
ate mass refugee movements. National disasters and epidemics 
compel hundreds of thousands to migrate elsewhere. Condi-
tions change globally and affect both legal and unauthorized 
immigration, modifying the size and origin of the immigration 
flows.
So, too, are domestic conditions in flux. Any balance achieved 
among the contending political forces and agreed-upon pol-
icy responses can quickly tip out of balance. Some groups 
decline in their relative political influence, while others rise. 
This process renews pressures to readdress the balance previ-
ously achieved. New problems are perceived. Old problems are 
viewed in new ways. Demands for a change in the balance are 
registered in public policy-making arenas. America’s complex 
federal system is dynamic with respect to the interrelations and 
interplay among the levels and branches of government.
This chapter reviews current issues arising from illegal immi-
gration in the domestic political arena. Soon after an immigra-
tion reform bill is passed, one hears calls for another new law. 
The implementation of yesterday’s law generates demands for 
some new permutation. What, then, are the major concerns? 
This chapter examines several policy issues of domestic con-
cerns over current illegal immigration problems.
Current Domestic-Policy Concern: Amnesty or Earned 
Legalization Issue of the Unauthorized
The steady arrival of unauthorized immigrants, or illegal aliens, 
renews calls for some sort of a legalization, or amnesty, program. 
Many see proposals to enact a guest-worker program as nothing 
more than a thinly disguised amnesty. Legislators and interest 
groups and their lobbyists adamantly oppose a guest-worker pro-
gram that would allow many among the 11 million unauthorized 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
43
immigrants a path to legalize their status as an unacceptable 
amnesty program that rewards lawbreakers.
A June 5–8, 2014, Gallup public opinion poll asked, “should 
immigration be kept at its present level, increased, or decreased?” 
The Gallup poll found 33 percent in favor of keeping it at the pres-
ent level, 22 percent thought it should be increased, 43 percent 
favored it being decreased, and 4 percent had no opinion. When 
asked what should be the main focus of the U.S. government 
when dealing with the issue of illegal immigration, 40 percent 
favored halting the flow of illegal immigrants, 53 percent favored 
developing a plan to deal with those immigrants currently in the 
country illegally, and 6 percent had no opinion. When asked how 
important it was that the government take steps to deal with the 
issue of controlling U.S. borders to halt the flow of illegal immi-
grants into the United States, 43 percent thought it extremely 
important, 34  percent very important, 16  percent moderately 
important, and only 7 percent not that important. When asked 
about their approval or disapproval of President Obama’s executive 
actions regarding illegal immigrants, 9 percent strongly approved, 
32 percent approved, 28 percent disapproved, 23 percent strongly 
disapproved, and 8 percent had no opinion (Gallup 2014).
On the last major congressional action establishing an 
amnesty program (a provision in the Immigration Reform and 
Control Act of 1986 or IRCA), both Republicans and Demo-
crats in Congress split their vote. Democrats voted 196 (55%) 
in favor of IRCA to 88 (45%) opposed. Republicans voted 105 
(49%) in favor to 109 (51%) opposed (LeMay 1994: 53). The 
two major parties differ on how they see the immigration func-
tion being reorganized (Aleinikoff, 2000). Since 2010, Demo-
cratic legislators are more likely to sponsor “earned legalization” 
(their term for conditional amnesty measures). Republicans are 
more divided on the issue. “Establishment” Republican legisla-
tors favoring big businesses see a guest-worker program as essen-
tial to supplying needed and cheaper labor. Tea Party and other 
socially conservative Republicans advocate restrictionist immi-
gration policy and object to anything resembling an amnesty 
program, including an expansion of the guest-worker program.

44	
Illegal Immigration
Democratic sponsors of earned legalization argue that it will 
bring unauthorized immigrants out of the shadow of an under-
ground economy and into the light of accountability. They 
maintain it will aid in the fight against terrorism. They view it 
as decreasing illegal immigration and aiding homeland security 
by allowing law enforcement to concentrate on border secu-
rity and tracking down criminals and potential terrorists rather 
than chasing after millions of ordinary undocumented aliens 
who are in the country simply to find work and be reunited 
with family members. Proponents contend the majority of the 
millions of unauthorized immigrants have done what was asked 
of them: they work hard, stay out of trouble, obey the laws 
(other than the civil laws relating to immigration, of course), 
help their families, and desire the opportunity to legalize their 
status. Proponents maintain that economic studies have shown 
the unauthorized are a net asset, taking menial jobs that U.S. 
workers will not and paying taxes. Proponents consider the very 
status of being illegal makes such workers all the more exploit-
able by unscrupulous employers. Interest groups supporting 
earned legalization provisions include LaRaza, the United Farm 
Workers, Mexicano Estudiente Chicano de Aztlan (MECHA), 
League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC), and 
several national church groups. Proponents contend it will 
improve U.S. foreign relations with Mexico and Central 
American and other Latin American countries. The millions of 
Mexicans in the United States (both authorized and unauthor-
ized) send billions of dollars back home, but, proponents say, 
it all comes back to the U.S. economy (Gotcham and Martinez 
2005). These billions in remittances exceed foreign investment 
as Mexico’s second most important source of revenue after oil. 
These billions of dollars return to the United States by way of 
Mexican purchases of U.S. goods by increasing the well-being 
of Mexico’s poor and working classes, thereby enabling them to 
purchase consumer goods produced in the United States.
Opponents of legalization contend it simply sparks further 
illegal immigration, spurs U.S. population growth, further 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
45
stresses economic development, and adds to already overcrowded 
schools and water shortage problems in the Southwest. They 
view illegal immigrants as coming to the United States to 
exploit its welfare and public health care systems (Feere 2010; 
Lee 2006). One critic noted: “We pick up the tab in many ways 
for the undocumented—from burying their dead, to delivery 
of their babies, to emergency medical and surgical care. There 
are 300,000 babies born to undocumented mothers annually 
at a cost of $5,000 a baby.” He went on to assert that Medicaid 
for such babies in Colorado alone totaled $30 million annu-
ally, in California $79 million, in Texas $74 million, in Arizona 
$31 million, and in New Mexico $6 million. Some hospitals, 
clinics, and emergency rooms closed after being overrun by the 
uninsured and undocumented (Kamau 2005: B-7).
Groups like the Minutemen and the Heritage Foundation 
see illegal immigrants as criminals—for breaking U.S. laws 
regarding immigration—and often as criminals from their 
nation of origin who essentially import increased levels of 
crime, and overcrowd U.S. jails and prisons (Center for Immi-
gration Studies 2014; Heritage Foundation 2014; Camarota 
1999, 2012b).
In 2005, House Judiciary chairman Rep. Jim Sensenbrenner 
(R-WI) authored the law barring states from giving driver’s 
licenses to illegal aliens (known as the Real ID Act of 2005, P.L. 
109–12, 119 Stat. 302), arguing that because some of the Sep-
tember 11, 2001, terrorists gained access to aircraft using driv-
er’s licenses as identification, all illegal aliens should be denied 
them (LeMay 2013: 68). Proponents of the Real ID Act argued 
that it enacted recommendations of the 9/11 Commission and 
that it implements common sense reforms to strengthen border 
security by interrupting terrorist travel and closing loopholes in 
the asylum system (“House of Cards” 2005).
Opponents of the Real ID Act contend it has serious legal 
issues. It raises the bar for persons seeking asylum from religious 
and political persecution and grants the Secretary of Homeland 
Security excessive power to circumvent the judicial branch in 

46	
Illegal Immigration
matters pertaining to border security. They fear that rather than 
closing the back door to those who would exploit asylum to do 
harm, the law closes the door on real refugees fleeing persecu-
tion precisely when the United States needs allies in the war 
on international terrorism. The law, they maintain, makes the 
United States less popular and sympathetic in the world, which 
the United States can ill afford. Before its enactment, the Real 
ID Act was opposed, too, by the National Governors Associa-
tion and the National Conference of State Legislatures because 
of its top-down approach and unfunded mandate. Section 202 
of the act, “Alien Smuggling and Related Offenses,” turns into 
felons anyone—employers, aid workers, Catholic nuns—who 
willingly help an undocumented person.
The Secure Fence Act of 2006 (P.L. 109–367) authorized 
construction of a fence along the U.S.-Mexican border, from 
south of San Diego to Texas, waiving a host of environmental 
hurdles. It approved a 700-mile-long fence (LeMay 2013: 68).
The impact of unauthorized immigrants on the economy is 
hotly debated, but is without question significant. Economic 
analysts estimate the shadow economy at about 10  percent 
of the goods and services produced by the legal economy 
(“Jobs, Impact Ample in Shadow Economy” 2005). Econo-
mists who have analyzed the costs and benefits have reached 
varying estimates, depending on how they measure costs and 
benefits (Chiswick, 1982, 2005; GAO 2000b, 2004; National 
Association of State Budget Officers 2005, Pew Hispanic Cen-
ter 2006; Vernez and McCarthy 1996; Cato 2009a, 2009b; 
Camarota 1999; 2012b). However, there is no question that 
unauthorized immigrants impact the labor market, put strains 
on the social fabric, and tend to lower labor market wages. In 
a December  2007 report, the Congressional Budget Office 
reviewed 15 economic studies of the impact of unauthorized 
immigrants on the budgets of state and local governments. It 
found great variance in their timing and scope. The federal sys-
tem of government and how the various levels of government 
collect their revenue results in state and local governments 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
47
bearing more costs from services provided to the unauthorized 
than they receive back in revenues (Schuck 2009). However, 
it is probable that the national level of government receives 
more in revenue from the unauthorized than it pays out. The 
Internal Revenue Service estimates that about 6 million unau-
thorized immigrants file individual tax returns each year and 
an undetermined more use Social Security numbers obtained 
using false documents and who thereby pay Social Security 
withholding taxes, state and local income, and payroll taxes for 
employees (Congressional Budget Office 2007). The undocu-
mented hold an estimated 15 million jobs and many such jobs 
are “off the books,” meaning the government does not receive 
taxes on wages. Steven Camarota of the Center for Immigra-
tion Studies estimated that, in 2012, of the 11–12  million 
illegal immigrants in the United States, 7–8 million held jobs 
(Center for Immigration Studies 2012).
Analyses by both the Center for Immigration Studies and the 
Pew Hispanic Research Center show that illegal immigrants earn 
far less than the rest of the population, with an average income at 
$27,000, which is 40 percent below the legal immigrant or native 
family income level of $47,000 (Center for Immigration Studies 
2004, 2006; Pew Hispanic Center 2005, “Jobs, Impact Ample in 
Shadow Economy” 2005). Pew estimates Mexican immigrants at 
about 6.3 million, of whom about 3.5 million hold jobs, roughly 
20 percent of the nation’s Hispanic workforce. Despite the fact 
that their earnings are about half that of legal U.S. workers, those 
wages are nonetheless nearly three to seven times the average 
weekly salaries they earned in Mexico. Nor are illegal immigrants 
randomly locating. They follow jobs into the suburbs and to 
states that previously had seen few unauthorized immigrants, and 
into job market areas where the population is growing, requiring 
more restaurants and grocery stores, and more construction work 
and retail outlets. And whereas in the 1990s legal immigrants 
outnumbered illegal ones, by 2005 more than half of the esti-
mated 1.2 million people who arrived were unauthorized. Of the 
11.3 million living in the United States in March 2013, about 

48	
Illegal Immigration
half of them had been in the country for at least 13 years. Among 
unauthorized immigrants, Pew estimates that, in 2012, 2.1 mil-
lion, or 38 percent, of adults lived with their U.S. born children. 
And about three-quarters of them had lived in the United States 
for 10 or more years (Pew Hispanic Center 2014a).
Building fences does not substantially reduce the number of 
undocumented crossing the borders; it simply induces them to 
go around the fence and to cross elsewhere—-through Arizona, 
Texas, and New Mexico, where the climate and terrain are more 
dangerous, leading to a number of deaths. In 2005, a noto-
rious incident highlights that fact. An immigrant smuggler, 
known as a coyote, was bringing in 74 people across Texas in 
an 18-wheeler in back of his truck, when the truck’s refrigera-
tion system broke down and temperatures inside reached 173 
degrees, which resulted in 19 deaths, including a 5-year-old boy. 
In 2004 a record 415 people died while attempting to cross ille-
gally. A volunteer group, No More Deaths, set up camps along 
popular crossing routes to conduct daily patrols and transport-
ing immigrants in need to local hospitals. Several of the vol-
unteers were arrested for aiding and abetting. Another group, 
Humane Borders, calls the Border Patrol when it encounters 
illegal immigrants in dire medical need and secures approval 
in advance to transport them to the local hospital (“Border: 
Felony Case Questions Migrant Aid” 2006).
Estimates of the growth in unauthorized immigrants peaked 
in 2007, at 12.2  million, then declined and have remained 
steady until 2013. The Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS), the Department of Labor, and several think tanks on 
both sides of the issue (Pew, Center for Migration Studies, 
Center for Immigration Studies) all estimate that 60 percent 
of unauthorized immigrants come across the borders, mostly 
from Mexico, without proper papers (that is, undocumented), 
and that about 40 percent enter legally but overstay or other-
wise break conditions of their temporary visas.
A 2014 Pew Research report found that U.S. border appre-
hensions of Mexicans fell to historic lows and that for the first 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
49
time on record, more non-Mexicans than Mexicans were appre-
hended at U.S. borders by the Border Patrol. About 229,000 
Mexicans were apprehended in 2014 compared to 257,000 
non-Mexicans (see data from Congressional Budget Office 
2007; and Pew Hispanic Center 2014b). The two strongest 
magnets pulling unauthorized immigrants to the United States 
are jobs and family reunion.
The typical undocumented Mexican worker earns about a 
tenth of what his North American counterpart earns and many 
U.S. businesses welcome and even rely on undocumented 
workers as cheap and compliant labor. Community networks 
among recently arrived legal immigrants help establish systems 
used by illegal immigrants by helping provide jobs, housing, 
and entry for their illegal relatives and countrymen (Camarota 
2005). A 2006 study among day laborers found that 75 percent 
were in the United States illegally, 49 percent of whom were 
employed by homeowners and 43 percent of whom worked in 
construction, most frequently as laborers, landscapers, paint-
ers, roofers, and drywall installers. Among them, 59 percent 
were from Mexico, 28 percent from Central America, and only 
7 percent were born in the United States. Also among them, 
73 percent stated they were placed in hazardous working condi-
tions (“Study on Day Laborers Tallies Woes of 117,600” 2006).
Census Bureau projections estimate that the U.S. popula-
tion will soon exceed 400  million. The immigrant popula-
tion is growing at a rate six-and-a-half times faster than the 
native-born population, accounting for about 42  percent of 
the total increase in population between 2000 and 2010 (U.S. 
Census Bureau, American Community Survey 2010).
After the passage of IRCA in 1986, there was a slight dip 
in apprehensions at the borders, but those numbers climbed 
again since 1988, reaching a peak in 2007, as noted earlier. In 
2014, total apprehensions by the Border Patrol were 486,651 
(Congressional Budget Office 2014).
Perceiving them as a “flood” of illegal immigrants, some citi-
zens began to act as do-it-yourself immigration law enforcers. 

50	
Illegal Immigration
A number of vigilante groups began to actively patrol the bor-
der for undocumented crossers. Groups like American Border 
Patrol, Ranch Rescue, the Minuteman Project, and the Colo-
rado Minutemen comb the deserts of Texas, New Mexico, and 
Arizona to report immigrants to the Border Patrol, sometimes 
using high-tech equipment such as drones, sophisticated listen-
ing devices, and light aircraft (LeMay 2007: 38; see also Min-
uteman HQ 2015; Minuteman Project 2015; Pollack 2005). 
A proimmigrant group, Border Action Network, argues that 
this makes for an inherently dangerous mix of people (Border 
Action Network 2015).
Arizona has emerged as a main entry crossing point and vigi-
lante groups patrol along the 350-mile Arizona-Mexico border. 
One vigilante group member stated he spent $1,500 during 
his time on patrol in the Arizona desert, including the price of 
night-vision equipment, a directional microphone, and body 
armor capable of withstanding a round from an AK 47 assault 
rifle (“Smuggling Deaths Net Conviction” 2005).
The situation in Arizona and New Mexico prompted their 
governors to declare states of emergencies in 2005. The then-
governor of New Mexico Bill Richardson (D-NM) declared 
that four counties in the state were crippled by the effects of 
burgeoning unauthorized immigration and called for national 
reform. His executive order declared that the counties were 
“devastated by the ravages and terror of human smuggling, 
drug smuggling, kidnapping, murder, property destruction 
and death of livestock.” He committed $750,000 in state emer-
gency funding and pledged an extra $1 million in aid, a por-
tion of which would fund to build and staff a field office for the 
New Mexico Office of Homeland Security. In 2004, 300,000 
undocumented immigrants were apprehended near the city of 
Columbus, New Mexico. In July 2005, someone shot at the 
city’s chief of police. Area ranchers witnessed attempted kid-
napping of three female undocumented immigrants by masked 
and armed men on a New Mexico ranch. In a similar action, 
then Arizona governor Janet Napolitano (D-AZ) declared a 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
51
state of emergency in Arizona’s border counties, and pledged 
$1.5 million in aid for extra sheriff’s deputies and other offi-
cers’ overtime costs and upgraded equipment (LeMay 2007: 
39). Richardson’s voice added weight to the issue as he is a 
Hispanic, a Democrat, and was a candidate seeking the party’s 
presidential nomination in 2008.
The Americans for Immigration Control (AIC) led a 
state-by-state campaign to enact state legislation to clamp 
down on illegal immigration, sponsoring public awareness 
campaigns in many states. In 2006, Colorado held a special 
session of the legislature to pass a measure imposing fines on 
employers of unauthorized immigrants and requiring them to 
check the legal status of all prospective employees and verify-
ing their Social Security numbers, their citizenship status, or 
their legal right to work (commonly called a “green card”). The 
AIC uses surveys, talk radio, Fox TV interviews, newspaper 
columns, and ads across the country to increase support for 
an immigration moratorium of three to five years, maintaining 
such a moratorium is necessary to give the present immigration 
population time to assimilate and for the Border Patrol (Immi-
gration and Customs Enforcement or ICE) to regain control of 
the borders. It further advocates cutting legal immigration to 
no more than 300,000 per year. AIC advocates enacting laws 
or even amending the constitution, if that is necessary, to end 
birthright citizenship for children born in the United States of 
illegal immigrant parents (Feere 2010; Lee 2006).
Since 9/11, the federal government has pressured state and 
local law enforcement to take a more active role in enforcing 
immigration laws. Only a few departments have obliged; many 
were reluctant to do so citing costs of unfunded mandates, 
fears of civil rights lawsuits, and the need for training of local 
officers. Some local departments have policies and procedures 
specifically prohibiting them from checking on the immigra-
tion status of persons they pull over in traffic violations, and 
local officers are concerned that they will be suspected of racial 
profiling. ICE officers are stretched thin and do not always 

52	
Illegal Immigration
show up if persons are detained and reported by local police. 
ICE agents not only enforce immigration policy for wide geo-
graphic sectors, but also are concerned with child pornogra-
phy, money laundering, and narcotics smuggling. ICE is often 
stretched too thinly to respond to local police whose depart-
ments lack the funding and their officers the training, and lack 
detention facilities to hold suspected illegal immigrants for 
much longer than overnight. California, Florida, and Alabama 
have entered into agreements with ICE to train members of 
their state patrols to identify and detain undocumented driv-
ers. However, the National League of Cities has lobbied against 
proposed bills to expand local police enforcement of immi-
gration laws as unfunded mandates that would divert much 
needed local resources to enforce federal obligations (Crummy 
2005; Suro 2015).
Incorporation of Illegal Immigrants and Their Children
A public policy concern closely related to the issue of earned 
legalization or amnesty is the incorporation of unauthorized 
immigrants and their children. Concern for the assimilation 
of immigrant children is particularly at the forefront of Ameri-
can politics today as legislators grapple with such issues as the 
Dreamers, the impact on families of the surge in deportation 
of illegal immigrant parents of citizen children, and the recent 
influx of thousands of children from Central America unac-
companied by adults. Historically, each successive wave of 
immigrants raised anxiety about their ability to assimilate and 
that pattern holds true for today. Since 1965, the source of 
immigration shifted from Northwestern European nations to 
Latin America and Asia. That change in the composition of the 
immigrant flow renewed concerns about the ability of the new-
comers to incorporate into U.S. cultural, economic, political, 
and social systems. Critics of illegal immigration fear especially 
the trend toward increased immigration from Mexico, South 
and Central America, and Asia, which is projected to alter the 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
53
racial makeup of the U.S. population. These critics fear that 
immigration is changing the very face of America. The Census 
Bureau projects that by 2050 white Americans will be in the 
numerical minority.
Such critics further maintain that the nature of today’s flow 
makes more difficult efforts for their “Americanization.” Illegal 
immigrants are still highly concentrated in urban areas and in 
the top 10 receiving states. They also argue that illegal immi-
grants are less varied than were immigrants from the past. More 
than 50 percent speak Spanish as their native language, which 
critics argue is a degree of ethnic concentration unprecedented 
in U.S. history.
Although immigration trends, of both legal and illegal immi-
grants, are undoubtedly reshaping the racial composition of 
the United States and indeed changing the very appearance of 
“Americans,” are illegal immigrants any less able to incorporate 
into the United States than the legal immigrants of the past? By 
most measures available, such fears seem more xenophobic than 
real. In large measure, how quickly any immigrant assimilates 
into society is influenced by the person’s age. The median age 
of unauthorized immigrants is 28 years. The influx of young 
people is particularly important because the U.S. population, 
with its relatively low birthrate among native-born citizens, is 
aging rapidly. By 2025, when more than 20 percent of the pop-
ulation will be over 65, more working people will be needed to 
support them and maintain the solvency of the Social Security 
system through their payroll taxes. Young people acquire flu-
ency in English much faster than do their parents. They enter 
the workforce and learn job skills more quickly as well. The 
younger the person, the more he or she absorbs the culture of 
majority society. Critics fear the very massiveness of the flow 
hinders economic incorporation. Illegal immigrant wages are 
well below those of native workers, leading to a steady rise in 
overall immigrant poverty.
Finally, critics argue that illegal immigrants oppose assimi-
lation. They contend that illegal immigrants undergo at best 

54	
Illegal Immigration
a superficial assimilation. For such critics, Americanization is 
more than learning English or getting a job. They see the devel-
opment of a visceral, emotional attachment to the United States 
and its history as part of a “patriotic assimilation,” which they 
fear is unlikely to occur when the schools and the general cul-
ture are skeptical, if not hostile, to patriotism, and when com-
munication technology enables illegal immigrants to maintain 
strong psychological and even physical ties to their countries of 
origin (Francis 2001; Lamm and Imhoff 1985; Nevins 2001).
Carefully constructed social science studies clearly question 
the idea that today’s immigrants and their children, no matter 
their status, are any less able to incorporate, or will be signifi-
cantly slower to do so, than were the immigrants of an earlier 
era. The findings of several studies show that respondents turn 
conventional expectations on their head, a result that poten-
tially has long-term political consequences. These studies offer 
a different theoretical view of the assimilation process than that 
traditionally held. In place of viewing assimilation as a homo-
geneous, linear process, these scholars argue that it is better 
seen as a highly segmented, nonlinear process that does not lead 
to “amalgamation.” Biculturalism and pluralism are as evident 
as is traditional assimilation (Portes and Rumbaut 2001; Bean 
and Stevens 2003; LeMay 2001; Stevens 2001; Wolbrecht and 
Hero 2005).
Of concern to most such scholars is the language ability and 
adaptation of immigrants. A  study among immigrants who 
arrived between 1987 and 1989, and who therefore had little 
time to learn English in the United States, found that half of 
those recently arrived spoke English well or very well (Jasso 
et al. 2000). There is, of course, considerable variation within 
and among immigrant groups depending on their native tongue 
and on the educational backgrounds and occupational catego-
ries of the immigrants—as was the case in the past. Post-1965 
immigrants are less likely to have entered with high levels of 
proficiency in English (Stevens 2001). However, census data 
show the children of immigrant families quickly become the 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
55
family’s English translators, and that performing that function 
helps their own assimilation and self-image (Obsatz 2002a).
Since there is no national policy on incorporation to encour-
age their learning of English akin to the national “American-
ization” campaigns of the 1920s, such efforts vary across local 
and state areas and across time. While 25 states have “Official 
English” laws, an equal number do not. This patchwork of pub-
lic and political responses to the varying language skills of these 
newest immigrants reflects the difficulties and benefits of wel-
coming newcomers to a nation that prides itself as being a nation 
of immigrants, although not recognized in national policy as an 
English-speaking nation (Stevens 2001).
What about the incorporation of their children? Immigrant 
children and the U.S.-born children of immigrants, no matter 
their status, are the fastest growing segments of the child-age 
population. U.S.-born persons with at least one foreign-born 
parent now exceed 60  million in number. The Children of 
Immigrant Longitudinal Study (CILS) is a multifaceted study 
of the educational performance and the social, cultural, and 
psychological adaptation of children of immigrants. It is the 
largest study of its kind in the United States (Rumbaut 2000; 
Portes and Rumbaut 2001; Stevens 2001).
CILS found that while more than 90 percent of immigrant 
children lived in households in which a language other than 
English was spoken, 73  percent preferred to speak English 
rather than their parent’s native tongue. And by three years later, 
those who preferred English rose to 88 percent. Even among 
the most mother-tongue retentive group, Mexican youth liv-
ing in San Diego with its large Spanish-speaking population 
and many Spanish-language radio and television stations, the 
32 percent originally preferring English rose to 61 percent after 
three years. Among Cuban youth in Miami, the shift was even 
more dramatic. There, 95 percent preferred English three years 
later (Rumbaut 2000). The study found a somewhat lower but 
similar shift in identity in the second generation as well, where 
the U.S.-born children of foreign-born parents were four times 

56	
Illegal Immigration
less likely to identify themselves by their parents’ national ori-
gin than were the foreign-born children. The CILS found an 
overall picture of resilient ambition and noteworthy achieve-
ment (Rumbaut 2000: 242–257).
Yet another source of pressure for illegal immigration is the 
desire for family reunification, coupled with huge backlogs in 
the applications for legal immigration visas. Visa application 
processing delays run from a year for immediate relatives to 
more than two years in other cases. A Mexican adult son or 
daughter of a legal permanent resident faces a wait of eight 
and a half years, as do nationals from other high-source coun-
tries such as India or the Philippines. Such years-long backlogs 
increase pressures for illegal entry as children in backlog often 
face the problem of “aging out” of their preference category if 
the delays result in their passage from under 18 (minor chil-
dren) to over 18 years (adult children). In 2000, the estimated 
number of visa-backlogged persons was over 3.5 million (CILS, 
cited in Portes and Rumbaut 2001).
Another processing and due process issue involves “expe-
dited removal,” which has soared in number during the 
Obama Administration’s time in office. Expedited removals 
were at 978,000 in 2009, with interior deportations at 236,376 
and criminal deportations, as of 2012, at 153,000 (Center 
for Immigration Studies 2015). According to a Pew study, 
expedited removals rose for 350,000 in 2008 to 419,000 in 
2012 (Pew Hispanic Center 2014a). Provisions for expedited 
removal were in the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immi-
grant Responsibility Act of 1996 (IIRIRA), which emphasized 
asylum reform—preventing, defeating, or deterring the use of 
asylum by claimants who had destroyed or hidden their iden-
tity in order to get past border screening who then disappeared 
into the country. Expedited removal subjects clearly fraudu-
lent violators to a more efficient removal order and imposes 
even more severe sanctions should such persons attempt illegal 
entry at a later date. ICE agents have swept up a record num-
ber of unauthorized immigrants whose sole violations are visa 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
57
overstaying or entering undocumented. A  majority of those 
deported were returned to Mexico, while most of the remain-
der were sent back to Central America, South America, or the 
Dominican Republic. ICE owns and operates a fleet of jets to 
annually make hundreds of flights to return those thousands 
of persons to their native countries. The recent surge in chil-
dren unaccompanied by adults coming from Central Amer-
ica increases the pool of known persons by several thousands, 
since they routinely turn themselves in to ICE immediately 
on arrival. The DHS struggles to reduce the number of ille-
gal aliens who have disobeyed orders to leave the country or 
who have failed to appear at deportation hearings. Estimates 
of those numbers remain at about 400,000 because new unau-
thorized immigrants continue to come, particularly along the 
southwestern border, and continue to defy orders to appear at 
deportation hearings. ICE agents also track noncitizens who 
are serving time for serious crimes and to bring their cases to an 
immigration judge, and if a judge order them deported, they 
can be sent back home upon release from prisons, as were the 
153,000 in 2012 (Leinwand 2005; Center for Immigration 
Studies 2015).
Critics of the expedited removal process, such as human 
rights advocates, legal organizations, and refugee service orga-
nizations, argue that the increased use of expedited removal 
results in some individuals denied entry as refugees who may 
not make it through the “credible fear” interview (Martin 2000; 
Wolchock 2000). President Obama issued executive orders 
(DACA, DAPA) that may ease the use of expedited removal, 
but the process is likely to remain a contested issue for the 
foreseeable future.
Border Control and Management Issues
The perennial proposals for illegal immigration reform (numer-
ous bills are introduced annually) speak to another ongoing 
concern. Does the United States have adequate control over its 

58	
Illegal Immigration
borders? The political struggles to control illegal immigration, 
now more than three decades long, reflect the view of many 
that the nation has, indeed, lost control of its borders. Con-
cerns were heightened after the September 11, 2001, attacks, 
resulting in the USA Patriot Acts I  and II, the Homeland 
Security Act of 2002, the Real ID Act of 2005, and the Fence 
Act of 2006. Border control is an enormous undertaking. The 
United States shares 5,525 miles of border with Canada and 
1,989 miles with Mexico. Ocean borders include 95,000 miles 
of shoreline and a 3.4-million-mile exclusivity zone. Annually 
more than 500 million persons cross the borders, among which 
are some 350  million noncitizens. They enter through 350 
official ports of entry. Managing the borders, securing trans-
portation systems by sea and air, and controlling international 
airports and seaports are inseparable and monumental tasks.
The DHS, established in 2002, has four divisions: Border 
and Transportation Security; Emergency Preparedness and 
Response; Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear 
Countermeasures; and Information Analysis and Infrastruc-
ture Protection. DHS Act restructured the INS by moving the 
Border Patrol from the DOJ (Department of Justice) to the 
DHS. The act reflected the political consensus that the system 
of border control was obviously broken and in need of a major 
overhaul. The tension in policy is between the need for control 
pitted against service. Greater control is opposed to civil liber-
ties. Group interest, identity, and diversity are balanced against 
shared national goals. Trying to balance such zero-sum, no-win 
trade-offs of deeply ingrained values in fundamental constitu-
tional principles results in a never-ending quest to achieve bal-
ance (Bach 2000).
ICE daily encounters, processes, and makes decisions about 
1 million border crossers. With globalization, the world’s econo-
mies, so closely tied to that of the United States, depend increas-
ingly on border crossings for increased trade, business, mobility, 
and tourism. ICE remains the primary agency for control of the 
borders and for catching undocumented immigrants and visa 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
59
overstayers. Its biggest problems are at the southwestern border, 
although others enter as stowaways on ships, or enter through 
airports.
Past attempts to beef up border control at problematic sta-
tions resulted in increased apprehensions followed by a shift 
in the flow of illegal traffic. Increases in Border Patrol staff in 
San Diego, California, and El Paso, Texas, saw a decline in the 
rate of apprehensions at those stations (33%), but the traffic 
relocated to Tucson, Arizona, and to Del Rio, Laredo, and 
McAllen, Texas. And actual staffing increases in the Border 
Patrol have proven to be problematic to implement. Congress 
approved, in 1996, the hiring of 1,000 agents a year for the 
next five years. While 1,148 agents were hired in 1998, fewer 
than 400 were hired in 2000 (Information Plus 2006).
IIRIRA required the attorney general to install additional 
physical barriers in high illegal-entry sectors. In San Diego, 
bollard-type fencing (using reinforced steel) was constructed, 
adding 32 miles to the prior 14. The Fence Act approved more 
than 300 miles of such fencing. However, fencing has failed to 
substantially slow down undocumented crossings. It has been 
tunneled under (hundreds of tunnels have been found since 
the fence was erected), or simply bypassed, with the flow mov-
ing to Arizona and New Mexico.
Human Rights Watch has been critical of abuses commit-
ted by the Border Patrol, including the use of excessive force. 
The Border Patrol counters that their agents come into con-
tact with human and narcotics smugglers who are prepared to 
use all means, including violence, to enter the United States, 
and that smugglers are, in fact, better armed than are Border 
Patrol agents. Individual citizens, mostly ranchers whose land 
abuts the Mexican border, have formed vigilante groups, some 
lethally armed. These groups patrol border areas looking for 
human smugglers and bands of illegal crossers.
Airline companies are responsible for screening passengers 
and preventing those without proper documentation from 
boarding. ICE requires them to provide a list of all departing and 

60	
Illegal Immigration
arriving passengers. Airlines are held responsible if they bring 
in passengers without documents, whether or not such docu-
ments are verified before departure. They can be fined $3,000 
per illegal passenger and bear the cost for alien detentions—the 
costs of which run to as much as $10 million annually. Delta 
Airlines, for example, maintains a motel exclusively for detain-
ees near JFK Airport in NYC. At some high-risk airports, car-
riers duplicate visas and passports prior to departure, collect 
and hold documents, or take other precautions to screen out 
document flushers and to establish that the passenger is not a 
stowaway.
Border management is complicated by high volume. But 
increased security results in cross-border exchanges that are 
slow and rely on relatively primitive technology. Risk to public 
safety and the potential risk of law enforcement violation are 
high. Ports of entry sometimes pose no credible law enforce-
ment risks to smugglers, and the ability of smugglers and traf-
fickers to adapt their techniques and tactics at border crossings 
increases the law enforcement problem.
Better border patrol and management service requires improved 
enforcement that slows traffic. How do policy makers accom-
plish the contradictory aims of increased security yet speeding up 
the flow for economic trade reasons? Future innovations in tech-
nology are needed to alter the past zero-sum, either-or approach 
(Bach 2000; Broder 2002; Gerstle and Mollenkopf 2001; Kemp 
2003; Krauss and Pacheco 2004). Since the establishment of the 
DHS, border management relies on new technology and better 
use of information. These include improved advanced passenger 
information systems at airports, dedicated commuter lanes at 
Canadian and Mexican borders, testing by ICE of an informa-
tion system matching passenger arrivals and departures being 
used between several European airports of embarkation and some 
major U.S. airports of debarkation. Enhanced enforcement sys-
tem at land borders using new technology such as drones, motion 
sensors, automated inspection activities in high-volume stations 
processing of documents relying on traveler’s being pre-screened, 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
61
using traveler’s fingerprints, and visual eye-scanning and photo-
graphic profiling and scanning with facial recognition technolo-
gies are under development or in testing usage.
Another approach relies on improved preinspection and pre-
clearance arrangements with the governments of Mexico and 
Canada, where the locus of inspection can do the most good 
and least harm. Such overseas inspection occurs when inspec-
tors have greater time, where security is greater, and under con-
ditions where the governments have the upper hand. A regional 
framework means a shared set of rules for cross-border activity 
(Bach 2000: 244–248).
Domestically, improved procedures involve the cooperation 
and coordination of agencies such as the FBI, Department of 
Energy, Department of Commerce, and the DHS. The inde-
pendent Terrorist Threat Integration Center was established 
in 2003. It is a joint venture between the DHS and the CIA, 
housed in CIA headquarters. The merger of so many depart-
ments into the DHS makes its management of so many 
tasks more difficult to do so efficiently (Lehrer 2004; Kemp 
2003; Crotty 2003; GAO 2004; Haynes 2004; Hyong 2003; 
O’Beirne 2002).
Obstacles to DHS efficiency include mission complexity, 
bureaucratic-cultural incompatibility among disparate bureaus 
and agencies (22) merged into a superdepartment, task obfus-
cation, and using symbolic versus real performance (Krauss 
2003; Birkland 2004; Broder 2002; Halperin 2003; Jacobson 
2003; Light 2002a).
Another policy impacting illegal immigration was the enact-
ment of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act 
(P.L. 108–458, 2004) establishing an “Intelligence Czar” by 
restructuring intelligence operations. Critics are skeptical of the 
“czar” approach (O’Hanlon 2005). Critics point out that the 
Director of National Intelligence (DNI) has ignored minority 
views on how analysis of information is handled, voiced, and 
heard. They argue that the CIA routinely ignored State Depart-
ment analyses.

62	
Illegal Immigration
At the heart of homeland security is the concept of national 
sovereignty. A unilateral perception of national security arises 
out of the traditional definition of sovereignty, which sees the 
nation-state as having the power and rightful authority to gov-
ern its territory and secure its borders. That requires a delicate 
balancing act between the needs of security and the traditions 
of civil liberty. When confronted by international terrorist 
organizations like Al Qaeda, Al Qaeda in the Arabian Penin-
sula, and Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), such balance is 
all the more difficult. Terrorist bombings in England, France, 
Spain, and the Netherlands as well as in the United States sug-
gest that a more international, multinational approach to secu-
rity is needed.
A particularly worrisome form of international terrorism 
involves the use of bioterrorism, where casualties are poten-
tially very high (O’Hanlon 2005). An efficient bioterrorist 
attack using a pathogen of contagious agents such as Anthrax, 
cholera, Ebola, or even a modified smallpox virus is technically 
possible and raises fear of such attack to heightened levels. In 
part, the extra edge to such fear results from the realization that 
the incubation period of these dreaded and deadly diseases is 
often days to weeks. A suicide terrorist could be infected, then 
fly to the United States on a tourist visa. Because the incuba-
tion period is longer than the flight time, such an individual, 
while in a contagious stage, could then travel internally to air-
ports and train and bus terminals, and attend events involv-
ing mass public attendance and thereby spread the contagion, 
which would be difficult to detect, control, or contain. The 
recent natural epidemic of measles, which spread from Dis-
neyland in California to hundreds (more than 500 as of this 
writing) in more than 30 states, is an example of the potential 
danger, which would be far more deadly and likely with far 
higher morbidity rates than the measles outbreak.
Former INS commissioner Bach suggests four strategies to 
bring people together rather than pitting them against one 
another, such as does the employer-sanctions approach. Bach 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
63
recommends four strategies: (1) target criminals who should 
be imprisoned and removed; (2) target smuggling operations 
and rally all interest groups against human trafficking; (3) tar-
get worksite enforcement with improved involvement of the 
Department of Labor, the Equal Opportunity Commission, 
and state labor law agencies to enforce labor laws against employ-
ers who are hiring and exploiting unauthorized workers; and  
(4) prioritize technology to cope with document and visa abuse 
and fraud, essential to providing better services (Bach 2000).
The Cost of Illegal Immigration
Controversy over immigration centers on whether immigra-
tion is of overall benefit to the nation or is a huge drain on 
resources. Public opinion polls registering opposition against 
illegal immigration emphasize its cost to public education, 
health, prisons and jails, the criminal justice and state and 
local court systems, and welfare services. These costs are seen 
as a net drain on state and local governments. Critics maintain 
that illegal immigrants take away jobs from native-born citi-
zens, especially blacks and other Hispanics. State governments, 
especially those in states with large percentages of foreign-born 
in their populations, are concerned that federal laws impose 
huge financial burdens (Borjas 1994; Camarota 2005, 2012a; 
Gorman 2004; Huddle 1993; Information Plus 2006; Kamau 
2005; Mosisa 2002; Simcox 1997).
However, other scholars and studies dispute the “bur-
den” argument and the methods and manner in which the 
cost-benefit ratio is measured (Fix and Passel 2002; Gotcham 
and Martinez 2005; Information Plus 2006; McCarthy and 
Vernez 1997; Moore 1998; Fix and Passel 1994; Smith and 
Edmonston 1998; Singer 2004: Spencer 2005). Proimmigra-
tion advocates contend that the United States, in the long run, 
benefits economically, culturally, and socially from immigra-
tion. Immigration, whether legal or illegal, brings workers and 
workers create wealth. They point out the United States benefits 

64	
Illegal Immigration
from the “brain drain” wherein highly talented individuals with 
strong entrepreneurial spirits migrate from developing nations 
to the United States, bringing with them their talents and ethic 
of hard work. Immigrants add workers to the labor force and, 
with their higher birth rates, continue to add to the employee 
base upon which an increasingly aging native-born population 
depends for the solvency of the Social Security and the Medi-
care systems.
The cost debate first came to national attention in 1993, 
when economist Donald Huddle completed a report for the 
Carrying Capacity Network, an environmental group con-
cerned over rapid population growth (Huddle 1993). Huddle 
calculated that for every 100 unskilled immigrants who were 
working, 25 unskilled U.S.-born workers were displaced from 
jobs. In 1992, he placed the net costs at $42.5 billion, and in 
1997 estimated those costs had risen to $68 billion.
An Urban Institute study by Jeffrey Passel disputed Huddle’s 
findings. Passel maintained that Huddle had failed to account 
for the positive impact of immigrant businesses and consumer 
spending. Passel argued Huddle had overstated costs and dis-
placement effects. Passel calculated that immigrants paid more 
than $70 billion in taxes, $50 billion above Huddle’s estimates 
(Passel 1994).
Because of different approaches to measuring the cost-benefit 
ratio and the use of different assumptions in their calculations, 
it is difficult to assess which is more accurate. Their estimates 
of economic gains and losses differ substantially. The General 
Accounting Office (1995) examined three national studies of 
costs and benefits associated with illegal aliens. All three of 
those studies concluded that undocumented immigrants (visa 
overstayer data were not included in any of the studies) cost 
more than they generated in revenues to federal, state, and 
local governments. The GAO report found net costs ranged 
from $2 billion (Urban Institute) to about $19 billion (Hud-
dle’s 1993 study). Illegal immigrants’ primary fiscal benefits are 
on the positive impact on the Medicare and Social Security 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
65
systems. A  study by Steven Moore (1998) noted that while 
immigrants pay into those systems, their own parents are not 
collecting benefits. Illegal immigrants using fraudulent Social 
Security numbers pay in to the system through payroll with-
holding taxes collected, but since they are unauthorized, they 
cannot draw on those accounts when they reach age 65. This 
creates a one-generation windfall to the Social Security sys-
tem that helps ease the financial hardship to the system by the 
baby-boom generation of about 40 million people who started 
collecting their retirement benefits in 2011. A Social Security 
Trust Fund Board of Trustees Report (1998) estimated that 
immigrants, over the next 25, 50, and 75 years, would contrib-
ute an average of $19.3 billion, $22.3 billion, and $25.8 bil-
lion, respectively, to the Social Security Trust Fund. Moore 
(1998) estimated that, in 1997, the total immigrant income 
was $390 billion, generating $133 billion in taxes.
By contrast, George Borjas, a Cuban immigrant and profes-
sor of public policy at the John F. Kennedy School of Govern-
ment at Harvard University, argues immigration is detrimental, 
claiming immigrants’ lower educational levels mean that they 
will remain at an economic disadvantage and in the long run 
will result in greater use of welfare. However, the National 
Research Council concluded immigration had little negative 
effect on wages and job opportunities of most native-born 
Americans, and concluded that estimates of the costs to state 
and local taxpayers had been inflated (Smith and Edmondson, 
The New Americans 1997). In another study, Walter Ewing 
concluded that immigrants, on average, paid $1,800 in taxes 
to local, state, and federal governments above what they cost in 
services and benefits received, but notes that costs to state and 
local governments are higher than to the federal level as they 
provide more of the total services and depend for a greater per-
centage of their revenues on property tax and sales tax, whereas 
the federal government receives a greater percentage of its rev-
enues from income taxes collected to a greater extent through 
payroll withholding (Ewing 2005: 5).

66	
Illegal Immigration
Guest-Worker Issues
The policy of allowing for guest-workers has been a recurring 
issue since the Bracero Program ended in 1964. Guest-workers 
are temporary immigrants who are legally admitted to the 
United States for a specified time (e.g., the Bracero workers for 
nine months of a fiscal year). Historically, most guest-workers 
have been associated with agricultural work. U.S. growers 
import such workers through the H-2A program. Congressio-
nal members associated with growers have consistently sought 
to expand H-2A. The National Republican Party platform in 
2012, for example, called for an expanded guest-worker program 
(Moffett 2015). IRCA, in 1986, expanded the guest-worker 
program by creating an H-2B category for nonagricultural 
workers. The number of H-2B visas allowed was expanded by 
the IMMACT (the Immigration Act of November 29, 1990) 
in reaction to a projected labor shortage that never occurred. It 
allowed for 65,000 temporary visas for up to six years for people 
in special occupations and tied to a specific employer-sponsor. 
Government audits have found it rife with abuse. The current 
system allows for considerable exploitation and unscrupu-
lous employers can retaliate against guest-workers if they try 
to assert labor workplace rights (Nevins 2001). During the 
Clinton administration, then Labor Secretary Robert Reich 
testified against the H-2B visa program, stating that indus-
try was using it to replace skilled U.S. workers with cheaper 
foreign workers. There is no annual limit on H-2A visas, and 
a 66,000 annual limit on H-2B visas (LeMay 1994: 37–40, 
2007: 59). Since 1990, the computer, electronic, and related 
high-tech industries have lobbied for increased numbers in 
the annual allotment of H-1B visas for high- or special-skilled 
workers (referred to as the STEM program, standing for sci-
ence, technology, engineering, and mathematics workforce). 
Guest-workers increased from 44,000 admitted in 1981, to 
139,000 in 1990, to 227,000 in 1996, to 106,000 in 2011, 
the latest year for which data are available. In 2011, there were 
just over 55,000 H-2A visas issued, and just over 51,000 H-2B 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
67
visas (Southern Poverty Law Center 2013; Camarota 2006). 
The National Guestworker Alliance is a New Orleans–based 
advocacy group that tries to organize such workers across the 
country and tries to combat their exploitation (Moffett 2015).
The American Competitiveness and Workforce Improve-
ment Act of 1998 increased the number of H-1B visas available 
by 142,500 visas over the course of three years. It imposed two 
employer requirements for H-1B workers: that the employer 
must pay a $500 fee per applicant, the funds from which were 
to support scholarships for Americans studying computer and 
related technical fields; and that employers with 15 percent or 
more such workers in their workforce had to certify that U.S. 
workers were not laid off for H-1B workers 90 days before or 
after the H-1B workers arrive at the workplace. The H-1B visa 
is a nonimmigrant visa issued to employers who will employ 
guest-workers temporarily in a specialty occupation or field. 
H-1B visas are issued for a period of up to three years but may 
be renewed for up to six years. The number of H-1B visas is lim-
ited, but the cap has fluctuated throughout the program’s exis-
tence. Alongside the H-1B visa is the L-visa, used for persons 
employed at managerial or executive level and issued for three 
years and renewable for a maximum of seven years. The L-1B 
visa is for intracompany transferees with specialized knowledge 
in the field, issued for up to three years and renewable for up 
to five years. L-2 visas are issued to spouses of L-1 visa benefi-
ciaries, allowing them to reside and work in the United States 
for the duration of the L-1 visa. Finally, there is the Optional 
Practical Training visa, offering practical experience through 
optional temporary employment, to F-1 student visa holders 
for up to 12 months. Those in STEM fields are eligible for a 
17-month extension at the end of one year, with the option of 
later applying for an H-1B visa (Department for Professional 
Employees 2013).
STEM and guest-worker trends show fluctuation. The Depart-
ment of Labor estimates about 50,000 employers sought appli-
cations in 1999, and about 44 percent admitted were from India, 
most of whom were computer programmers (Martin 2001).

68	
Illegal Immigration
The U.S. Department of State issued 134,212 L-visas in fis-
cal year 2010–2011. Among those, 64,430 were L-1 visas and 
71,782 were L-2 visas. They were issued in nearly 200 coun-
tries, although 29 percent went to guest-workers born in India. 
FY2012 saw a 3 percent decrease in approved H-1B petitions, 
from 269,653 in 2011 to 262,569 in FY2012. While approved 
petitions for initial employment increased 29 percent, approved 
petitions for continuing employment decreased 23  percent 
between FY2011 and FY2012. In FY2012, 154,859 (59%) of 
H-1B recipients were in computer-related occupations, 26,239 
were in architecture and engineering, 4,820 in life sciences, and 
4,969 in mathematics and physical sciences. Together, STEM 
fields totaled 190,987 workers, 73 percent of H-1B approv-
als in FY2012. Computer-related occupations accounted for 
81 percent of STEM-related H-1B visas (Department for Pro-
fessional Employees 2013).
In 2013, there were nearly 3.8 million workers in computer- 
related occupations, 11 percent of whom were not U.S. citizens. 
Among them, computer analysts were 19 percent, and software 
developers and applications and systems software personnel 
were 17 percent. The Department for Professional Employees of 
the AFL-CIO estimates that H-1B admissions were associated 
with a 5 to 6 percent drop in wages for those STEM workers. 
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, real wages for work-
ers in computer and mathematics occupations were flat from 
2004 to 2012, while employment grew by 23 percent (“Occu-
pation Employment Statistics, Occupational Employment and 
Wages” 2004 and 2012. See also Salzman et al. 2013). The total 
number of H-1B visa beneficiaries working in the United States 
at any given time can only be estimated and does not account 
for those who have remained in the labor market after their visas 
expired. Estimates indicate 40 to 45 percent of immigrants have 
overstayed their legally obtained visas (Marshall 2009; DHS 
2013a).
There are policy trade-offs inherent in the temporary worker 
approach. Which is more valuable to U.S. society, cheaper food 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
69
or higher farm worker wages? How long should temporary 
workers be allowed to stay? Do STEM workers fill a vital niche 
in the global economy and global workforce? Ultimately, the 
answers to those questions are political. As a National Research 
Council—the principal operating arm of the National Academy 
of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering—found, 
“the current size of the H-1B workforce relative to the over-
all number of IT professionals is large enough to keep wages 
from rising as fast as might be expected in a tight labor market 
. . . [and further found] no analytical basis on which to set 
the proper level of H-1B visas, and that decisions to reduce 
or increase the cap on such visas are fundamentally political” 
(NRC 2001: 187).
Restructuring the INS into the DHS
Many of the issues and controversies discussed in the previous 
sections involved criticism of the INS. Calls for its restructur-
ing go back to legislative proposals that predate the enactment 
of IRCA. During the Iran-Embassy hostage crisis, when the 
INS could not establish even how many Iranian students were 
in the United States, many in Congress called for its restruc-
turing. The 1990 IMMACT established a Commission on 
Immigration Reform (CIR). The commission issued a report 
in 1997 calling for a restructuring of the INS (Meissner 2000: 
3; Gardner 2000: 7–8).
The Jordan Commission, as it became known, held hearings, 
consultations, and roundtable discussions. It defined four core 
functions of government in implementing immigration policy. 
It held that there were two systemic flaws in carrying out those 
functions: (1) mission overload and (2) fragmentation and dif-
fusion of responsibility. Among its several recommendations 
was a call for a newly created independent agency for immigra-
tion review (Gardner 2000: 17–21).
After the Jordan Commission report, several representatives 
introduced, in 1998, variations to restructure the INS, but those 

70	
Illegal Immigration
measures were put on hold when the House Judiciary Com-
mittee undertook its impeachment referral. In 1999, a new bill 
was introduced by Representatives Mike Rogers (R-MI) and 
Silvestre Reyes (D-TX) and Rep. Lamar Smith (R-TX), chair 
of the House Subcommittee on Immigration and Claims. This 
measure called for creating two bureaus: a Bureau of Immigra-
tion Services and a Bureau of Immigration Enforcement. Had 
it passed, the bill would have transferred to the director of the 
Bureau of Immigration Enforcement all functions—personnel, 
infrastructure, and funding—in support of the following pro-
grams: the Border Patrol, the Detention and Deportation pro-
gram, the Intelligence program, the Investigations program, 
and the Inspections program. It would also have established a 
chief financial officer within the bureau (Ries 2001). Another 
proposal to restructure INS came from the International Migra-
tion Policy Program of the Carnegie Endowment for Interna-
tional Peace (Papademetriou et al. 1999). There were several 
areas of consensus among these three proposals. All agreed that 
a dramatic structural change of the INS was needed. All agreed 
that a separation of law enforcement and service functions and 
chain of command was needed. All agreed on the need for 
drastic improvement in management. Finally, all agreed that 
the detention function, like asylum, needed to be separated 
­(Aleinikoff 2001: 22–27).
The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, made the pro-
posals moot. The failure of the INS to prevent the terrorists 
from entering the country, combined with the announce-
ment of approval, some six months after the attack, of visa 
applications for several of the hijackers to come to the United 
States to attend flight training schools, raised the level of 
rhetoric and the political support for—indeed, the demand 
for—something to be done. The Bush administration devel-
oped and announced a plan to establish a new cabinet-level 
DHS. Its creation involved the most extensive reorganization 
of the executive branch in decades. On November 19, 2002, 
President Bush signed the law establishing the new DHS. 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
71
It moved 22 agencies and 190,000 employees into the new 
department, the most massive reorganization of the federal 
government since the creation of the Department of Defense 
after World War II. The Congressional Budget Office placed 
the number of affected workers at 225,000, among the federal 
civilian workforce of 1.7 million, and pegged the cost of creat-
ing the new department at $3 billion. That was the cost of the 
restructuring per se, not the increased cost of additional secu-
rity technology and the like. Scholars at the Brookings Institu-
tion warned that with such a massive reorganization, the new 
department’s top management would need considerable time 
to be concerned with the integration of the agencies into a 
new management and budget system (Light 2002a). The 22 
agencies had varied financial management systems and 100 
personnel systems, and the new department managers had to 
negotiate contracts with 18 labor unions. Some of the agen-
cies moved to DHS were widely viewed as “worst-run agen-
cies” (the Customs Service, the INS, and the Border Patrol, in 
particular). INS investigators and Border Patrol agents were 
notoriously undertrained, overworked, and overstressed. The 
information management system of the INS was considered to 
be abysmal (Light 2002b).
Congressional debate on the measure generally followed 
party lines, with a majority of House Democrats voicing con-
cerns that the law gutted civil service protections for employees, 
seriously limited civil liberties, and gave companies involved 
in homeland security excessive protection from legal liability. 
They wanted airport security guards to be federal employees 
rather than private sector employees under contract with air-
port authorities or airline companies.
Among the 22 agencies moved to the new department were 
the Coast Guard, the Customs Service, the Border Patrol, the 
Secret Service, the Transportation Security Administration, 
and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. DHS sepa-
rates the functions of visa processing, immigration services, and 
Border Patrol (called Border Security in the new department).

72	
Illegal Immigration
Immigration and Related Policy Issues
Several public policy areas have important linkages to the illegal 
immigration problem. The high numbers of illegal immigrants, 
which have been rising exponentially since 1980, resulted in a 
dramatic demographic shift. In 1900, there were approximately 
one-half million Hispanics among the then total population of 
about 76 million (or 0.006%). The Census Bureau estimates 
that, by 2020, nearly 11 million, or 25 percent of the pro-
jected population of 438 million, will claim Hispanic descent. 
That dramatic shift has been and will continue to be fueled by 
immigration from Mexico and Central and Latin America, and 
by their higher birth rates compared to those of the general 
population. According to the Census Bureau, 82 percent of the 
increase in the Hispanic population will be from immigration. 
The Pew Hispanic Center projects an even higher rise in the 
Hispanic population—to 47 percent of the total U.S. popula-
tion by 2050. The Census Bureau projects the Asian popula-
tion to triple by 2050 (Fawcett and Carino 1987).
Financial impact studies that focus on the long-term effects 
of such demographic shifts found that immigrants contrib-
ute as much as $10 billion to the U.S. economy (Smith and 
Edmondson 1997; Simon 1989; Perez 2006). Reports by both 
the conservative Cato Institute and the liberal Pew Hispanic 
Center found that the increasing levels of immigration add 
increases to the GDP over 10 years, but do not hurt employ-
ment prospects for American workers (Cato Institute 2009a; 
Pew Hispanic Center 2012).
As is the case with its economic impact, there has long been 
controversy about the social impact of illegal immigration. 
Nearly every new group and every new wave of immigration, 
whether legal or illegal, arouses fear that it could or should not 
assimilate or that it was adversely affecting American society. 
The two elections of President Barack Obama only added to 
such fears, and calls from his ardent critics to “take back Amer-
ica.” One would not feel the need to “take back” something 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
73
unless one felt it was changing, and negatively so. After 9/11, 
suspicions of immigrants of Middle Eastern origin, and espe-
cially of Muslims, rose dramatically. Tensions between Asians, 
Black Americans, and Hispanics in the past have engendered 
riots and interracial violence (Bodner 1985; Foner and Freder-
ickson 2004; Portes and Rumbault 1990; Suarez-Orozco 1998; 
Zuniga and Hernandez-Leon 2005; Schultz 2000). The per-
ceived slower rate at which Mexicans shed Spanish and acquire 
fluency in English, for example, makes some question their 
incorporation (Borjas 2000). However, in the long term, every 
new immigrant group has assimilated into American society by 
the second or third generation (LeMay 2004: 36–45).
There is controversy over the health care and welfare impacts 
of illegal immigrants (Suarez-Orozco 1998; Simon 1989; 
Smith and Edmondson 1997). Illegal immigrants are far less 
likely to be insured and therefore rely on emergency rooms 
for nonemergency care, and studies have found that dispro-
portionately lower access to unpaid health care by illegal immi-
grants is adding to the cost of the public health care system 
(Kamau 2005), although that may change as the Affordable 
Care Act’s implementation increases health insurance coverage 
by nearly tens of millions of persons. However, at least one 
study found that immigrants pay more into the health care 
system than they take out (Simon 1989). Others are concerned 
that illegal immigrants bring with them higher incidences of 
certain diseases and they link them to the resurgence of diseases 
like tuberculosis and the spreading of HIV/AIDS, or even that 
bioterrorists will enter with the illegal flow to launch a biologi-
cal attack (LeMay 2013: 68).
Illegal immigrants affect public education by increasing 
demands placed on the public education system at the local 
levels, in terms of both their increased numbers and their need 
for bilingual education (Hayes 2012; Merino 2012; Miller 
2014; Kivisto and Faist 2010).
Finally, two issues related to young illegal immigrants occu-
pied public concern after 2001, and particularly after 2008, and 

74	
Illegal Immigration
its subsequent surge in deportations using expedited removal. 
Progressive forces in Congress have been introducing a bill annu-
ally since 2001 to enact what has become known as the Dream 
Act (Development, Relief, and Education of Alien Minors). Sen. 
Harry Reid, for example, then Senate majority leader, intro-
duced a bill in May 2011. In past years the measure had a degree 
of bipartisan support, but is currently adamantly opposed by 
Congressional Republicans as an amnesty measure and what 
they term “backdoor citizenship” (Heritage Foundation 2014).
In all of their various versions over a decade, the Dream Act 
proposals provide for conditional permanent residency to ille-
gal alien students of good moral character who graduated from 
U.S. schools, having lived in the United States for at least five 
years, completed two years of military service, or were enrolled 
in a two- to four-year institution of higher education. The 
Congressional Budget Office, in its markup of Senator Reid’s 
bill, estimated that it would reduce deficits by $1.4 billion over 
the period 2011–2020, and would increase government rev-
enues by a projected $2.3 billion over 10 years (Pew Hispanic 
Center 2013).
Conservative critics on the right of U.S. politics argue that 
one solution, or at least one approach, to deal with the issue is 
to end the birthright citizenship of persons born in the United 
States of illegal immigrants. They charge undocumented and 
unauthorized immigrant mothers come to the United States 
while pregnant in order to have their child be a native-born 
citizen. Several scholars argue Congress should abolish or 
modify birthright citizenship (in Erler and Stock 2012). Oth-
ers argue there is no legal basis to do so without an outright 
amendment of the Constitution, citing legal precedents such 
as the Fourteenth Amendment, enacted on July 9, 1968, the 
Naturalization Act of 1790 (1 Stat.103), and U.S. Federal Law 
(8 USC 1401). The birthright citizenship debate was heated 
up again in 2013 when Sen. David Vitter (R-LA) and Rep. 
Steve King (R-IA) introduced bills to end birthright citizen-
ship for children of unauthorized immigrants (Pew Hispanic 
Center 2010.)

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
75
Frustrated with Congressional inaction and entrenched 
opposition by the Republicans in both houses of Congress, Pres-
ident Obama used his executive authority to implement most 
of the provisions contained in the Dream Act. In 2012, there 
were 4 million unauthorized immigrant adults living with their 
U.S.-born children. Among those, 3.7 million, approximately 
1 million, people have temporary relief from deportation by 
two separate administration programs. Roughly 575,000 unau-
thorized immigrants aged 16 to 30 who were brought into the 
country by their parents are shielded under President Obama’s 
Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) (DHS 2014; 
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services 2014).
Similarly, a degree of protection was afforded to 5,000 chil-
dren, mainly from Central America, who came unaccompanied 
by adults, and have been granted “Temporary Protected Status” 
based on conditions in their home countries (El Salvador, Gua-
temala, and Honduras) that make it difficult and dangerous for 
them to return (DHS 2014; U.S. Citizenship and Immigration 
Services 2014).
President Obama followed that executive action with one 
called: “Deferred Action for Parents of Americans and Lawful 
Permanent Residents” (DAPA) on November 20, 2014. How-
ever, both orders have been put on legal hold from implemen-
tation by an order of Federal District Judge (Texas), Andrew 
Hanen, a 2002 Bush appointee. Prior to Judge Hanen’s restrain-
ing order, pending further judicial review by a full panel of the 
Circuit Court, 26 states had filed a suit opposing the DACA 
and DAPA actions as unconstitutional exercises of execu-
tive power. Twelve liberal states supported President Obama’s 
DACA and DAPA orders, as did the Major Cities Chiefs (of 
Police) Association (National Immigration Law Center 2015).
Solutions
As has hopefully been made clear by this chapter, illegal immi-
gration is a problem for which there is simply no easy solution, 
at least not in terms of congressional enactments of domestic 

76	
Illegal Immigration
legislation. The problem is what may be called a public pol-
icy conundrum. What makes for good (i.e., popular) politics 
makes for bad (i.e., ineffective or inefficient) policy and vice 
versa. The politics of illegal immigration reform has become 
all the more complicated and perhaps intractable by the spread 
of the illegal immigrant population across the nation, now to 
about 30 states. The shift in the composition of the post-1970 
immigration from European nations to those from Asia and 
Latin America exacerbate the conundrum nature of the issue.
Congressional enactments, especially since the 9/11 attacks, 
presidential executive orders or proclamations, and judicial rul-
ings have shaped the illegal immigration policy debate since 
1986. Illegal immigration reform measures are likely, as do vir-
tually all major policy decisions, to have significant intended 
and unintended consequences. Perhaps a greater measure of 
success regarding the illegal immigration reform problem will 
be involved in congressional enactment of Comprehensive 
Immigration Reform, such as S.744, a bill passed on June 27, 
2013, by the U.S. Senate by a bipartisan vote of 68 to 32, 
with 52 Democrats and 14 Republicans voting for the mea-
sure. However, to date, comprehensive immigration reform has 
been stymied in the House of Representatives by the refusal of 
Speaker John Boehner (R-OH) to even bring the House mea-
sure to a floor vote (Lee 2013).
References
Aleinikoff, T. Alexander. 2000. “Reorganizing the U.S. 
Immigration Function.” In Lydio Tomasi, ed., In Defense of the 
Alien, XXII. New York: Center for Migration Studies: 22–32.
Aleinikoff, T. Alexander. 2001. “Policing Boundaries: 
Migration, Citizenship, and the State.” In Gary Gerstle and 
John H. Mollinkopf, eds. E Pluribus Unum? Contemporary 
and Historical Perspectives on Immigrant Political Incorporation. 
New York: Russell Sage.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
77
Americans for Immigration Control. www.Immigration 
Control.com.
Bach, Robert L. 2000. “Looking Forward: New Approaches 
to Immigration Law Enforcement.” In Lydio Tomasi, ed. In 
Defense of the Alien, XXII. New York: Center for Migration 
Studies, 239–251.
Bean, Frank D., and Gillian Stevens. 2003. America’s 
Newcomers: Immigrant Incorporation and the Dynamics of 
Diversity. New York: Russell Sage.
Birkland, Thomas A. 2004. “The World Changed Today: 
Agenda-Setting and Policy Change in the Wake of 9/11 
Terrorist Attacks.” Review of Policy Research 21, no. 2 
(March): 179–201.
Bodnar, John. 1985. The Transplanted: A History of Immigrants 
in Urban America. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University 
Press.
Border Action Network. http:www.borderaction.org/. Accessed  
on February 20, 2015.
“Border Felony Case Questions Migrant Aid.” Denver Post, 
January 6, 2006: A-15.
Borjas, George J. 1994. “The Economics of 
Immigration.” Journal of Economic Literature XXXII 
(December):1667–1717.
Borjas, George. 1997. The New Americans: Economic, 
Demographic and Fiscal Effects of Immigration. 
Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences Press.
Borjas, George J., ed. 2000. Issues in the Economics of 
Immigration. Washington, DC: National Bureau of 
Economic Research.
Broder, David. 2002. “Security in the Homeland.” Washington 
Post Weekly Edition. September 2–8: 4.
Camarota, Steve A. 1999. Immigrants in the United States—1998: 
A Snapshot of America’s Foreign-Born Population. Washington,  
DC: Center for Immigration Studies.

78	
Illegal Immigration
Camarota, Steve A. 2005. Economy Slowed, but Immigration 
Didn’t: The Foreign-Born Population, 2000–2004. 
Washington, DC: Center for Immigration Studies.
Camarota, Steve A. 2006. “Immigration’s Impact on 
American Workers.” Testimony prepared for the House 
Judiciary Committee, August 29, 2006. Online at http://
cis.org/articles/2006/sactestimony082906.html.
Camarota, Steve A. 2012a. Amnesty and the Employment 
Picture for the Less Educated. http://www.cis.org/
amnesty-and-the-employment-picture-for-less-educated. 
December 2012. Accessed on February 20, 2015.
Camarota, Steve A. 2012b. “Socio-Demographic Variables of 
U.S.-Born Hispanics That May Matter Politically.” http://
www.cis.org/blog/17. Accessed on February 15, 2015.
Cato Institute. 2009a. “CATO Institute Finds 
$180 Billion Benefit to Legalizing Illegal Immigrants.” 
htpp://www.washingtonindependent.com. Accessed on 
February 15, 2015.
Cato Institute. 2009b. http://www.cato.org/measuring-the- 
economic-benefits-of-illegal-Immigrants. Accessed on 
February 15, 2015.
Center for Immigration Studies. 2004. “The High Cost  
of Cheap Labor.” http://www.cis.org/the-high-cost- 
of-cheap-labor. Accessed on February 15, 2015.
Center for Immigration Studies. 2006. http://www.cis.org/
article/2006/sactestimony/082906.html.
Center for Immigration Studies. 2012. http://www.cis.
org/amnesty-and-the-employment-Picture-for-the-less-
educated. Report of December 2012. Accessed on 
February 15, 2015.
Center for Immigration Studies. 2014. http://cis.org/vaughn/
contrary-to-administration-claims-only-tiny-fraction-of- 
‘surge’border-jumpers-deported. Accessed on February 15, 
2015.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
79
Center for Immigration Studies. 2015. http://www.cis.org/
node/5883. Accessed on February 15, 2015.
Chiswick, Barry R., ed. 1982. U.S. Immigration Issues and 
Policies. Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute.
Chiswick, Barry R. 2005. The Economics of Immigration: 
Selected Papers of Barry R.Chiswick. Cheltenham, UK: 
Edward Edgar Publishing.
Congressional Budget Office. 2007. http://www.cbo.gov/
sites/default/files/12–6-immigration.pdf. Accessed on 
February 15, 2015.
Congressional Budget Office. 2014. http://www.cbo.gov/sites/
default/files/documents/USBP%20stats%20FY2014%20
sector%20profile.dpt. Accessed on February 20,2015.
Crotty, William. 2003. “Presidential Policymaking in Crisis 
Situations: 9/11 and Its Aftermath.” Policy Studies Journal 
31, no. 3 (August): 451–465.
Crummy, Karen E. 2005. “The Reluctant Enforcer.” Denver 
Post, May 31: A-12.
Department for Professional Employees. 2013. “Guest Worker 
Programs and the STEM Workforce. Fact Sheet 2013.”  
AFL-CIO. http://dpeaflcio.org/guest-worker-programs-and- 
the-science-technology-engineering-and-mathematics- 
stem-workforce.
Department of Homeland Security. 2011. “Persons Obtaining 
Permanent Resident Status, Fiscal Years 1820–2010.” 
Yearbook of Immigration Statistics, 2010. Washington, DC: 
Department of Homeland Security.
Department of Homeland Security. 2013a. Characteristics 
of H-1B Specialty Occupation Workers, Fiscal Year 2012, 
Annual Report. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Homeland Security.
Department of Homeland Security. 2013b. http://www.dhs.
gov/sites/default/OIS-enforcements_ar_2013.pdf. Accessed 
on February 15, 2015.

80	
Illegal Immigration
Department of Homeland Security. 2014. http://www.dhs.
gov/sites/default/. . ./14_1120_memo_deferred_action.pdf.
Erler, Edward, and Margaret Stock. 2012. The Cost to 
Americans and America of Ending Birthright Citizenship. 
National Foundation for American Policy.
Ewing, Walter A. 2005. “The Economics of Necessity.” 
Immigration Policy in Focus, Report of the American Law 
Foundation 4, no. 3 (May).
Fawcett, James T., and Benjamin V. Carino. 1987. Pacific 
Bridges: The New Immigration from Asia and the Pacific 
Islands. New York: Center for Migration Studies.
Feere, Jon. 2010. “Birthright Citizenship in the United States: 
A Global Comparison.” Center for Immigration Studies, 
August. http://www.cis.org/birthright-citizenship. Accessed 
on February 20, 2015.
Fix, Michael, and Jeffrey Passel. 2002. Lessons of Welfare 
Reform: Immigrant Integration.” The Urban Institute, 
Presentation, March 5, 2002.
Foner, Nancy, and George M. Frederickson. 2004. Not Just 
Black and White: Historical And Contemporary Perspectives 
on Immigration, Race, and Ethnicity in the United States. 
New York: Russell Sage.
Francis, Samuel T. 2001. America Extinguished: Mass 
Immigration and the Disintegration of American Culture. 
Monterey, VA: Americans for Immigration Control.
Gallup. 2014. http://www.gallup.com/poll/1660/
immigration.aspx. Accessed on February 15, 2015.
Gardner, Robert. 2000. “Restructuring the INS: Draft Design 
Proposal.” In Lydio Tomasi, ed., In Defense of the Alien, 
XXII. New York: Center for Migration Studies.
General Accounting Office. 1995. Illegal Aliens: National 
Net Cost Estimates Vary Widely. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
81
General Accounting Office. 2000a. H1-B Foreign Workers: 
Better Controls Needed to Help Employers and Protect 
Workers. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing 
Office.
General Accounting Office. 2000b. Illegal Aliens: 
Opportunities Exist to Improve Expedited Removal Process. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
General Accounting Office. 2004. Overstay Tracking: A Key 
Component of Homeland Security and a Layered Defense. 
GAO-04–82. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing 
Office.
Gerstle, Gary, and John Mollenkopf, eds. 2001. E Pluribus 
Unum? Contemporary and Historical Perspectives on 
Immigrant Political Incorporation. New York: Russell Sage.
Gorman, Siobhan. 2004. “The Endless Flood.” National 
Journal 6 (February 7): 378–384.
Gotcham, Benjamin, and Rutilio Martinez. 2005. “Mexicans 
in the U.S. Send Billions Home—And It All Comes Back.” 
Denver Post, February 19: C-13.
Halperin, Morton H. 2003. “Safe at Home.” American 
Prospect 14, no. 10 (November): 36–40.
Hayes, Patrick, ed. 2012. The Making of Modern Immigration: 
An Encyclopedia of People and Ideas. Santa Barbara, CA: 
ABC-CLIO.
Haynes, Wendy. 2004. “Seeing Around Corners: Crafting the 
New Department of Homeland Security.” Review of Policy 
Research 21, no. 3 (May): 369–396.
Heritage Foundation. 2014. “The Dream Act in the NDAA:  
Wrong for National and Homeland Security.” http:// 
www.heritage.org/research/reports/2014/the-dream- 
Act-in-the-NDAA. Accessed on February 20, 2015.
“House of Cards? Point-Counterpoint Commentary.” Denver 
Post, February 19, 2005: C-12.

82	
Illegal Immigration
Huddle, Donald. 1993. The Costs of Immigration. 
Washington, DC: Carrying Capacity Network.
Hyong, Y. 2003. “Building a Department of Homeland 
Security: The Management Theory.” Public Manager 32, 
no. 11 (Spring): 55–57.
Information Plus. 2006. Immigration and Illegal Aliens: 
Burden or Blessing? Farmington Hills, MI: Thomson/Gale.
Jacobsen, Gary C. 2003. “Terror, Terrain and Turnout: 
Exploring the 2002 Midterm Elections.” Political Science 
Quarterly 118, no. 1 (Spring): 1–23.
Jasso, G. et al. 2000. “The New Immigrant Pilot Survey 
(NIS-P): Overview and New Findings about U.S. Legal 
Immigrants at Admission.” Demography 37: 127–138.
“Jobs, Impact Ample in Shadow Economy.” Denver Post, 
December 4, 2005: A-12.
Kamau, Pius. 2005. “Illegal Immigrants Jam Our Emergency 
Rooms.” Denver Post, December 22, 2005: B-7.
Kemp, Roger. 2003. “Homeland Security: Trends in 
America.” National Civic Review 92, no. 4 (winter): 45–53.
Kivisto, Peter, and Thomas Faist. 2010. Beyond a Border: The 
Causes and Consequences of Contemporary Immigration. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publication.
Krauss, Elisha. 2003. “Building a Bigger Bureaucracy: What 
the Department of Homeland Security Won’t Do.” Public 
Manager 32, no. 1 (Spring): 57–59.
Krauss, Erich, and Alex Pacheco. 2004. On the Line: Inside  
the U.S. Border Patrol. New York: Citadel Press.
Lamm, R. D., and G. Imhoff. 1985. The Immigration Time 
Bomb. New York: Truman Tally.
Lee, Esther Yu-Hsi. 2013. “Breaking: Senate passes 
historic immigration reform.” ThinkProgress. http://
www.thinkprogress.org/immigration/2013/27/
comprehensive-immigration-reform.Accessed on 
February 21, 2015.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
83
Lee, Margaret. 2006. U.S. Citizenship of Persons Born in the 
United States of Alien Parents. Congressional Research 
Service Report, ilw.com. Accessed on May 30, 2010.
Lehrer, Eli. 2004. “The Homeland Security Bureaucracy.” 
Public Interest 1156 (Summer): 71–86.
Leinwand, Donna. 2005. “Illegals Going Back by the Planeload.”  
USA Today, February 16, 2005. http://usatoday30 
.usatoday.com/news/nation/2005–02–16-illegals-
deportation_x.htm.
LeMay, Michael. 1994. Anatomy of a Public Policy: The Reform 
of Contemporary American Immigration Law. Westport, CT: 
Praeger.
LeMay, Michael. 2001. “Assessing Assimilation: Cultural 
and Political Integration of Immigrants and Their 
Descendants.” In Lydio Tomasi, ed., In Defense of the Alien, 
XXIII. New York: Center for Migration Studies, 163–176.
LeMay, Michael. 2004. U.S. Immigration: A Reference 
Handbook. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
LeMay, Michael. 2006. Guarding the Gates: Immigration and 
National Security. Westport, CT: Praeger Security International.
LeMay, Michael. 2007. Illegal Immigration: A Reference 
Handbook. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
LeMay, Michael., ed. 2013. Transforming America: Perspectives 
on Immigration, Vol. 3: Immigration and Superpower Status: 
1945 to the Present. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Light, Paul C. 2002a. Homeland Security Will Be Hard to Manage. 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Center for Public 
Service.
Light, Paul C. 2002b. “Homeland Security Debate on Hold.” 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Center for Public 
Service, Interpreter Releases, August 25.
Los Angeles Times. http://www.latimes.com/la-ed-birthright_ 
citizenship_in_the_United_States. Accessed on 
February 20, 2015.

84	
Illegal Immigration
Manning, Bayless. 1977. “The Congress, the Executive 
and Intermestic Affairs: Three Proposals.” Foreign Affairs 
(January), Online, http://www.foreignaffairs.com/
articles/27035/bayless-manning.
Marshall, Ray. 2009. Immigration for Shared Prosperity—A 
Framework for Comprehensive Reform. Washington, DC: 
Economic Policy Institute.
Martin, David. 2000. “Expedited Removal, Detention, and 
Due Process.” In Lydio Tomasi, ed. In Defense of the Alien, 
XXII. New York: Center for Migration Studies: 161–180.
Martin, Philip. 2001. “Temporary Workers at the Top and 
Bottom of the Labor Market.” In Lydio Tomasi, ed. In 
Defense of the Alien, XXIII. New York: Center for Migration 
Studies, 44–55.
McCarthy, Kevin F., and George Vernez, 1997. Immigration 
in a Changing Economy: California’s Experience. Santa 
Monica, CA: Rand Corporation.
Meissner, Doris. 2000. “Management Challenge and Program 
Risks.” In Lydio Tomasi, Ed., In Defense of the Alien, XXII. 
New York: Center for Migration Studies, 1–5.
Meissner, Doris. 2003. “Senate Testimony of Doris  
Meissner.” http://www.hsgac.senate.gov/download/?id- 
00030998-d4df-4aa-aaa69. Accessed on February 15, 2005.
Merino, Noel. 2012. Illegal Immigration. Boston, MA: 
Cengage/Greenhaven Press.
Miller, Debra. 2014. Immigration. Boston, MA: Cengage/
Greenhaven Press.
Minuteman HQ. http://www.minutemanhq.com/CO. 
Colorado. Accessed on February 20, 2015.
Minuteman Project. http://www.minutemanproject.com. 
Accessed on February 20, 2015.
Moffett, Dan. 2015. “What Is a Guest Worker Program?” 
http://immigration.about.com/od/Browse-Topic/f/
What-Is-A-Guest-Worker-Program.htm.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
85
Moore, Stephen. 1998. A Fiscal Portrait of the Newest 
Americans. Washington, DC: National Immigration Forum 
and the CATO Institute.
Mosisa, Abraham. 2002. “The Role of the Foreign-Born 
Workers in the U.S. Economy.” Monthly Labor Review, 
May 2002 (3): 1–14.
National Association of State Budget Officers. 2005. http://
www.nasbo.org/. Accessed on February 15, 2015.
National Conference of State Legislatures. 2005. “Immigrant 
Policy: News from the States, 2005.” http://www.ncsl.org/
programs/immig/immigstatelegis080105html. Accessed on 
July 20, 2006.
National Immigration Forum. 1998. Fiscal Impact of  
the Newest Americans. Washington, DC: National 
Immigration Forum and the Cato Institute.
National Immigration Law Center. 2014. “Deferred Action 
for Parents of Americans and Lawful Permanent Residents.” 
Online at http://www.nilc.org/dapa&daca.html. Accessed 
on February 22, 2015.
National Research Council. 2001. Building a Workforce  
for the Information Economy. Washington, DC: National 
Academy.
Nevins, Joseph. 2001. Operation Gatekeeper: The Rise of the 
“Illegal Alien” and the Making of the U.S.-Mexico Boundary. 
New York: Routledge.
New York Times. http://www.nyt/com/2995/08/19/
national/19ranch.html.
O’Beirne, Kated. 2002. “Bureaucratic Nightmare on the  
Way.” National Review, Public opinion page, Press Enterprise.  
Riverside, CA: August 25: D-1.
O’Hanlon, Michael E. 2005. Defense Strategy for the 
Post-Saddam Era. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Obsatz, Sharyn. 2002a. “Between Two Worlds.” Press 
Enterprise. Riverside, CA: August 27, 2002: B-5.

86	
Illegal Immigration
Obsatz, Sharyn. 2002b. “Vandals Turn Desert Deadly,” Press 
Enterprise. Riverside, CA: September 14: A-1, 10.
Papademetriou, Demetrios, Alexander Aleinkopf, and D. W. 
Meyers. 1999. Reorganizing the U.S. Immigration Function: 
Toward a New Framework for Accountability. Washington, 
DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
Passel, Jeffrey S., and Rebbecca L. Clark. 1994. How Much Do 
Immigrants Really Cost? Washington, DC: Urban Institute.
Perez, Miguel. 2006. “Hire Education: Immigrants Aren’t 
Taking Jobs from Americans.” Chicago Sun Times 
(August 22).
Pew Hispanic Center. 2005. Report of May, 2005. 
“More Jobs for New Immigrants but at Lower Wages.” 
Washington, DC: Pew Hispanic Center: 1–22.
Pew Hispanic Center. 2010. “Unauthorized Immigrants and 
Their U.S.-Born Children.” Pew Hispanic Center.
Pew Hispanic Center. 2012. “A Portrait of Unauthorized 
Immigrants in the U.S.” http://phc.org/portrait-of- 
unauthorized-immigrants-in-u.s. December 6, 2012. 
Accessed on February 20, 2015.
Pew Hispanic Center. 2013. http://www.pewhispanic.org/
2013/12/18/3-views-about-unauthorized-immigrants-an
d-deportation-worries. Accessed on February 20, 2015.
Pew Hispanic Center. 2014a. http://www.pewhispanic.
org/2014/09/03/as-growth-stalls-unauthorized- 
population-becomes-more-stable. Accessed on 
January 26, 2015.
Pew Hispanic Center. 2014b. http://www.pewresearch.org/
fact-tank/2014/12/30/u-s-Apprehensions-of-Mexicans- 
fall-to-historic-lows. Accessed on February 15, 2015.
Pollack, Andrew. 2005. “2 Illegal Immigrants Win Arizona 
Ranch in Court,” New York Times, August 19, 2005. http://
www.nytimes.com/2005/08/19/national/19ranch.html.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
87
Portes, Alejandro, and Ruben G. Rumbaut, eds. 2001. 
Ethnicities: Children of Immigrants in America. New York: 
Russell Sage.
Ries, Lora. 2001. “An Update from Capitol Hill.” In Lydio 
Tomasi, ed. In Defense of the Alien, XXIII. New York: 
Center for Migration Studies.
Rumbaut, Ruben G. 2000. “Transformation: The 
Post-Immigrant Generation in an Age of Diversity.” In 
Lydio Tomasi, ed. In Defense of the Alien, XXIII. New York: 
Center for Migration Studies.
Salzman, H. et al. 2013. Guestworkers in the High-Skill U.S. 
Labor Market: An Analysis of Supply, Employment, and Wage 
Trends. Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute.
Schuck, Peter H. 2009. “Taking Immigration Federalism 
Seriously.” The Forum 7, no. 3: 4–14.
Schultz, Jeffrey D. 2000. Encyclopedia of Minorities in 
American Politics: African Americans and Asians Americans. 
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Simcox, David. 1997. Measuring the Fallout: The Cost of the 
IRCA Amnesty after 10 Years. Washington, DC: Center for 
Immigration Studies.
Simon, Julian L. 1989. The Economic Consequences of 
Immigration. Boston: Basil Blackwell.
Singer, Audrey. 2004. “Welfare Reform and Immigrants: 
A Policy Review.” In Philip Kresedemas and Anna Aparicio, 
eds. Immigrants, Welfare, Reform, and the Poverty of Policy. 
Westport, CT: Praeger Press.
Smith, James P., and Barry Edmonston, eds. 1998. The New 
Americans: Studies of the Economic, Demographic, and Fiscal 
Effects of Immigration. Washington, DC: National Research 
Council, National Academy of Sciences Press.
“Smuggling Deaths Net Convictions.” Denver Post, March 25, 
2005: A-1, 16.

88	
Illegal Immigration
Social Security Trust Fund. 1998. Board of Trustees Report. 
Washington, DC: SSTF, U.S. Government Printing Office.
Southern Poverty Law Center. 2013. “Close to Slavery: 
Guestworker Programs in the United States.” http://www 
.splcenter.org/get-informed/publications/close-to- 
slavery-guestworker-programs-in-the-united-states. 
Accessed on February 15, 2015.
Spencer, Jim. 2005. “Immigration Economics vs. Emotion.” 
Denver Post, December 14, 2005: B-1.
Stevens, Gillian. 2001. “U.S. Immigration Policy and 
Language Characteristics of Immigrants.” In Lydio Tomasi, 
ed. In Defense of the Alien, XXIII. New York: Center for 
Migration Studies.
“Study on Day Laborers Tallies Woes of 117,600.” Denver 
Post, January 13, 2006: A-12.
Suarez-Orozco, Marcelo M., ed. 1998. Crossings: Mexican 
Immigration in Inter-Disciplinary Perspectives. Cambridge, 
MA: David Rockefeller Center for Latin American Studies, 
Harvard University Press.
Suro, Roberto. 2015 “California Dreaming: The New 
Dynamism in Immigration Federalism and Opportunities 
for Inclusion on a Variegated Landscape.” Journal Migration 
and Human Security 3, no. 1 (2015): 1–25.
Time, Inc. 2010. “Arizona’s Next Immigration Target: 
Children of Illegals.” Time.com/. June 11, 2010.
United States Bureau of the Census. 2010. American 
Community Survey. Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office.
United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.  
“Occupational Employment and Wages.” Washington,  
DC: Bureau of Labor Statistics, May 2004–May 2012.
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services. 2014. 
“Consideration of Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals 
by Fiscal Year, Quarter, Intake, Biometrics, and Case 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
89
Status: 2012–2014. FY2014, 3rd Quarter. http://www.
uscis.gov/sites/default/files/USCIS/Resources/Reports%20
and%20Studies/Immigration%20Forms%20Data/All%20
Form%20Types/DACA/DACA_fy2014_qtr3.pdf.
Vernez, George, Robert Schoeni and Kevin McCarthy. 1996. 
The Mixed Economic Progress of Immigrants. Santa Monica, 
CA: The Rand Corporation.
Wolbrecht, Christina, and Rodney E. Hero. 2005. The Politics 
of Democratic Inclusion. Philadelphia: Temple University 
Press.
Wolchok, Carole Leslie. 2000. “Where Do We Go from 
Here? The Future of the Expedited Removal Process.” In 
Lydio Tomasi, ed. In Defense of the Alien, XXII. New York: 
Center for Migration Studies.
Zuniga, Victor, and Ruben Hernandez-Leon, eds. 2005. New 
Destinations: Mexican Immigration to the United States. New 
York: Russell Sage.


91
Introduction
This chapter presents eight original essays on the topic of illegal 
immigration from a variety of viewpoints from all sides of the issue. 
It gives voice to activists, both pro and con on the issue and on ille-
gal immigration reform measures, and from various disciplinary 
perspectives, allowing the reader to hear viewpoints beyond and 
different from the expertise of the author. They are presented here 
in point/counterpoint arrangement.
On Hospitality to the Stranger: Some Moral 
Implications of Immigration Reform
The Rev. Canon Pablo Ramos
This is the truth of stewardship: the service to others, espe-
cially the service to our neighbors in the same form that it was 
thought of in the Old Testament, and as Jesus thought of it 
in the parable of the Good Samaritan, takes us to the practice 
of stewardship itself, especially in the exercise of the charity 
to others, in particularly to the immigrants who come to this 
3	
Perspectives
A U.S. Customs and Border Protection Air and Marine agent looks for 
signs of illegal activity along a trail while on patrol near the Texas-Mexico 
border, September 5, 2014. Since illegal immigration spiked in the Rio 
Grande Valley in the summer of 2014, the Border Patrol dispatched more 
agents, the Texas Department of Public Safety sent more troopers, and 
Governor Rick Perry deployed as many as 1,000 guardsmen to the area. 
(AP Photo/Eric Gay)

92	
Illegal Immigration
country after a long journey of suffering in search of better 
perspectives of life. These people are not statistics or objects of 
political agreements or new laws that do not help them in any 
way. There are our brothers and sisters.
I remember hearing someone say, “Hospitality opens the 
door of a community into something out of the ordinary.” It 
is not coincidence that hospitality and hospital come from the 
same word in Latin—both lead to the same result: healing, 
health. When you open the door to anyone you are sending 
this message, “You are important to God and to me.” You may 
be thinking that what you are saying is this, “come to visit us.” 
But what the stranger hears is, “I am worthy.”
Today men and women live on a constant pilgrimage (espe-
cially the immigrants coming to this country) as lone travel-
ers in search of a moment of peace, fresh water, and a sign of 
encouragement that allow us to keep walking in search of the 
ultimate freedom (the collect for peace says to serve God is 
perfect freedom). For this reason the stewardship of hospitality 
invites us to get rid of the fear and turn our communities into 
places where our hospitality reigns. Hospitality is a virtue that 
allows us to break the narrowness of our fears and to open our 
home to the stranger with the intuition that salvation comes in 
the form of a weary traveler.
We are people easily dominated by the negative power of 
fear—fear pervades most recondite corners of our being to the 
point of controlling our choices and decisions. Fear is a cruel 
being that has taken hold of us and our communities. Fear 
makes us pull away, become fearful and distant to the stranger. 
Fear prompts us to try to close or fortify our borders. Fear takes 
away our ability to host in simplicity.
Our society seems to be wrapped in an alarming rate of 
growing violence and aggression—leading us to live defen-
sively. Communities that live attached to their property are 
inclined to be suspicious of the one that approaches us. But 
our vocation in the midst of this world is to receive what we 
see as a hostile being as a brother, the enemy as a friend. We are 

	
Perspectives	
93
called to create a place of no fear or worries; a place where we 
can give the grace of the common union.
Historically, churches have been concerned with the con-
struction of temples: places for song, conferences, and exhor-
tations. Places where some believers can take their sacrifice 
and offerings. Places where believers hope to find prosperity, 
psychological orientation and fight against the demons that 
overwhelm them. Places where some are proud of what they 
built and where they get motivated to build more. It is in the 
temple of today, just as it was in the Old Testament, where 
some believe God lives and forgiveness can be found.
The forgiveness that Jesus offers serves as an alternative to 
include anyone of any ethnicity, any age, any gender, any sexual 
orientation. For example, when Jesus presented his authority to 
forgive sins he did it in conflict with the authority of the time, 
in the temple, and against Jewish law. Jesus did not proclaim 
another temple, but an alternative. Jesus offers his forgiveness 
in homes, at the table, in friendship with the sinners.
God provides for the life of his children. Through the bless-
ing of the Lord, we know that to host those who come to us 
pleases the Lord. I want to emphasize that hospitality is funda-
mental to and an integral tool of stewardship, and that we need 
to focus on two characteristics of hospitality. First, hosting a 
stranger is to host the Lord. Second, the hospitality that we 
offer must be born from the richness of our heart and not only 
from our checkbook. The Letter to the Hebrews gives us a great 
stimulus that could be something of value for the stewardship 
of hospitality: “Do not neglect to show hospitality to strangers, 
for by doing that some have entertained angels without know-
ing it” (Hebrews 13:2).
In the New Testament numerous accounts value hospitality 
to the stranger as hospitality to the Lord. Today, in the church 
at the Eucharistic Table, when strangers and foreigners are wel-
comed and recognized, they become members of the commu-
nity. Jesus’s encounter with the Samaritan woman at the well 
suggests the notion of hospitality and how to host the Lord in 

94	
Illegal Immigration
your life. Like the Samaritan woman who comes to recognize 
who Jesus is, we as well, can hear this good news and recog-
nize a God that comes to us through our encounters with the 
stranger. This story encourages us to be aware of our own will-
ingness or neglect to offer hospitality to the “other.” Through 
the other God opens us to his presence.
The stewardship of hospitality invites us to recognize that in 
receiving the stranger we receive the Lord and the One that is 
loved by the Lord. The hospitality that we are invited to give is 
simple: it comes fundamentally from affirming the value of a 
person, even though in this action the Lord is not recognized. 
A story illustrates a piece of this truth.
An old rabbi asked his students one day when they could say 
the night was over and the day begun. “Is it,” a student 
responded, “when you can see an animal at a distance and tell 
whether it is a sheep or a dog?” “No,” replied the rabbi. 
Another asked, “Is it when you can see a tree in the distance 
and tell whether it is a fig tree or a palm tree?” “No,” replied 
the rabbi. The students were puzzled and no other responses 
were proposed. “So, what is it?” they asked. “It is when looking 
at the face of the stranger, you see him as a friend. Because if 
you don’t see a friend, it is still dark.”
The symbolic meaning of the kiss on the cheek as a personal sign 
of welcome is that our hospitality should be personal—born 
from the heart. It is not enough simply to indicate a location 
and provide a brochure or bulletin. We must pay special atten-
tion to the person.
Conclusion
In this essay I am not saying that hospitality is always a pleasant 
experience. The exercise of hosting or receiving is not always 
easy. Patience and good will can often be tested in the practice 
of hospitality. Instead, I want to re-emphasize the importance 

	
Perspectives	
95
of the service of hospitality. In this essay I have suggested two 
related and important ideas in relationship to hospitality that 
have biblical foundations. First, in hosting the stranger we 
receive angels, which means the presence of the Lord among 
us. This must be done with faith and respect. Second, our hos-
pitality should be personal, sincere and cheerful. What makes 
Christian hospitality amazing is the fact that it is offered with-
out any pretentions. Christian hospitality is spontaneous. Our 
hospitality does not seek recognition in doing a good deed or 
for fulfilling an obligation—it is simply a pleasure. We live to 
be able to express this type of hospitality. This is the essence of 
our spiritual life. Who knows what the Lord wants to do in the 
lives of His people in this place and among us? As Jesus, with 
the help of the Holy Spirit, let’s be hospitable disciples.
Many politicians today describe the United States as a Chris-
tian nation. If that is so, then we must be a nation that wel-
comes the stranger. As we grapple with proposals to amend our 
immigration laws, we must remember that there are, indeed, 
moral as well as legal implications to immigration reform.
The Rev. Canon Pablo Ramos has worked in the Diocese of Utah 
since 1998, and currently serves as Canon for the Latino Ministry, 
Vicar of San Esteban, El Buen Pastor and San Francisco; he is also 
cochair of the antiracism committee.
Examining the Adequacy and Enforcement  
of U.S. Immigration Laws
Jessica Vaughan
Current immigration law enforcement is in a state of collapse. 
The vast majority of illegal aliens face no threat of deportation 
regardless of when or how they arrived. New illegal arrivals con-
tinue from land, air, and sea; and the size of the illegal population 
stopped declining several years ago. The Obama administra-
tion’s deliberate dismantling of enforcement has imposed enor-
mous costs on American communities in the form of lost job 

96	
Illegal Immigration
opportunities and stagnant wages for native workers, higher 
tax bills to cover increasing outlays for social services and ben-
efits, compromised national security, and needless public safety 
threats. One of the most urgent tasks now before Congress is to 
restore integrity to our immigration laws by ending the massive 
catch and release scheme put into place by the Obama adminis-
tration, implementing more effective deterrents to illegal settle-
ment, and providing the tools for more efficient enforcement.
Statistics published by the Department of Homeland Secu-
rity (DHS) show clearly that over the last several years, even as 
illegal border crossings have grown and the number of overstay-
ing visitors is large, the number of deportations has plummeted 
and the number of illegal aliens allowed to stay and work in the 
United States has increased. The drop in enforcement activity 
has become particularly acute since the president’s executive 
action went into effect in late November 2014.
Since 2011, the number of illegal crossers apprehended by 
the Border Patrol has increased by 43 percent, from 340,000 
to 487,000 (Simanski 2014). It is generally believed that bor-
der apprehensions are an indicator of the number of attempted 
illegal border crossings, and that approximately half of those 
who attempt illegal entry are successful. U.S. Customs and 
Border Protection (CBP) states that “The uptick is largely due 
to the increase in unaccompanied children and family units 
who turned themselves in to Border Patrol agents in South 
Texas this summer.” These cases totaled 137,000 in 2014 alone.
Although the apprehension statistics are concerning enough, 
they do not tell the whole story. CBP has yet to disclose how 
these cases were disposed of—that is, how many of those 
apprehended were removed or returned, and how many were 
released into the United States? Of those released, how many 
have concluded their immigration proceedings or absconded 
from those proceedings? For example, separate government 
statistics indicate that only a few hundred of the surge arrivals 
have been deported (Vaughan 2014).

	
Perspectives	
97
It is generally accepted that 40 percent of the illegally resid-
ing population is comprised of aliens who overstayed beyond 
the time or purpose authorized by their status. According to 
an unpublished report prepared by DHS based on arrival and 
departure records, in 2012 approximately 263,000 aliens who 
were admitted on B-1 or B-2 visitor status or under the Visa 
Waiver Program were identified as having stayed in the country 
beyond their authorized duration of stay (DHS 2012). Over-
stayers are not a high priority for deportation. In 2013, only 
3 percent (11,596 out of 368,485) of the aliens deported by 
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) were over-
stays (ICE 2013).
Total deportations of all three DHS immigration enforce-
ment agencies (Border Patrol, ICE, and CBP-OFO) have 
declined 37  percent since 2009, from 978,000 to 616,000. 
This has occurred despite an increasing number of apprehen-
sions and continuing overstay arrivals (DHS Office of Statistics 
Annual Reports).
The number of ICE deportations from the interior has 
dropped 58 percent since the peak in 2008, from 236,000 to 
102,000 in 2014 (Vaughan October 2014).
The number of criminal aliens deported from the interior has 
declined by 43 percent since 2012, from 153,000 to 87,000, 
despite increases in the number of criminal aliens encountered 
and screened by officers. In 2014, ICE deported 69,000 fewer 
criminals from U.S. communities than it did in 2012. This has 
occurred despite the fact that ICE has the ability to identify more 
criminal aliens than ever before, thanks to the nationwide imple-
mentation of the Secure Communities program, which links the 
DHS databases to the national fingerprint matching system.
In 2013, ICE released 36,007 convicted criminal aliens from 
its custody (Vaughan May 2014). Of these, 193 had homicide  
convictions, 426 had sexual assault convictions, and 303 had 
kidnapping convictions. As of September 2014, 5,700 of them 
(16 percent) had been arrested again for subsequent offenses, 

98	
Illegal Immigration
and 1,000 have been convicted again. ICE has taken only 
1,600 back into custody (DHS Records 2015). There were 
174,283 convicted criminals with pending deportation pro-
ceedings who were at large, released by ICE (DHS Secretary 
Johnson 2014).
Moreover, many convicted criminal aliens are allowed to 
walk out of ICE custody without being enrolled in a program 
of supervision. ICE officers report that fewer aliens are being 
enrolled in the Intensive Supervision Appearance Program 
(ISAP), in which criminal aliens wear an electronic monitor-
ing bracelet and check in frequently with monitors. While 
once this program was used for lower level offenders, now it is 
rarely used.
The number of aliens who have received final orders of 
removal but who are still in the United States has risen to 
nearly 900,000 as of September 2014 (Ibid). This number has 
risen by 40,000 in just two years. They were never a priority 
for enforcement under this administration, but now the presi-
dent’s recent executive action specifically nullified all removal 
orders and enforcement actions involving “non-criminals” 
taken before January 1, 2014.
References
Department of Homeland Security. 2012. “Nonimmigrant 
Overstays, Fiscal Year 2012, Unpublished report reviewed 
by author.
Department of Homeland Security. 2015. DHS Records 
provided to Sen. Churck Grassley on January 30, 2015.
Department of Homeland Security, Annual Reports, Office of 
Immigration Statistics Yearbooks and Annual Reports.
ICE. 2014. Weekly Departures and Detention Report, 
September 22, 2014.
ICE Removals 2013, obtained by FOIA request by author, 
includes those labeled non-Immigrants, Border Crossing 

	
Perspectives	
99
Card Holders, temporary workers, students, and Other 
categories of admission.
Johnson, Jeh. 2014. Testimony of the DHS Secretary 
before the House Homeland Security Committee on 
December 2, 2014.
Simanski, John. 2014. “Immigration Enforcement Actions, 
2013.” Department of Homeland Security, CBP Border 
Security Report, Fiscal Year 2014.
Vaughan, Jessica. M. 2014. Testimony before the House 
Immigration Subcommittee, December 10, 2014.
Vaughan, Jessica. May 2014. “ICE Documents Detail 36,700 
Criminal Alien Releases in 2013.” Center for Immigration 
Studies.
Vaughan, Jessica. October 2014. “ICE Enforcement Collapses 
Further in 2014.” Center for Immigration Studies.
Jessica M. Vaughan serves as Director of Policy Studies for 
the Center for Immigration Studies, a Washington, D.C.–based 
research institute that examines the impact of immigration on 
American society and educates policy makers and opinion leaders 
on immigration issues. She has been with the center since 1992, 
and her area of expertise is immigration policy and operations, 
covering topics such as visa programs, immigration benefits, and 
immigration law enforcement.
Should the United States Enact Tougher Laws to Stem 
Illegal Immigration?
Karen K. Clark
The United States does not need to enact tougher laws to stem 
illegal immigration. Myths and politically infused ideas about 
illegal immigration create an emotionally charged environment 
that promotes segregation, racism, and divided communities 
while undermining deliberate discussion about productivity, 
economic development, and the exploitation of labor groups.

100	
Illegal Immigration
Much of the immigration controversy reflects the relation-
ship between the United States and Mexico. While there are 
significant numbers of illegal European and Canadian immi-
grants who work “off-the-books” without paying taxes or pro-
cessing appropriate paperwork for long term stay (roughly 
40 percent of unauthorized immigrants), many view the issue 
of illegal immigration as simply a problem of allowing Mexi-
cans to cross the southern border illegally.
Modern efforts to limit immigration reflect misunderstand-
ings or ignorance of historical patterns. Those who advocate 
stricter limits ignore the fact that their European heritage reflects 
its own pattern of illegal immigration. Between the 16th and 
20th centuries, millions of Europeans arrived claiming lands 
that belonged to the indigenous population. Violence, repeated 
violations of treaties and laws, and even genocidal efforts were 
used consistently against native peoples. European immigrants 
felt entitled to enter occupied nations and take control of their 
lands and resources. Many U.S. national parks were estab-
lished after the forced relocation of the indigenous people. This 
removal was not an unfortunate aberration. Rather, it was one 
of countless acts leading to the development of modern Amer-
ica. Manifest Destiny was more than a political declaration; it 
was a deeply held belief those of Northern European ancestry 
held that did not limit their migration, while those of Mexi-
can, Chinese, and Native American ancestry were expected to 
abide by a myriad of laws and government efforts to limit their 
migration and settlement.
Throughout American history immigration policies favored 
those of European descent, although there had been immigra-
tion waves of nonwhites when their labor fulfilled a need, such 
as the construction of railroads. Unfortunately, the history of 
immigration policy has exhibited a racial bias that continues to 
shape current debate.
Both Mexican and Chinese immigrants were used to con-
struct railroads throughout the United States. Chinese labor-
ers were paid less than half the wages of white laborers during 

	
Perspectives	
101
the construction of the Pacific and Transcontinental Railroads. 
Mexican immigrants were brought in to work as railroad main-
tenance workers in the Bracero Program during World War II. 
Once the troops returned, labor shortages dissipated and the 
workers who had been here legally became, if they stayed, ille-
gal immigrants. The United States developed a closed border 
policy in the 1920s. Prior to then, the U.S.-Mexican border 
was open and people from both sides moved freely into and out 
of each other’s respective countries.
Since the closed border policies developed, immigration 
strategies have reflected economic conditions, but the problem 
isn’t as simple as greater opportunities for economic prosperity 
luring migrants to the United States. Acknowledging that cor-
porations and large-scale business alliances create migration is 
paramount to understanding resettlement trends.
Such business practices are not colonial rules. They reflect 
a political reality that irrevocably stimulates human displace-
ment. Migration results inevitably. Contemporary pronounce-
ments against immigration fail to take into account the fact 
that the United States creates migration patterns while laying 
blame on those whose environments are altered. America is the 
world’s largest consumer culture yet it fails to recognize the 
implications of this fact. Consequences of mass consumption 
require alterations to lifestyles elsewhere and create demand 
for cheap labor and production within U.S. borders. The idea 
that trade can be facilitated cheaply and quickly across borders 
through policy like the North American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA) while pretending that labor and human migration 
patterns will not follow suit is illogical and impractical.
Reducing immigration without causing labor shortages in 
agriculture and the hospitality sectors has proven problematic. 
There are an estimated 1.6 million illegal farm workers in the 
United States. This number does not include those who work 
in meat or egg processing plants. Those working in the agri-
cultural sector are roughly 15 percent of the estimated 12 mil-
lion undocumented immigrants in the United States. Several 

102	
Illegal Immigration
congressmen from states now dependent on such labor have 
made attempts to legalize them. Recognizing the needs of 
large-scale farming operations, Senators John McCain (R-AZ) 
and Edward Kennedy (D-MA) proposed legislation in 2006 
and 2007 that would have allowed farm workers a gradual path 
towards citizenship working under recognized labor contracts. 
Both efforts were defeated by members of the Republican Party. 
Some Democrats voted against the proposals fearing a ‘yes’ vote 
would create reputations for supporting amnesty—then politi-
cally unpopular. To be clear, the programs are not the same 
as amnesty, but to voters whose emotions are manipulated 
by commercial media outlets, the differences among various 
immigration policies and related terms can easily be lost.
Unfortunately, this political environment leads to produc-
tivity loss on American farms. For example, New Mexico, the 
world’s largest producer of chili peppers, has had multiple 
years of partially harvested crops. Restrictions and a decrease 
in visas issued to Mexican citizens resulted in many crops not 
being picked, packaged, or sold—leading to increased costs, 
diminished supplies, and substantial losses to farmers and their 
communities. American citizens have not been willing to fulfill 
those labor roles while simultaneously resisting the idea of pay-
ing higher produce costs, particularly during a hardship econ-
omy, and thus, unfortunately, denying the fact that this kind of 
labor is essential to United States agriculture.
Paradoxes in immigration policy are a recurrent theme. 
Under President Ronald Reagan, the Immigration Reform 
and Control Act (IRCA) was passed in 1986. It represented 
the first widespread effort to enhance both border security and 
restrict immigration. It reduced the allocation of visas for legal 
migration by Mexican citizens and increased penalties for visa 
overstayers.
Ironically, these restrictions were passed in the same time 
frame as NAFTA. The dichotomous concept that one can 
facilitate greater movement of goods across borders while 
restricting movement of people created an increase in the black 

	
Perspectives	
103
market for illegal labor. Illegal labor increases tend to decrease 
wages and working conditions, exacerbating the declin-
ing work environment and the degradation of a community 
forced into economic shadows. Another irony is that IRCA, 
meant to be tough on illegal immigration, granted amnesty to 
undocumented immigrants who had entered before 1982, and 
amnesty programs are anathema to those wanting the toughest 
immigration laws and policies.
Regrettably, scapegoating immigrants has been endemic in 
American history. In contemporary politics, this translates to 
enhanced security on the Mexican border. Anti-immigrant sen-
timent is largely based on fear of crime. While Mexico has expe-
rienced spikes of violent crime associated with narcotics trade, 
little of this crime has crossed the border. Cuidad Juarez experi-
ences an unusually high rate of homicide as a result of Mexican 
cartel activity. However, El Paso, Juarez’s neighbor to the north, 
is consistently rated as one of the safest cities in America.
Within the Unites States, communities with higher per-
centages of immigrants tend to have lower rates of crime than 
communities without significant numbers of foreign-born. The 
notion that immigrants and crime are related is a political arti-
fact not borne by data or scientific evidence. Anecdotal insinu-
ations of Al Qaeda or terrorist networks using the Mexican 
border to cross into the United States are not based in fact. 
There are no reports by any local, state, or federal agencies that 
indicate this scenario has been used. It appears to be sensation-
alistic fears of one group imposed on another.
Meanwhile, militarization of the border has done little to 
affect crime rates in Mexico or the United States. Illegal immi-
gration, while absorbing much of the media’s attention, has 
been declining over recent years. Between October 2010 and 
September 2011, the rate of apprehensions by the U.S. Bor-
der Patrol’s Tucson, Arizona, sector has declined by 42 percent. 
Arrests throughout all border patrol stations along the south-
ern border were the lowest since 1972. While some are quick 
to suggest this is due to security enhancements, there was little 

104	
Illegal Immigration
done then to distinguish it from other periods after 2003. The 
better explanation is that the weak economy is not drawing 
labor. Most illegal immigrants work in the hospitality and con-
struction industries. Lowered demand in these industries fol-
lowing the bust of the housing bubble predictably reduced the 
number of undocumented immigrants.
The most effective method to contain illegal immigration 
would be to enhance investigation and penalties against corpo-
rations and employers using undocumented labor. Increasing 
restrictions on visas and work programs or expanding security 
measures will do little to impact exploitive labor patterns that 
require illegal immigrants. Recognizing the impact of trade 
policies and consumption patterns on migration will likely pro-
duce a more cohesive and effective set of immigration policies.
References
Andreas, Peter. 2009. Border Games: Policing the U.S.- 
Mexico Divide. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Booth, William. 2011. “National Guard Deployment on  
Mexico Border Has Mixed Results.” Washington Post,  
December 5. http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/ 
national-security/national-guard-deployment-on-us- 
mexico-border-has-mixed-results/2011/11/21/gIQAly 
6qXO_story.html?hpid=zl (Accessed December 5, 2011).
Elliot, Debbie. 2011. “Tough Alabama Law Changes Way 
of Life.” Morning Edition/NPR, October 6, 2011. http://
www.npr.org/2011/10/06/141103839/tough-ala- 
immigration-law-changes-way-of-life?ps=rs (Accessed 
December 5, 2011).
Greenblatt, Alan. 2008. “Immigration Debate: Can 
Politicians Find a Way to Curb Illegal Immigration?” 
Congressional Quarterly, 18, 5 (February 2008): 97–120.
Massey, Douglas S., Jorge Durand and Nolan J. Malone. 
2002. Beyond Smoke and Mirrors: Mexican Immigration in 
an Era of Economic Integration. New York: Russell Sage.

	
Perspectives	
105
NPR Staff. 2001. “The Economic Reality of Tough 
Immigration Laws.” All Things Considered/NPR,  
October 8, 2011. http://www.npr.org/2011/10/08/ 
141183030/can-the-us-economy-really-function-without- 
undocumented-workers (Accessed December 5, 2011).
Preston, Julia. 2011. “US to Review Cases Seeking 
Deportations.” New York Times. November 17, 2011. 
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/11/17/us/deportation-case
s-of-illegal-immigratns-to-be-reviewed.html?_r=l&scp=2& 
sq=illegal%20immigration&st-cse (Accessed December 5, 
2011).
Rau, Alia Beard. 2010. “Arizona Immigration Law Three  
Months Later: No Arrests.” The Arizona Republic/USA  
Today, October 10, 2010. http://www.usatoday.com/ 
news/nation/2010–10–29-immigration-law-three-months- 
laterN.htm (Accessed March 2011).
Rotella, Sebastian. 1998. Twilight on the Line: Underworlds 
and Politics at the U.S.-Mexico Border. New York: W.W. 
Norton and Company.
Karen K. Clark received her doctorate from the University of 
California in Irvine. She specializes in international criminality 
covering topics such as war crimes, immigration, and smuggling. 
She has published in various textbooks and academic journals and 
conducts book reviews for the Digest of Middle East Studies. 
Dr. Clark is affiliated with research projects with the Homeland 
Security Department at San Diego State University.
In Opposition to Birthright Citizenship
Judith Ann Warner
Opponents of birthright citizenship refer to children born to 
undocumented immigrants as anchor babies. These children 
increase U.S. population growth and are eligible at maturity 
to anchor or pull extended family members within the legal 
immigration quotas. It is purported that thousands of pregnant 
women from Mexico and other countries come to give birth 

106	
Illegal Immigration
in the United States. They can enter as temporary visitors or 
without authorization. After birth, they receive a U.S. birth 
certificate and passport for the child and gain a permanent link 
to this country (Simmons 2005; Warner 2008).
Birthright citizenship is considered unfair because it allows 
noncitizens and their American children to bypass the natural-
ization process of legal immigrants. Spouses and children who 
have applied for entrance to the United States face quotas that 
often result in a long wait for legal entrance. It is unfair for 
unauthorized women to use a loophole to gain entrance for 
their child, and through that child, legal residency for them-
selves (Lee 2006). Proposals to end birthright citizenship have 
been introduced by Republican members in the U.S. House of 
Representatives in 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, and 2013.
Those opposed to birthright citizenship believe that unau-
thorized immigrants try to have children quickly after their 
arrival because it complicates their removal. Legal action 
taken to prevent deportation of undocumented parents with 
birthright-citizen children rarely succeeds. Under a legal 
change 10 years ago, parents were required to prove that their 
deportation would cause “exceptional and extremely unusual 
hardship” to the children (Warner 2010).
Birthright citizenship becomes an issue at the outset because 
of hospital costs. The medical cost of labor and delivery are 
estimated at from $1,500 to $1,800 per child. Legally, the gov-
ernment has to cover these costs. The baby receives the right 
to a public school education, federal welfare benefits, and the 
right to vote in adulthood (Kamau 2005).
Birthright citizenship carries many taxpayer costs in the 
high-immigration states of California, Texas, and Florida, and 
it disproportionately impacts U.S.-Mexico border communi-
ties. Along the U.S.-Mexico border, Mexican women may cross 
to give birth in U.S. hospitals in order for their children to be 
U.S. citizens. Later, these children may attend school in U.S. 
border cities in neighborhoods in which the family maintains 
an address. In effect, the child leads a bi-national life, spending 

	
Perspectives	
107
the preschool years in a Mexican border city and then crossing 
the border to attend a U.S. public school, which is considered 
to be better (Beilenson 1996; Warner 2008).
Certain issues connected to birthright citizenship concern 
how the medical and other costs of these children born to non-
citizens are to be covered. At present, states have to pay for natal 
hospitalization, education, and other social services to which 
these children are entitled. One result is a conflict between the 
states, whose taxpaying citizens may be reluctant to fund this, 
and the federal government, which regulates immigration and is 
viewed as rightfully owing the cost for permitting the situation. 
States are suing the federal government and pressuring for reim-
bursement for these additional costs since the federal govern-
ment regulates immigration and states are not given that right.
Critics of birthright citizenship point out that few nations 
confer automatic citizenship by birth, jus soli citizenship. For 
example, a child born in France to a noncitizen can apply for 
citizenship at age 18, but only if they resided in France con-
tinuously for five years. Indeed, birthright citizenship is a fea-
ture of some North, Central, and South American nations, the 
new world, but not nations of other continents, the old world, 
unless there has been upheaval or an effort to recruit exter-
nal population. The countries that grant birthright citizenship 
include Argentina, Brazil, Cameroon, Canada, India, Jamaica, 
Mexico, New Zealand, Pakistan, Spain, United States, and 
Venezuela (Feere 2010).
Almost all industrialized countries and all European nations 
require at least one parent to be a citizen or legal resident before 
conferring citizenship at birth. European countries have used jus 
sanguinis legal principles, requiring parents to be citizens before 
conferring citizenship. In Europe, immigrant parents and their 
children have been excluded from citizenship. Children of immi-
grants must apply for citizenship after fulfilling residency and 
age requirements. Over time, as the immigrant population in 
Europe has increased in size, some countries are liberalizing citi-
zenship requirements. In 1999, Germany changed from a  jus 

108	
Illegal Immigration
sanguinis policy to a more liberal jus soli policy. Great Britain and 
Ireland, which had maintained liberal jus soli policies, have reversed 
and passed more exclusive jus sanguinis laws (Warner 2010).
A 2011 Rasmussen poll indicated that a majority (61%) 
do not believe that children of illegal immigrants should be 
granted birthright citizenship while 28% do. Multiple bills and 
resolutions to end birthright citizenship have been introduced 
in Congress but not passed. Margaret Lee, author of a House 
Congressional Research Service Report, indicates that there are 
many legal issues related to the wording of the various congres-
sional amendments, including which parents are included or 
excluded and the constitutionality of a congressional vote to 
end birthright citizenship. It is uncertain if the Supreme Court 
will allow a legal end to birthright citizenship (Lee 2006).
The Fourteenth Amendment grants citizenship to those born 
in the United States under the “complete and exclusive jurisdic-
tion” of the United States. After an 1898 Supreme Court ruling 
in United States v. Kim Ark, it was argued that being born on 
U.S. soil was made more important than whether the parents 
were under the jurisdiction of the U.S. or had allegiance. It was 
thought that subordinating birthplace to jurisdiction would 
end the practice of coming to the United States to establish 
birthright children as an anchor (Warner 2010).
Terminating birthright citizenship might yield a small advan-
tage in the war on terror. The U.S. birthright citizenship of Yasser 
Hamdi was an issue taken to the U.S. Supreme Court because 
he was classified an enemy combatant fighting for the Taliban 
in Afghanistan. Yasser Hamdi, born to Saudi parents in Louisi-
ana, had birthright citizenship but spent little of his lifetime in 
the United States, living instead in Saudi Arabia. As a citizen, 
he received rights and benefits a noncitizen combatant did not 
receive. Ending birthright citizenship would remove constitu-
tional protections in the case of enemy fighters such as Hamdi.
Those opposed to birthright citizenship make three points: 
(1) individuals who enter without documents should not be 
allowed to use children born on U.S. soil as an anchor to move 

	
Perspectives	
109
ahead of legal applicants for immigration; (2) individuals who 
do not have primary or full allegiance to the United States 
should not be allowed to have children born to them in the 
United States gain instant citizenship, and (3) individuals who 
were born in the United States but develop enemy allegiance 
should not be able to use the fact of birth on U.S. soil to gain 
constitutional citizenship legal protections (Barton 2013; Erler 
2012; Erler and Stock 2012; Porttens 2012; Schuck 2009; Lee 
2006; Warner 2008; Reasoner 2011).
References
Barton, Paul C. 2013. “Birthright Citizenship Contested on 
Capitol Hill.” USA Today, March 20.
Beilenson, Anthony. 1996. “Case for Correction by Constitutional 
Amendment.” The Social Contract, 7, no. 1 (Fall).
Erler, Edward et al. 2012. The Founders on Citizenship 
and Immigration: Principles and Challenges in America. 
Arlington, VA: National Foundation for American Policy.
Erler, Edward, and Margaret Stock. 2012. “The Costs to 
Americans and America of Ending Birthright Citizenship,” 
www.infop/com.
Feere, Jon. 2010. “Birthright Citizenship in the United States:  
A Global Comparison.” http://www.cis.org/birthright- 
citizenship. August.
Fourteenth Amendment, July 9, 1868.
“GOP Mulls Ending Birthright Citizenship.” Washington 
Times, November 3, 2005.
Kamau, Pius. 2005. “Illegal Immigrants Jam Our Emergency 
Rooms,” The Denver Post, December 22, 2005: B-7.
Lee, Margaret. 2006. U.S. Citizenship of Persons Born 
in the United States of Alien Parents. Congressional 
Research Service Report, http://www.ilw.com. Accessed 
May 30, 2010.

110	
Illegal Immigration
Porttens, Kevin. 2012. “Immigration and the American 
Founding.” Free Market Forum. www.hillsdale.edu/
outreach/free-market-forum.
Reasoner, W. D. 2011. “Birthright Citizenship for Visitors.” 
http://www.cis.org/birthright-citizenship-for-visitors. 
March 2011.
Schuck, Peter M. 2009. “Taking Immigration Federalism 
Seriously.” The Forum 7(3): 4–14.
Simmons, Kathryn. 2005. “Anchor Babies Tie Illegal 
Immigrants to U.S.” NBC News, November 25.
U.S. Federal law (8 U.S.C. 1401).
Warner, Judith A. 2008. Battleground Immigration. Westport, 
CT: Greenwood Press, 2v.
Warner, Judith A. 2010. U.S. Border Security: A Reference 
Handbook. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Wong Kim Ark vs. United States, 1898. United States Supreme 
Court.
Judith Ann Warner is a professor of sociology and criminal jus-
tice at Texas A&M International University (TAMIU). In 2008, 
she received the Distance Educator of the Year award, and in 
1991, she received the Scholar of the Year award from TAMIU. 
She is coeditor of the Journal of Social and Ecological Boundaries 
and has published in the areas of immigration, homeland security, 
and domestic violence. Her research interests include immigration, 
homeland security, and the intersection of race, class, and gender. 
She is the editor of Battleground: Immigration (Greenwood, 
2008) and the author of U.S. Border Security: A  Reference 
Handbook (ABC-CLIO, 2010).
In Support of Maintaining Birthright Citizenship
Judith Ann Warner
Advocates of maintaining the birthright citizenship privilege 
contend that the unauthorized population is composed primarily 

	
Perspectives	
111
of moral, hard-working individuals who should be supported 
in attaining legalization and naturalization. The U.S. Catholic 
Bishops’ Committee on Migration and Refugee Services has 
stressed that citizenship is important to showing humans respect 
and giving immigrants dignity. The United States is the world’s 
most open nation for immigrants; their successful adaptation 
and assimilation is dependent on offering them a stake in the 
nation through citizenship for themselves, through naturaliza-
tion, or birthright citizenship for their children. Ending this 
form of citizenship would marginalize these immigrants and 
make the United States less successful as an immigrant-receiving 
nation. Children who are adapting and growing up accustomed 
to American culture could be yanked away from their homeland 
if this form of citizenship were ended (Warner 2008).
The stereotype of a woman with a birthright citizen child is 
that of a border crosser who has a motive to use an American 
hospital to have her baby. Yet a majority of undocumented par-
ents born in Mexico or Central America have been living and 
working in the United States over a period of time. A politi-
cally strategic constituency that is opposed to ending birth-
right citizenship is Latinos. They are the group with the highest 
birthrate in the United States, and both the stereotype of the 
pregnant Latino woman and the idea of taking away citizen-
ship from babies is offensive to them. Politicians are wary of 
politically alienating this important group (Warner 2010).
Undocumented immigrants maintain that they came to 
the United States to find a livelihood, not to have children. 
They believe that the attack on birthright citizenship is unfair 
and that all children should be born equal. Parents in fami-
lies separated by immigration status have a hard time explain-
ing to children why their father or mother is not present. The 
Pew Hispanic Center estimated that as the first decade of the 
21st century drew to a close 14.6 million people were part of 
a mixed-status family in which at least one parent is undocu-
mented. Sixty-four percent of the mixed-status-family chil-
dren, 3.1 million, were birthright citizens (PHC 2010).

112	
Illegal Immigration
Birthright citizenship is not a way of avoiding the immi-
gration bureaucracy indefinitely, and unauthorized immigrants 
pay a price in fear and waiting. Although the United States has 
a principle of family reunification in its legal immigration pol-
icy, it can take years or decades before the quota on admittance 
ends family separation. Visa petitions are processed slowly and 
some immigrants wind up as visa overstayers or try to enter 
unauthorized in order to be with their families. U.S. immigra-
tion law literally creates partially fugitive families that mix legal 
and unauthorized members. Undocumented individuals need 
to make serious decisions about where their families will live 
and work to try to avoid detection and family separation. Fam-
ilies of mixed nationality are deeply impacted by the debate on 
immigration. Parents are worried that they will not be able to 
stay with their citizen children or that their family will have 
to return to Mexico (Bosniak 2012; Goode 2015; PHC 2010; 
PHC 2011; Warner 2010; Manger 2015).
It is undeniable that birthright-child citizens are the ones 
who are harmed when parents are deported. The older birth-
right children of undocumented parents have a history of hav-
ing lived in and adapted to the American culture. Benjamin 
Cabreras, from Mexico, and Londy Cabreras, from Guatemala, 
brought a lawsuit asking that they be able to stay with their two 
teenage daughters. In 2002, a Los Angeles immigration judge 
made a rare decision in ruling that the parents could maintain 
residency. The basis of the legal decision was that one daughter 
was academically gifted and that parental deportation would 
“savagely” and permanently interrupt her schooling. This case 
is now under appeal (LA Times 2011).
At present, in the Department of Homeland Security, the 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement branch can deport the 
undocumented parents of children who are citizens by birth. 
In practice, immigration judges can rule in favor of the par-
ents and grant them legal status. Many immigration processors 
simply choose not to undertake deportation of parents with 
birthright children and they remain as unauthorized residents. 

	
Perspectives	
113
Nevertheless, cases are coming to immigration court and the 
parents do not always win. In Los Angeles, parents with a child 
who has hemophilia won the right to stay while the undocu-
mented parents of a child with a mild learning disability were 
deported (Warner 2010).
When parents are deported, some leave their children with 
relatives, others depart with the child, and yet others seek to 
remain illegally by disappearing underground. Family fragmen-
tation is a common result of deporting parents of birthright 
citizen children. Breaking up families is a dubious venture. 
Removing parents of birthright children could result in a 
massive number of children needing foster care at a tremen-
dous cost to the states. At present, although birthright chil-
dren receive a public education at taxpayer cost, those with an 
undocumented parent(s) often are less likely to receive health 
and other benefits (PHC 2010).
Despite being U.S. citizens, children born to undocumented 
immigrants are more likely to live in poverty and crowded hous-
ing and are less likely to have health coverage than children 
born to citizens, experts say. Citizen children in mixed-status 
families are eligible for public assistance, but their parents often 
fear that seeking government help could lead to deportation 
or hurt their chances for future legalization. Michael Fix, vice 
president of the Migration Policy Institute, a think tank, indi-
cated that undocumented parents do not want to apply for 
benefits because they fear discovery and deportation as a public 
charge. Although immigrants are stereotyped as coming to the 
United States to receive public benefits, many believe in inde-
pendence for themselves and their children (Fix and Van Hook 
2010; Hanson 2009; Warner 2008, 2010).
Supporters of birthright citizenship feel that eliminating it 
creates another social barrier between those who are socially 
included and those who are socially excluded. Social divisions 
that exclude a part of the population from full participation 
in this country are a violation of democratic principles. End-
ing birthright citizenship would result in the first generation 

114	
Illegal Immigration
of native-born noncitizens in this society. These individuals 
would become part of a stateless class and subject to preju-
dice, discrimination, and the resultant feelings of alienation. In 
France, a nation which practices heritage or jus sanguinis citi-
zenship, extensive rioting occurred among the second genera-
tion of immigrants because they were treated as a lesser class. If 
the United States disenfranchises children born in the United 
States to non-native parents, it could create an alienated group 
that will engage in destructive forms of social struggle, as 
occurred in France (Warner 2008).
Peter Nyers contends that 9/11 greatly impacted immigrants 
because of the idea that some individuals become so-called 
citizens by accident. Yaser Esam Hamdi, designated an enemy 
combatant during the war in Afghanistan, received U.S. Con-
stitutional protections because he was born to Saudi parents 
on a three-year temporary work permit. He only resided in the 
United States as a toddler. Despite a debate over whether Hamdi 
was an essential citizen or an accidental citizen, it becomes evi-
dent that territorial birthright is a transparent and reliable way 
to establish citizenship. It is a legal concept that permits an 
international system of citizenship rights, as well as inequalities 
and exclusions based on place of birth (Nyers 2005).
Ending the use of birthright citizenship as a legal concept 
would have severe administrative repercussions for children 
born to undocumented parents. Stateless children would have 
a compromised citizenship status because of their parents’ 
unauthorized entrance or illegal stay. Citizenship might be 
established by the parents’ country of origin, but some parents 
come from different countries of origin. Many children might 
be required to petition to another country to establish legal sta-
tus. In addition, not having birthright citizenship would create 
massive bureaucratic problems as the citizenship of each baby’s 
parents would need to be verified. The present rule makes it 
easy to administer the system of birth certificate processing. If 
all parents had to provide papers to prove their children’s citi-
zenship, it would overburden immigration enforcement.

	
Perspectives	
115
References
Bosniak, Linda S. 2012. “Birthright Citizenship, 
Undocumented Immigrants and the Slavery Analogy.” 
Social Science Research Network, December 12, http://ssrn.
com/abstract=2194874. Accessed February 20, 2015.
Fix, Michael, and Jennifer Van Hook. 2010. The Demographic 
Impacts of Repealing Birthright. Washington, DC: 
Migration Policy Institute.
Goode, Victor. “Race, Immigration and the Birthright 
Controversy.” Legal Services of California Race Equity 
Project. http://www.equity.Isuc.net/race-immigratio
n-and-the-birthright-controversy. February 20, 2015.
Hanson, Gordon. 2009. The Economics and Policy of Illegal 
Immigration in the United States. Washington, DC: 
Migration Policy Institute.
LA Times 2011. “Tampering with Citizenship.” htpp://www 
.latimes.com/news/opinion/editorials/la-ed-citizen- 
20110113.0.5847728. Accessed February 20, 2105.
Manger, Chief J. Thomas. 2015. “Law Enforcement 
Immigration Task Force on Safe Act.” http://
immigrationforum.org/blog/law-enforcemen
t-immigration-task-force-on-safe-act. February 11, 2015 
Letter, Major Cities Chiefs Police Association.
Neyers, Peter. 2005. Rethinking Refugees Beyond States of 
Emergency. New York: Routledge.
Pew Hispanic Center. 2010. “Unauthorized Immigrants and 
Their U.S.-Born Children.” PHC, August 11, 2010. http://
www.perhispanic.org.
Pew Hispanic Center. 2011. “Statistical Portrait of the 
Foreign-Born Population of the United States, 2009.” 
http://www.pewhispanic.org/factsheet/factsheet.
php?FactsheetID=69.
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops. 2012. 
“Birthright Citizenship: The Real Story.” Issue Briefing 

116	
Illegal Immigration
Series, Issue #2. Migration and Refugee Services, Office of 
Migration Policy and Public Affairs.
Warner, Judith A. 2008. Battleground Immigration. Westport, 
CT: Greenwood Press. 2v.
Warner, Judith A. 2010. U.S. Border Security: A Reference 
Handbook. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Judith Ann Warner is a professor of sociology and criminal jus-
tice at Texas A&M International University (TAMIU). In 2008, 
she received the Distance Educator of the Year award, and in 
1991, she received the Scholar of the Year award from TAMIU. 
She is coeditor of the Journal of Social and Ecological Boundaries 
and has published in the areas of immigration, homeland security, 
and domestic violence. Her research interests include immigration, 
homeland security, and the intersection of race, class, and gender. 
She is the editor of Battleground: Immigration (Greenwood, 
2008) and the author of U.S. Border Security: A  Reference 
Handbook (ABC-CLIO, 2010).
Mitigating Federal Immigration Law: Inclusion  
at the Local Level
Roberto Suro
Interactions among local, state and federal governments as 
regards immigration policies have undergone dramatic changes 
since the passage of Proposition 187 in California in 1994, 
and after the U.S. Supreme Court’s 2012 decision in Arizona 
v. United States (132 S.Ct. 2492) (Suro 2015). States have been 
portrayed as uniquely capable intermediaries between national 
policies and immigration’s highly local impacts (Su 2014).
In one of the most extensive post-Arizona analyses, Hiro-
shi Motomura argues in his 2014 book, Immigration Outside 
the Law, for distinguishing “direct” involvement in immigra-
tion law which refers to governmental decisions whether or not 
to admit or exclude aliens, an undisputed federal domain, as 
characterized by Ming Chen as “at the border” policies (Chen 

	
Perspectives	
117
2014). By contrast, Motomura describes a realm of “indirect” 
involvement where state and local governments can play a role 
in several different ways. They can become involved in enforce-
ment through cooperative agreements with federal authorities 
or undertake their own efforts to make life difficult for unau-
thorized immigrants. Still other forms of indirect involvement, 
in Motomura’s view, are state and local policies that “neutralize” 
federal enforcement policies, effectively shielding the unau-
thorized from federal regulation and thus permitting them to 
integrate into local communities regardless of immigration sta-
tus (Motomura 2014). The latter kind of state and local poli-
cies have the potential to change life for the unauthorized and 
may eventually help change federal policy. They are mitigating 
federal laws and policies that determine immigration status in 
the sense that they are reducing the penalty to be paid for vio-
lating those policies.
Indeed, the cumulative effect of such mitigating state and 
local policies can be to create the potential for inclusion of 
immigrants regardless of status. Maria Lorena Cook usefully 
defines the term: “By inclusion I mean an individual or group’s 
engagement with processes or organizations that recognize the 
individual or group by conferring membership or by provid-
ing resources such as entitlements or protections. . . . Inclu-
sion provides a sense of security, stability, and predictability, 
understood primarily as an ability to plan for the future (Cook 
2013).
State and local jurisdictions have varied greatly in their 
willingness to cooperate with federal immigration enforce-
ment since some policing powers were devolved in 1996. The 
Secure Communities program was launched in 2008 and iden-
tified unauthorized immigrants for removal by checking the 
fingerprints of persons arrested or booked in custody by local 
authorities. President Obama ended it as one of the executive 
actions announced in November 2014, saying federal agents 
should focus on deporting “felons, not families” (Linthicum 
2014). During its 2008 to 2014 lifespan, Secure Communities 

118	
Illegal Immigration
provoked a variety of state and local governments to take 
actions that neutralize federal regulations, to borrow Moto-
mura’s expression. For example, in October 2014 the Catho-
lic Legal Immigration Network, Inc. had counted three states, 
26 cities, 233 counties and the District of Columbia as hav-
ing restricted cooperation (CLINIC 2014). However, some 
state and local governments are doing more than that. They 
are taking proactive steps to welcome immigrants regardless of 
their status under federal law. These mitigate the condition of 
illegality.
On November  19, 2005, Illinois Governor Rod Blago-
jevich signed the “New Americans Executive Order,” which 
launched a package of efforts to coordinate policies and pro-
grams promoting integration or other services to immigrants 
and to help the state assert its voice on federal immigration 
policies. This initiative was the result of a public-private part-
nership that involved foundation founding, think-tank advice 
and an explicitly influential advisory role for local and national 
advocacy groups and civil society organizations from the immi-
grant communities (Illinois.gov 2005). That model of creating 
a coordinating office for immigrant services has been adopted 
in Michigan, New York, Massachusetts as well as a number 
of cities including Los Angeles, Philadelphia and Baltimore. 
In many of these cases the explicit intent has been to entice 
the settlement of immigrants as part of an economic develop-
ment strategy (Turner 2012). Such rustbelt cities as Colum-
bus, Cleveland and Lansing that were facing population losses 
have recruited immigrants with packages of incentives and ser-
vices, and in some of the most successful cases, like Dayton, 
which has attracted more than 3,000 Turkish newcomers, local 
citizens and business groups have jointed municipal officials 
in developing detailed action plans for immigrant settlement 
(Altman 2014; Preston 2013).
While such welcoming programs were spurred by local con-
cerns and local policy entrepreneurs, other inclusionary policies 
have echoed federal initiatives, for example, President Clinton’s 

	
Perspectives	
119
executive order in 2000 that requires any state or local agency 
receiving federal funds to bridge language barriers with ben-
eficiaries who have limited proficiency in English. However, 
the federal government has not dictated how this require-
ment is to be met nor has it undertaken a significant account-
ability effort. As a result, a remarkable variety of approaches 
have emerged from state and local agencies of all sorts, from 
schools to courtrooms to city halls, utilizing everything from 
the deliberate employment of bilingual staff, to the translation 
of printed materials, and the use of interpretation technologies 
(MPI 2014).
All these local initiatives have two other characteristics in 
common. To varying degrees they all create points of interac-
tion between immigrants and government offices, local busi-
ness, civil society organizations and ordinary citizens. The 
welcoming initiatives in particular have also often stimulated 
the creation of civil society organizations within immigrant 
communities to mediate interactions with the host community. 
The second common characteristic is that these sub-federal ini-
tiatives erase, or at least blur, the many levels of immigration 
that are at the heart of federal policies, adopting a sort of “don’t 
ask, don’t tell” approach to immigration status (Montalvo et al. 
2014).
For an unauthorized immigrant, such sub-federal policies 
mitigate the status of illegality, lessening the severity of a nega-
tive condition, or reducing the penalty for an offense. These 
policies actively encourage interactions between unauthorized 
immigrants, public officials, and community institutions that 
might not happen otherwise. As a matter of public policy, they 
create safe spaces where some of the harshest negative conse-
quences of federal illegality are alleviated if not erased.
References
Altman, Alex. 2014. “Put Out the Welcome Mat.” Time, 
June 5, 16.

120	
Illegal Immigration
Chen, Ming Hsu. 2014. “Immigration and Cooperative 
Federalism: Toward a Doctrinal Framework.” University of 
Colorado Law Review 85(4): 1087.
CLINIC (Catholic Legal Immigration Network, Inc.). 
2014. “State and Localities that Limit Compliance with 
ICE Detainer Requests.” In State and Local Immigration 
Project. Washington, DC: Catholic Legal Immigration 
Network, Inc.
Cook, Maria Lorena. 2013. “Is Incorporation of 
Unauthorized Immigrants Possible? Inclusion and 
Contingency for Nonstatus Migrants and Legal 
Immigrants.” In Outsiders No More? Models of Immigrant 
Political Incorporation, edited by Jennifer Hochschild, 
Jacqueline Chattopadhyay, Claudine Gay, and Michael 
Jones-Correa. Oxford: Oxford University Press. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/97801992113.003.0003.
Illinois.gov. 2005. “Gov. Blagojevich Announces Landmark 
Immigration Policy.” Springfield, IL: State of Illinois, 
Office of the Governor.
Linthicum, Kate. 2014. “Obama Acts on Immigration: An 
Unpopular Tool for Deportation Is Gone; Obama Ends 
Secure Communities Program, Saying U.S. Should Expel 
‘Felons, Not Families’.” Los Angeles Times, November 21, 
AA.1.
Montalvo, Jorge and Karen Phillippis, Marcony 
Almeida-Barros, Teresa Reyes. 2014 “Immigration and the 
States: Advancing State Policy Priorities.” Presented at the 
National Immigrant Integration Conference, Los Angeles, 
CA, December 14–16.
Motomura, Hiroshi. 2014. Immigration Outside the Law. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
MPI (Michigan Policy Institute). 2014. “Language Access: 
Translation and Interpretation Policies and Practices.” 
Michigan Policy Institute. http://migrationpolicy.org/

	
Perspectives	
121
programs/language-access-translation-and-interpretati
on-policies-and-practices.
Preston, Julia. 2013. “Ailing Cities Extend Hand to 
Immigrants: National Desk.” New York Times, October 7, 
A.18.
Su, Rick. 2014. “The Role of the States in the National 
Conversation on Immigration.” In Strange Neighbors: 
The Role of States in Immigration Policy, edited by Carissa 
Byrne Hessick and Gabriel J. Chin. New York: New York 
University Press.
Suro, Roberto. 2015. “California Dreaming: The New 
Dynamism in Immigration Federalism and Opportunities 
for Inclusion on a Variegrated Landscape.” Journal on 
Migration and Human Security 3 (1): 1–25.
Turner, Kim. 2012. United States: Good Ideas from 
Successful Cities. Toronto, Canada: Maytree 
Foundation. http://citiesofmigration.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2012/03Municipal_Report_Main_Report2.pdf.
Roberto Suro holds a joint appointment as a professor in the 
Annenberg School for Communication & Journalism and the Sol 
Price School of Public Policy at the University of Southern Cali-
fornia. He is also director of the Tomás Rivera Policy Institute, an 
interdisicplinary university research center exploring the challenges 
and opportunities of demographic diversity in the 21st-century 
global city. Suro’s latest book is Writing Immigration: Scholars 
and Journalists in Dialogue (U of CA Press, 2011) coedited with 
Marcelo Suarez-Orozco and Vivian Louie. Prior to joining the 
USC faculty in August 2007, he was director of the Pew His-
panic Center, a research organization in Washington, DC, which 
he founded in 2001. Suro worked as foreign and domestic bureau 
chief for The New York Times and at The Washington Post as 
deputy national editor and as a staff writer on the national desk. 
He is the author of several books and several dozen book chap-
ters, research reports, and other publications related to Latinos and 
immigration.

122	
Illegal Immigration
Obama’s “Executive Action” on Immigration  
and Judicial Review
Alemayehu G. Mariam
On November 20, 2014, President Barack Obama announced 
a series of executive actions purportedly aimed at 1) enforc-
ing tougher controls to prevent illegal immigration into the 
U.S.; 2) prioritizing deportation of felons and 3) requiring cer-
tain undocumented immigrants to pass a criminal background 
check and pay taxes in order to temporarily stay in the U.S. 
without fear of deportation (White House, 2014). In taking 
“executive action,” President Obama robustly asserted, “I have 
the legal authority to take as president—the same kinds of 
actions taken by Democratic and Republican presidents before 
me—that will help make our immigration system be more fair 
and more just.”
House Speaker John Boehner lamented the President’s 
actions. “The American people want both parties to focus on 
solving problems together; they don’t support unilateral action 
from a president who is more interested in partisan politics 
than working with the people’s elected representatives.” House 
Judiciary Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte chafed. “The 
president’s decision to recklessly forge ahead with a plan to 
unilaterally change our immigration laws ignores the will of 
the American people and flouts the Constitution.” Sen. Mitch 
McConnell groused. “The plan [Obama is] presenting is 
more than just, as the president himself has acknowledged, an 
overreach—it’s also unfair.”
In a Memorandum dated November 20, 2014, Jeh Charles 
Johnson, Secretary of Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS) set up a Deferred Action for Parental Accountability 
(DAPA) program which directed his agency to exercise “pros-
ecutorial discretion” in “issuing, serving, filing, or canceling a 
Notice to Appear” as well as in implementation of “a broad 
range of other discretionary enforcement decisions, including 
deciding: whom to stop, question, and arrest; whom to detain 

	
Perspectives	
123
or release; whether to settle, dismiss, appeal, or join in a motion 
on a case; and whether to grant deferred action, parole, or a 
stay of removal instead of pursuing removal in a case” (Depart-
ment of Homeland Security, 2014). The new policy rescinded 
6 major policy memoranda dating back to 2009.
In December 2014, federal judge Arthur Schwab in Pitts-
burgh ruled, “This[Obama’s] executive action ‘cross[es] the 
line,’ constitutes ‘legislation,’ and effectively changes the 
United States’ immigration policy. The president may only 
‘take care that the laws be faithfully executed . . .’; he may not 
take any executive action that creates laws” (U.S. v. Elionardo 
Juarez-Escobar, 2014). In February 2015, a federal judge in 
Texas issued a preliminary injunction in Texas v. U.S. blocking 
DAPA (State of Texas v. United States, 2015). In a 123-page 
Memorandum Opinion and Order the court ruled the Obama 
Administration had failed to comply with the Administrative 
Procedures Act. The court reasoned DAPA “represents a sub-
stantive change in immigration policy . . . a massive change 
in immigration practice. It does more than supplement the 
[Immigration and Nationality Act] . . . it contradicts it (State 
of Texas v. United States, 2015, p. 111).
Does the president have the constitutional or statutory 
authority to grant “administrative relief” to undocumented 
aliens on a large scale? There are those who argue the President 
does not have the authority to issue DAPA. Derrick Morgan, 
vice president of The Heritage Foundation, argues Obama 
“gave quasi-legal status and work permits to millions of ille-
gal immigrants” by his pen (Morgan, 2014). He surmised, 
“Obama’s executive action could usher in an era of government 
by executive fiat. A future president may decide to use ‘prosecu-
torial discretion’ to ignore environmental or tax laws.”
Marshall Fitz, director of immigration policy at the Cen-
ter for American Progress, argues that the President is merely 
acting in faithful execution of the laws. Fitz asserts that 
DAPA is “completely legal and grounded in ample historical 
precedent—similar policies have been adopted 39 times by 11 

124	
Illegal Immigration
presidents over 60 years— . . . [and] . . . is no different than 
when President Ronald Reagan allowed children of unauthor-
ized immigrants to stay in the country in 1986 . . . [or] Presi-
dent George H.W. Bush’s Family Fairness policy of 1990 . . .” 
(Fitz, 2014).
Alex Nowrasteh takes the middle of the road and places 
blame on the president and Congress for the immigration 
mess. “The first is for the president to issue an executive order 
on dubious constitutional grounds to provide temporary relief 
for problems caused by a fundamentally broken system. The 
second resolution is for Congress to change those terrible laws 
and make them work so they don’t attract executive orders like 
honey attracts flies” (Nowrasteh, 2014).
It is unclear why the President chose to implement DAPA 
as an “executive action” instead of by “executive order,” which 
could have strengthened his hand as his predecessors had done. 
Executive actions do not have precise legal definition; but they 
have been used by presidents to take action or refrain from 
taking action such as actions issued by President Obama in 
January 2014 to increase federal back ground checks for fire 
arm purchases (White House, 2013). Such actions need not 
comply with the APA. Executive orders and proclamations are 
directives or actions by the President. When exercised, they 
must have a demonstrable basis in the Constitution, statutes or 
the President’s inherent authority to ensure the laws are “faith-
fully executed.”
The ultimate resolution in the DAPA challenge is likely to 
revolve around four questions: 1) whether the President abused 
his broad discretion in implementing DAPA, 2) whether 
DAPA represents “a substantive change in immigration policy 
and practice” as the District Court ruled in order granting the 
above-referenced injunction, 3) whether re-issuance of DAPA 
in compliance with the APA could resolve the question of its 
implementation, and 4) whether DAPA represents substantive 
lawmaking on the part of the President in violation of separa-
tion of powers principles under Art. I, § 7, cl. 3 (presentment 
clause) of the United States Constitution.

	
Perspectives	
125
I believe DAPA is within the guided but broad discretion 
of the President in implementing the INA. DHS is in charge 
of enforcing the immigration laws of the United States. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the existence of deferred 
action and DHS’s authority to grant it (Reno v. American-Arab 
Anti-Defamation League, 1999).
DHS makes discretionary decisions about prosecutions, 
deportations and other sanctions tens of thousands of times 
every year. DAPA appears to systematize the detection, appre-
hension and prosecution of alleged immigration law violators 
by enforcing tougher controls, focusing resources on felons and 
requiring criminal background checks on undocumented immi-
grants to temporarily stay in the U.S. without fear of deporta-
tion. DHS takes such actions on a case-by-case basis every day. 
DAPA aims to facilitate “batch processing” of such decisions.
There is ample presidential precedent to support DAPA. 
In 1980, President Jimmy Carter exercised parole authority 
and allowed some 123,000 “Mariel Cubans” into the U.S. 
In 1987, President Reagan barred deportation of children of 
newly-legalized immigrants under the Immigration Reform 
Act of 1986. President George H.W. Bush in 1990 and 1992 
issued executive orders that granted Deferred Enforced Depar-
ture (DED) to certain nationals of the People’s Republic of 
China and El Salvador. In 1997, President Bill Clinton issued 
an executive order granting DED to certain Haitians who had 
arrived in the U.S. before Dec. 31, 1995. In 2009–2010, the 
Obama administration began a policy of granting parole to the 
spouses, parents, and children of military members and DED 
to Liberians.
References
Department of Homeland Security. 2014. Policies for the 
Apprehension, Detention, and Removal of Undocumented 
Immigrants. November 20, 2014. Online at http://www 
.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/14_1120_memo_
prosecutorial_discretion.pdf.

126	
Illegal Immigration
Fitz, Marshall. 2014. “Obama Is Just Doing His Job.” U.S.  
News and World Report, November 21, 2014. Online  
at http://www.usnews.com/debate-club/is-obamas- 
immigration-executive-order-legal/obama-is-just- 
doing-his-job.
Morgan, Derrick. 2014. “Government by Executive Fiat.”  
U.S. News and World Report, November 21, 2014. Online 
at http://www.usnews.com/debate-club/is-obamas- 
immigration-executive-order-legal/government- 
by-executive-fiat.
Nowrasteh, Alex. 2014. “Bad Laws Lead to Bad Executive 
Orders.” U.S. News and World Report, November 21, 
2014. Online at http://www.usnews.com/debate-club/
is-obamas-immigration-executive-order-legal/
bad-laws-lead-to-bad-executive-orders.
Reno v. American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee. 1999. 
(97–1252) 525 U.S. 471 (1999) 119 F.3d 1367. Online at 
https://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/pdf/97–1252P.ZS.
State of Texas v. United States. 2015. Case # 1:14-cv-00254.  
Online at http://documents.latimes.com/obama-defer- 
deportation/.
U.S. v. Elionardo Juarez-Escobar. 2014. Case # 2:14- 
cr-00180-AJS. Online at http://online.wsj.com/public/ 
resources/documents/2014_1216_immigrationruling.pdf.
White House. 2013. “Now is the Time: The President’s 
Plan to Protect Our Children and Our Communities by 
Reducing Gun Violence.” Online at https://www 
.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/wh_now_is_the_
time_full.pdf.
White House. 2014. Fixing the System: President Obama Is 
Taking Action on Immigration. Online at https://www.
whitehouse.gov/issues/immigration/immigration-action.
Professor Alemayehu G. Mariam, PhD and JD, teaches politi-
cal science at California State University, San Bernardino. He is 

	
Perspectives	
127
also a defense lawyer practicing in the areas of criminal and con-
stitutional law. He is one of the foremost advocates of human rights 
in Africa. His weekly human rights blogs are disseminated widely.
Resolving the Issue of Illegal Immigration— 
A Question of Balance
David E. Krahl
The pervasive question of what to do about illegal immigra-
tion is being bantered about in the mainstream media and on 
24-hour cable news channels, by political candidates of every 
political stripe and persuasion, by liberals and conservatives, in 
the blogosphere, on discussion boards, by political action com-
mittees, in state legislatures, in Congress, by humanitarian and 
religious organizations, by voters—and by college professors 
and their students.
This essay will argue that the United States should adopt 
tougher strategies to control illegal immigration and that the 
U.S. government has both the moral obligation and the consti-
tutional authority to do exactly that.
Illegal Immigration as a Contemporary Social Issue
Illegal immigration as a contemporary social issue has been 
linked to a host of social ills: organized crime, violence, drug 
trafficking, and terrorism. It has economic implications in that 
it results in an increase in unskilled labor into an already fal-
tering economy. Another argument is that since “illegals” are, 
by definition, “undocumented,” they do not contribute to the 
viability of the national tax base, and are a drain on exist-
ing social programs, resources, benefits, and services. They 
are considered to be “free riders” in an already overburdened 
system.
Although illegal immigration had been a much discussed 
issue prior to the 9/11 terrorist attacks—mostly as a reflection 
of nativist sentiments and xenophobic beliefs—it was the 9/11 

128	
Illegal Immigration
attacks that catapulted illegal immigration into the front of the 
political discourse.
The control of illegal immigration rests with the Depart-
ment of Homeland Security, tasked with enforcing federal 
laws. Unfortunately, these laws are neither inclusive nor expan-
sive enough to provide tactical remedies to a problem that is 
clearly front-and-center in the collective consciousness of the 
American public.
In attempts to deal with the problem at the state level, sev-
eral states have enacted statutes to control the ebb-and-flow 
of “illegals” across their borders. The success of these statutes, 
however, has been limited. Several federal courts have held 
that the statutes represent unconstitutional usurpations of 
the power of the federal government to regulate immigration. 
Thus, we must rely upon the federal government implement-
ing a comprehensive workable set of strategies to mitigate the 
problem of illegal immigration.
Geographic and Demographic Considerations
The debate on illegal immigration most often focuses on the 
border between Mexico and the United States. Four states are 
directly affected: California, Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas. 
No other states are directly affected by this specific pattern of 
illegal immigration. Illegal immigration from Canada into the 
U.S. has been largely ignored.
From a simple geographic point of view, there are just 14 
states where illegal immigration is not actually or potentially 
problematic to some degree based on the fact that they do not 
have a border that is directly contiguous to another nation 
(Mexico or Canada), or a border that is contiguous to a body 
of water that could be used as an entry point into that state 
by illegal immigrants. The remaining 36 states fulfill either, or 
both, of those criteria. These states account for 86 percent of 
the total U.S. population, and comprise about three-fourths of 
the nation’s land area. Given this vast area, it makes sense for 

	
Perspectives	
129
the federal government to take the lead in addressing the issue 
in a comprehensive fashion.
Just as striking are the linear miles of land-based borders and 
coastlines that are adjacent to the United States. The land-based 
U.S.-Mexico border stretches for 1,933 miles, while the U.S.-
Canada border extends for 5,525 miles. Additionally, the U.S. 
coastline totals to 12,429 miles along the Atlantic and Pacific 
seaboards and the Gulf of Mexico. The Great Lakes shoreline 
which, in essence, serves as a functional boundary between the 
United States and Canada, adds another 4,960 miles. Given 
the sheer length of these borders, and the large number of states 
adjacent to them, how does this not make the federal govern-
ment preeminently responsible for securing them?
Constitutional Considerations
Currently, much of the federal law on immigration is sub-
sumed under Title 8 of the Code of Federal Regulations, the 
Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, as amended; Title 
VIII of the United States Code, as amended; the Immigration 
Reform and Control Act of 1986; the Immigration Marriage 
Fraud Amendments of 1986; the Immigration Act of 1990; the 
Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act 
of 1996; various administrative decisions issued by the United 
States Citizenship and Immigration Services’ Administrative 
Appeals Office; and various court cases pertaining to the vast 
body of federal immigration law.
The constitutional basis for all of these lies in Article I, Sec-
tion 8, which stipulates that congressional authority includes 
the power to “. . . establish a uniform rule of naturalization” 
along with the power to coin money, to borrow money on the 
credit of the United States, to declare war, to raise and sup-
port armies and maintain a navy, to regulate commerce with 
foreign nations, and a whole host of other congressional autho-
rizations. The implications of this provision for the control of 
modern illegal immigration are profound.

130	
Illegal Immigration
Ironically, in attempting to expand the authority of the states 
to deal with illegal immigration, it was actually Congress who 
took the lead: When revising immigration laws, it indicated 
that the states could cooperate with the federal government 
in the identification, apprehension, detention, and removal of 
aliens not lawfully present in the United States. However, states 
have limitations on their legislative authority to control immi-
gration (28 U.S.C. Section 1251).
These limitations have been further articulated in recent 
court decisions regarding the constitutionality of state immi-
gration statutes. Following Congress’s lead, immigration laws 
were enacted by state legislatures in South Carolina, Arizona, 
Utah, Georgia, Indiana, and Alabama. However, federal district 
courts have found that there has been a substantial amount of 
overreach on the part of the states, affirming that regulating 
immigration is the sole province of the federal government.
For example, in June 2011, U.S. District Court Judge Sarah 
Evans Barker put on hold a portion of an Indiana statute that 
authorized the arrest of anyone who had been ordered deported 
by an immigration court. A few days later after Judge Barker’s 
ruling, U.S. District Court Judge Richard M. Gergel, in a test 
of the South Carolina immigration statutes, held that only the 
federal government, and not the states, can regulate immigra-
tion. In December 2011, Judge Gergel also prevented the state 
of South Carolina from giving the police the authority to arrest 
and hold suspected illegal immigrants while their immigration 
status was being checked. Similar kinds of decisions were ren-
dered in federal district court ruling on state statutes in Georgia, 
Alabama, and Arizona. These lower court decisions are under 
appeal, and the United States Supreme Court may ultimately 
decide that the states have not overstepped their authority.
Enhanced Federal Strategies for Control of Illegal  
Immigration
Contrary to the views of many in the public, the federal govern-
ment is currently doing much to combat illegal immigration. 

	
Perspectives	
131
Most prominently, there is extensive electronic monitoring, 
fencing, and boots-on-the ground patrolling along most of the 
U.S.-Mexican border. Moreover, several additional efforts are 
in the planning stages, including making E-Verify mandatory, 
refining a database that matches the entry of foreign nation-
als to their actual departure, and multiple amnesty proposals. 
E-Verify is an Internet-based system that allows businesses 
to determine the eligibility of their employees to work in the 
United States. It was established in 1997 for implementation 
at the state level, but has been of limited success because there 
is no mandatory requirement for its use. As of August 2011, 
only ten states had imposed mandatory E-Verify requirements 
on its employers (Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Indiana, Loui-
siana, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Utah, and 
Virginia).
In May 2011, the Supreme Court issued the United States 
Chamber of Commerce v. Whiting decision (558 F. 3d.856) that 
strengthened state authority to make participation in E-Verify 
mandatory for all employers. In the Whiting decision, the Court 
upheld an Arizona law that required employers within the state 
to use E-Verify to confirm employment eligibility of all new 
hires. Furthermore, the decision allowed the state to suspend 
or revoke an employer’s business license if the employer has 
knowingly hired unauthorized workers.
Although its net effect may indeed be to reduce the num-
ber of illegal immigrants, the Whiting decision is also likely 
to complicate the body of employment verification laws for 
employers from one state to the next. Proposals are before the 
federal government to establish a single, mandatory, reliable, 
and secure employment verification system that is consistent 
from one state to the next, from border to border, and from 
coast to coast.
Foreign Nationals Database. A second federal strategy under 
proposal is the implementation of a nationwide, comprehensive 
database that links data on foreign nationals who enter the 
country with data on those who leave. In essence, we know 
when foreign nationals enter the United States. However, 

132	
Illegal Immigration
there is no comprehensive database that indicates when 
they actually depart. As a result, even though they may have 
entered the country legally, their legal status may change after 
they arrive. Because we don’t know when they leave, or even if 
they leave, we have no realistic estimation on who is actually 
here  illegally, how long they have been here, or how many 
people have stayed longer than they have permission to. The 
development and implementation of a database that integrates 
these two types of data would go a considerable distance in 
estimating the scope and magnitude of the illegal immigration 
problem, as well as tracking down those who have overstayed 
their legal status.
Amnesty. A third strategy to ease the problem associated with 
illegal immigrants is to implement one of several proposals 
that would grant amnesty. To some, amnesty sends the wrong 
message: even though an individual is here illegally, he or she 
is receiving a “get-out-of-jail-for-free” card. However, amnesty 
proposals do not necessarily involve blanket amnesty. Rather, 
they employ a strategy of “conditional” amnesty. Conditional 
amnesty is based on the idea that if you’re here illegally, you can 
receive amnesty under certain conditions—having been here for 
a lengthy period of time, not having committed any criminal 
acts, and being willing to become a naturalized citizen by going 
through the lengthy process that naturalization presently entails. 
And the use of conditional amnesty would go a long way in 
also ensuring that the provisions of the DREAM Act could be 
continued.
Summary
Despite a vast body of federal immigration law, some states 
have enacted legislation that is more directly responsive to their 
unique, individual needs. The perception on the part of these 
states is that federal law does not go far enough to address the 
problem of illegal immigration. However, to date, federal courts 

	
Perspectives	
133
have stuck down a number of provisions of these state statutes. 
The prevailing sentiment expressed by the federal courts is that 
these state statutes have overreached their actual authority to 
control illegal immigration.
Any real solutions must involve the federal government and 
the states working together. Obviously, the federal government 
has the constitutional authority on its side; at the same time, the 
federal government cannot implement strategies like E-Verify, 
a national database, and a conditional amnesty program with-
out considerable buy-in and assistance from the states.
References
Adrian, James. 2005. “Criminal Networks, Illegal  
Immigration and the Threat to Border Security.” 
International Journal of Police Science & Management 7, 
no. 4: 219–229.
Buckler, Kevin. 2008. “Public Opinion on Illegal 
Immigration: A Test of Seven Core Hypotheses.” Journal of 
Crime & Justice 3, no. 1: 113–147.
Cornelius, Wayne. 2005. “Controlling ‘Unwanted’ Immigration: 
Lessons from the United States, 1993–2004.” Journal of 
Ethnic & Migration Studies 31, no. 4: 775–794.
Coutin, Susan Bibler. 2005. “Contesting Criminality: Illegal 
Immigration and the Spatialization of Legality.” Theoretical 
Criminology 9, no. 1: 5–33.
Leerkes, Arjen, Mark Leach, and James Bachmeier. 2012. 
“Borders behind the Border: An Exploration of State-Level 
Differences in Migration Control and Their Effects on U.S. 
Migration Patterns.” Journal of Ethnic & Migration Studies, 
38, no. 1: 111–129.
Tichenor, Daniel. 2002. Dividing Lines: The Politics of 
Immigration Control in America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.

134	
Illegal Immigration
Todaro, Michael P. and Lydia Maruszko. 1987. “Illegal 
Migration and US Immigration Reform: A Conceptual 
Framework.” Population and Development Review 13, no. 1: 
101–114.
Varsanyi, Monica. 2011. “Neoliberalism and Nativism: Local 
Anti-Immigrant Policy Activism and an Emerging Politics 
of Scale.” International Journal of Urban and Regional 
Research 35, no. 2: 295–311.
Vaughns, Katherine L. 2005. “Restoring the Rule of Law: 
Reflections on Fixing the Immigration System and 
Exploring Failed Policy Choices.” University of Maryland 
Law Journal of Race, Religion, Gender & Class 5, no. 2: 
151–186.
Woodland, Alan D. and Chisato Yoshida. 2006. “Risk  
Preference, Immigration Policy and Illegal Immigration.” 
Journal of Development Economics 81, no. 2: 500–513.
Dr. David E. Krahl is an Assistant Professor of Criminology 
and Criminal Justice at the University of Tampa. In his profes-
sional career, Krahl has extensive and diverse management and 
administrative experience in the different areas of the criminal jus-
tice system including the police, courts, and corrections. Krahl also 
has treatment, intervention, and prevention experience in the field 
of substance abuse and chemical dependency at both the adult and 
juvenile levels.

This page intentionally left blank


137
Introduction
This chapter profiles people and organizations involved in the issue 
of illegal immigration.
The biographical section is an extensive but partial list of the 
individuals who are key players in the arena of illegal immigra-
tion reform. The chapter covers executive branch officials, includ-
ing several U.S. presidents; several state governors who have 
taken prominent action on the problem or are chief executives of 
high-immigrant population states; legislative branch officials—key 
senators and members of the House of Representatives; a federal 
judge; and nongovernmental actors, including important advo-
cates for and against illegal immigration reform legislation, as 
well as scholars, or “think tank” actors, who have had a particular 
impact on the debates over illegal immigration policy reform. They 
are presented here in alphabetical order by last name.
The biographical section is followed by profiles of important orga-
nizations. It discusses national domestic government agencies first.
The domestic government section is followed by a list of some 
of the more important international organizations active in the 
4	
Profiles
Undocumented student Alma Castrejon, originally from Mexico, who 
has two college degrees but is unable to work, joins other undocumented 
students and community members protesting outside the Unites States 
Immigration Customs Enforcement (ICE) offices on August 24, 2011. 
The protestors called for the termination of the “Secure Communities Pro-
gram” in front of the Federal Building in Los Angeles. (AP Photo/Damian 
Dovarganes)

138	
Illegal Immigration
global scene, with particular emphasis on those involved in refugee 
issues and concerns.
In addition to governmental agencies and organizations, there 
are numerous important nongovernmental organizations involved 
(often known as NGOs or nonprofits). This chapter discusses those 
most active in advocacy for or against immigration and illegal immi-
gration matters. For each organization, it discusses their positions on 
immigration reform. The chapter lists and discusses scholarly organi-
zations involved in the policy arena of immigration reform. These are 
presented as examples of so-called immigration-related “think tanks” 
or centers for the study of immigration and immigration policy.
Biographies
Roy Beck (b. 1948)
Beck took his degree in journalism from the University of Mis-
souri. In the late 1970s he wrote on business news at the Cin-
cinnati Enquirer, then covered religion and politics, including 
covering Congress as chief Washington correspondent for the 
Booth chain of daily newspapers. He has written two books on 
immigration, one on its impact on the environment and the other 
on its impact on the U.S. labor market and on local communities. 
He has published on the topic in the Atlantic Monthly, New York 
Times, National Review, Washington Post, and Christian Science 
Monitor. He has studied immigration policy as an area of special 
concern while covering Congress. He is a frequent speaker on 
immigration matters before a wide variety of groups and organi-
zations. His career in print media coverage of immigration policy 
making finally led him to develop the Numbers USA Web site.
Michael Bennet (b. 1964)
Senator Bennet (D-CO) is the senior senator from Colorado 
and a member of the Senate’s “Gang of Eight” who sponsored 
and crafted S.744, the comprehensive immigration reform 
bill that passed the Senate in 2013. He was first appointed to 
the U.S. Senate in 2009, and elected in 2010. Before being 

	
Profiles	
139
elected to the Senate he was in private business and public 
service—Superintendent of Denver Public Schools. He took 
his BA degree from Wesleyan University and his JD from Yale 
Law School, where he was editor-in-chief of the Yale Law Jour-
nal. He is a member of the Senate Education Committee, the 
Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry, Committee on Finance, 
and Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions.
Sandford D. Bishop (b. 1947)
Rep. Sandford D. Bishop (D-GA) graduated with his B.A. from 
Morehouse College in 1968. He took his J.D. from Emory Uni-
versity in 1971. He served in the U.S. Army from 1971 to 1972. 
He was a practicing attorney from 1971 to 1992. His political 
career began with his election to and service in the Georgia 
House of Representatives, 1976–1990, and then the Georgia 
senate, 1990–1992. He was elected to the U.S. House of Rep-
resentatives in 1992. He serves on the Agriculture Committee 
and on the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence. He 
is the ranking minority member on the Technical and Tactical 
Intelligence subcommittee. He serves on the House Appropria-
tions Committee. His most notable effort on the immigration 
issue has been his sponsoring in the House of the 1998 Guest 
Worker Program bill. He is a member of the Law Enforcement 
Caucus and the Congressional Black Caucus.
Diane Black (b. 1951)
Rep. Diane Black (R-TN) is a leading sponsor among the 24 
Republicans who have led the effort to enact the Birthright 
Citizenship Act of 2013, which would strip citizenship of 
native-born persons whose parents are in the United States 
in unauthorized immigrant status. She has a BA in nursing, 
1991; and an AA degree in nursing, 1971. First elected to 
the House in 2010, she serves on the House Ways and Means 
Committee and the House Budget Committee. Black is a 
member of the Tea Party Caucus and the Congressional Coast 
Guard Caucus.

140	
Illegal Immigration
John Boehner (b. 1949)
Rep. John Boehner (R-OH) is Speaker of the House. He effec-
tively killed any chance of enactment of comprehensive immi-
gration reform by refusing to bring the House version of S.744 
to a House floor vote. Speaker Boehner took a business degree 
from Xavier University in 1977. He was elected to the House 
in 1990. In 1994 he was a prominent supporter of the Con-
tract with America. He was a member of the House Agricul-
tural Committee, and the “Gang of Seven” in 1992. He served 
as the House majority leader in 2006, and was elected Speaker 
of the House in 2010, and again in November, 2014 as the 
53rd Speaker of the House. As Speaker he controls the flow of 
legislative proposals in the House and has consistently resisted 
taking up comprehensive immigration reform, but rather, sup-
ports piecemeal consideration of bills focused on border con-
trol and restriction and opposed “amnesty” proposals.
Janet Brewer (b. 1945)
Janet Brewer was the Republican governor of Arizona until she 
chose not to run for reelection in 2014. She is and was a fre-
quently outspoken critic of the Obama administration and its 
immigration policy. During her five years in office as governor, 
she advocated and secured passage in 2010 of the state’s harsh 
immigration law (the harshest law passed by any state), which was 
subsequently overturned as unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme 
Court in Arizona v. United States (132 S.Ct. 2492, 2010).
Jerry Brown (b. 1938)
Jerry Brown is the governor of California, the state with the 
nation’s largest Hispanic population and the most unauthor-
ized/undocumented immigrants. He attended a Jesuit semi-
nary in 1956, but left the Jesuit order in 1960 and enrolled 
in the University of California, Berkeley, from which he took 
his BA in classics. He graduated Yale Law School with his JD 
degree in 1964. In 1970 he was elected California Secretary of 

	
Profiles	
141
State. He was first elected governor of California in 1974, and 
reelected in 1978. After his governorship, he lectured widely, 
led delegations to China and the Soviet Union, studied Span-
ish in Mexico, spent six months in Japan studying Japanese 
culture and Buddhist practice, worked with Mother Teresa in 
India, and was a CARE ambassador to Bangladesh during the 
devastating floods of 1987. He married Anne Gust, in a cer-
emony officiated by Sen. Dianne Feinstein and at a Catholic 
ceremony in the San Francisco church where he was baptized. 
In 1998 he served as mayor of Oakland and was reelected in 
2002. In 2006 he was elected California’s 31st attorney general. 
Governor Brown was elected for his third gubernatorial term 
in 2010 and reelected in 2014. He officially supports President 
Obama’s executive actions for DACA and DAPA.
George Walker Bush (b. 1946)
Former president George W. Bush was enrolled at Phillips 
Academy in Andover, Massachusetts, in 1961. He worked on 
his father’s Senate bid in 1964. He graduated Yale University 
in 1968, and then enlisted in the Texas Air National Guard. In 
1973 he entered the Harvard Business School, taking his MBA 
in 1975. He founded an oil and gas exploration company that 
year. In 1978 he lost a bid to the U.S. House. In 1978 he 
worked on his father’s campaign for the presidency. He joined 
a group of investors buying the Texas Rangers baseball team in 
1989. He was elected governor of Texas in 1994 and reelected 
in 1998. In 2000 he won the presidency after losing the popu-
lar vote but being certified as winner in Florida: he won the 
Electoral College vote and a U.S. Supreme Court case that 
prevented recounts of disputed votes in Florida. He was inau-
gurated in 2001. He won reelection in 2004 and served until 
2008. On September 11, 2001, terrorists struck the Pentagon 
and the World Trade Twin Towers in New York City. President 
Bush launched a “war on terrorism,” and his administration 
authored and Congress passed the USA Patriot Act, granting 
the executive branch sweeping powers to deal with terrorism 

142	
Illegal Immigration
that have had significant impact on illegal immigration control 
efforts. Congress also passed the administration-backed law 
to create a Department of Homeland Security that dissolved 
the INS and moved its activities to the new department. The 
administration is noted for its crackdown on illegal immigrants 
and efforts to enforce expedited removal. He appointed the 
first director of National Intelligence, a position that has the 
potential to impact on efforts to control international terrorism 
(which will in turn affect illegal immigration). He is currently 
promoting enactment of a guest-worker program and favors a 
comprehensive approach to immigration reform.
Thomas Carper (b. 1947)
Senator Carper (D-DE) is the ranking member of the Home-
land Security Committee, which oversees the DHS. He favors 
earned legalization and a guest-worker program. He received 
his BA in economics in 1968, went on to become a navy flight 
officer, than earned his MBA from the University of Delaware. 
He served two terms of governor of Delaware, after his election 
in 1992. He served five terms in the House of Representatives 
before being elected to the U.S. Senate in 2001.
James Earl Carter Jr. (b. 1924)
Jimmy Carter was born in Hope, Georgia. In 1941 he entered 
the Georgia Institute of Technology. In 1943 he entered the 
Annapolis Naval Academy, where he graduated in 1946. In 
1962 he was elected to the Georgia state senate. In 1970 he was 
elected governor of Georgia. Carter was elected president in 1976 
and served until 1980. In 1978 he deregulated the oil industry, 
pushed the Panama Canal treaty through the Senate, and signed 
the Camp David Accords. His most significant contribution to 
immigration policy was the establishment of the Select Commis-
sion on Immigration and Refugee Policy (SCIRP), whose rec-
ommendations led to the Immigration Reform and Control Act 
of 1986 (IRCA). The commission’s work has formed the basis 
for much of the debate over illegal immigration reform since 

	
Profiles	
143
then. In 1980, the hostage crisis in Iran and the failure of the 
Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) to track Iranian 
students in the United States contributed to his failed reelec-
tion bid. Carter’s humanitarian work has led to his involvement 
in negotiations regarding the Haitian crisis, and he has worked 
with the United Nations on refugee problems and as an external 
election observer in several countries around the world. He was 
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2002.
Linda Chavez (b. 1947)
Linda Chavez is founder and chairperson of the Center for 
Equal Opportunity, a policy research and advocacy organiza-
tion headquartered in Virginia. She also writes a weekly syn-
dicated column and is a political analyst for Fox News, hosts a 
daily radio show in Washington, D.C., and has written three 
books: Towards a New Politics of Hispanic Assimilation (1991), 
An Unlikely Conservative (2002), and Betrayal (2004). She 
served as chairperson of the National Commission on Migrant 
Education (1988–1992), as White House director of public 
liaison in 1985, as staff director of the U.S. Commission on 
Civil Rights (1983–1985), and as a member of the Admin-
istrative Conference of the United States (1984–1986). She 
was a Republican nominee for the U.S. Senate from Mary-
land in 1986. In 1992 she was elected to the UN Human 
Rights Commission, where she served a four-year term. She 
chairs the Latino Alliance of the Republican Party. In 2000, 
she was honored by the Library of Congress as a “Living Leg-
end” for her contributions to America’s cultural and histori-
cal legacies. In January 2001, President Bush nominated her 
to be the secretary of labor, but after considerable controversy 
she withdrew her name from consideration. She was born in 
Albuquerque, New Mexico, and received her BA from the Uni-
versity of Colorado in 1970. Chavez served as editor of the 
quarterly journal American Educator (1977–1983). She also 
served the American Federation of Teachers as assistant to its 
president (1982–1983) and as assistant director of legislation 

144	
Illegal Immigration
(1975–1977). She is a strong advocate of legal-immigration 
reform and control of illegal immigration, and she opposes 
amnesty for illegal immigrants.
William Jefferson Clinton (b. 1946)
Former president William Clinton entered Georgetown Uni-
versity in 1964 and clerked for Arkansas senator J. William Ful-
bright in 1966. He graduated from Georgetown in 1968 and 
went on to Oxford University as a Rhodes Scholar. In 1970 
he entered Yale Law School and received his law degree there 
in 1973. He began teaching at the University of Arkansas Law 
School in 1973 and lost an election for the U.S. House of Rep-
resentatives in 1974. He was elected Arkansas attorney general 
in 1976. He lost his first bid for governor of the state in 1980 
but was elected to that office in 1982 and reelected in 1984. In 
1986 he chaired the National Governors Association, and in 
1988 he was reelected governor. Clinton was elected president in 
1992, and reelected in 1996. His most significant illegal immi-
gration policy role was shepherding the Personal Responsibil-
ity and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 through 
Congress and signing it into law. This welfare reform act had 
numerous and important immigration-related provisions, and 
it was soon followed by the Illegal Immigration Reform and 
Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996. A  1998 sexual affair 
scandal led to his impeachment in 1998. He was acquitted by 
the U.S. Senate in 1999 and served out his term as president. 
After his term ended, Clinton served with distinction in disas-
ter relief efforts for the United Nations, most notably efforts to 
alleviate the devastation created by the Asian tsunami of 2004 
and to aid refugees. He founded the Clinton Initiative, and is 
an outspoken advocate for comprehensive immigration reform.
J. Richard Cohen (b. 1941)
J. Richard Cohen is president of the Southern Poverty Law 
Center, the civil rights advocacy organization headquartered 

	
Profiles	
145
in Montgomery, Alabama, founded in 1971 by Joe Levin, 
Julian Bond, and Morris Dees. It is a leading advocacy group 
on immigration reform, antifascism, and antipoverty issues. 
Cohen is a graduate of Columbia University and the Univer-
sity of Virginia Law School. He joined the SPLC in 1986, after 
which it won a series of landmark lawsuits against some of the 
nation’s most violent white supremacist organization. In 1997, 
the national legal magazine, The American Lawyer, selected him 
as 1 of 45 public sector lawyers “whose vision and commit-
ment are changing lives.” He recently won a case in which the 
Christian Knights of the Ku Klux Klan were handed a record 
$37.8 million judgment against the Klan group for the burn-
ing of a South Carolina church. He has led the SPLC into 
cooperative work with a host of proimmigrant rights groups 
advocating on behalf of legal and illegal immigrants.
John Conyers Jr. (b. 1929)
Conyers (D-MI) is the ranking member on the House Judi-
ciary Committee, which considers all legislative bills dealing 
with immigration matters. He is author of several books on 
civil rights matters. He was educated at Wayne State University. 
He was first elected to the Congress in 1965 and is the oldest, 
longest-serving member of Congress. He serves on the House 
Judiciary Committee and the Constitution Committee, and 
on the Intellectual Property, Competition, and Internet. He 
is founding member of the Congressional Black Caucus, and 
has strongly supported comprehensive immigration reform. 
He served in the National Guard and the U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers in the Korean War. He earned his BA degree in 1957 
and his JD in 1958 at Wayne State University.
John Cornyn (b. 1952)
John Cornyn is the junior senator from Texas. He was born in 
Houston, Texas, and received his BA from Trinity University in 
1973, his JD from St. Mary’s Law School in 1977, and an LLM 

146	
Illegal Immigration
degree from the University of Virginia in 1995. He served as 
the San Antonio District Court judge from 1984 to 1990, on 
the Texas Supreme Court from 1990 to 1997, and as Texas 
attorney general from 1998 to 2002. As attorney general, he 
argued that federal law bars public hospitals from giving ille-
gal immigrants anything but emergency treatment, immuni-
zations, and communicable disease treatment. He was elected 
to the U.S. Senate in 2002. He serves on the Armed Services 
Committee; on Budget, Environment and Public Works; on 
the Judiciary Committee and its subcommittees of Adminis-
trative Oversight and Courts, Constitution, Civil Rights, and 
Property Rights, of which he is chair; on Crime, Corrections 
and Victims’ Rights; and on Immigration, Border Security, and 
Citizenship. He was the Senate cosponsor of the Comprehen-
sive Enforcement and Immigration Control Act of 2005, a bill 
to reform illegal immigration policy that was a more conserva-
tive approach than the Kennedy-McCain bill. In the Senate 
today, he sponsors and supports the Secure Our Borders First 
Act of 2015. In 2015, he became assistant majority leader. He 
has sponsored the Cross-Border Trade Enhancement Act of 
2015. He serves on the Senate Homeland Security and Gov-
ernment Affairs Committee and has opposed any proposal he 
deems is an amnesty provision.
Andrew Cuomo (b. 1957)
Andrew Cuomo is the 56th governor of New York, one of 
the biggest immigrant-receiving states in the nation. He was 
elected governor in 2011. He previously served as New York’s 
attorney general from 2007 to 2010. He has been outspoken 
on the need for comprehensive immigration reform. He also 
served as U.S. Secretary of the Department of Housing and 
Urban Development from 1997 to 2001. He graduated from 
Fordham University in 1979, and took his law degree from 
Albany Law School in 1982. In 2014, he published his book: 
All Things Possible: Setback and Success in Public Life.

	
Profiles	
147
Thomas J. Donohue (b. 1938)
Thomas Donohue is president and CEO of the U.S. Cham-
ber of Commerce, which is a leading advocate for expansion 
of the various guest-worker programs to deal with immigra-
tion matters and the illegal immigration problem. He has been 
with the chamber since 1997 and established its Institute for 
Legal Reform. He was born in New York City and has his BA 
degree from St. John’s University and an MA degree in busi-
ness administration from Adelphi University. Although the 
chamber is officially nonpartisan, it more commonly supports 
Republicans; yet in 2015 Donohue said: “If the Republicans 
don’t change their immigration policy position, they shouldn’t 
even bother to run a candidate [for president] in 2016.”
Richard Durbin (b. 1944)
Dick Durbin (D-IL) is one of the Senate’s “Gang of Eight,” 
who helped craft S.744, the bipartisan comprehensive immi-
gration reform measure that passed the Senate in 2013. He 
is the 47th senator from Illinois, and has served in the Senate 
since 1996, having been reelected in 2002, 2005, and 2014. 
He is a member of the Senate Judiciary Committee and of 
the Appropriations Committee, and is ranking member on 
the Subcommittee on Constitution, Civil Rights, and Human 
Rights. He is the assistant Democratic leader in the Senate, 
commonly known as minority whip. As such, he is a leader of 
the Democrats in the Senate and their chief vote counter.
Dianne Feinstein (b. 1933)
Feinstein is California’s senior senator. She was elected in 1992 
and reelected in 2000. She received a BA from Stanford Uni-
versity in 1955. Prior to serving in the Senate, she served on 
California’s Women’s Parole Board, 1960–1966; on the San 
Francisco Board of Supervisors, 1970–1978; and as mayor of 
San Francisco, 1978–1988. Senator Feinstein serves on several 

148	
Illegal Immigration
committees important to immigration: the Appropriations Com-
mittee; Agriculture and Rural Development; Interior; Labor, 
Health and Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies; 
Judiciary; Immigration; and Technology, Terrorism and Gov-
ernment Information. A tough critic of the Immigration and 
Naturalization Service (INS) and now Immigration and Cus-
toms Enforcement (ICE), she has been notably involved in bills 
to strengthen the Border Patrol (1993), sponsored increased fees 
to fund the “fencing-in” pilot program in the San Diego area, 
and was instrumental in the legislative battles leading to the 
Department of Homeland Security. Feinstein is a sharp critic of 
some of the alleged abuses of civil liberties in the administration 
of the USA Patriot Act. Her most recent legislative proposal of 
note to illegal immigration is a bill to make it a federal crime to 
tunnel under a U.S. border. She has been and continues to be a 
sharp critic of the Department of Homeland Security.
Jeff Flake (b. 1962)
Senator Flake (R-AZ) is a member of the Senate’s “Gang of 
Eight” and sponsor of S.744, the bipartisan comprehensive 
immigration reform bill that passed the Senate in 2013. He 
was a cattle rancher before entering electoral politics. He is a 
graduate of Brigham Young University and served on a Mor-
mon mission. He has a B.A. in international relations and a 
M.A. in political science. He served in the House of Represen-
tatives from 2001 to 2013. He is an influential member of the 
Senate Judiciary Committee.
William Gheen (no birth date available)
William Gheen is president and spokesman of the Americans 
for Legal Immigration PAC (ALIPAC) and manages all opera-
tions and activities. He has led its fight against illegal immi-
gration and any form of amnesty since 2004. He is a veteran 
campaign consultant and North Carolina native with over 
15  years’ experience in Internet and grassroots organizing, 
marketing, research, campaign management, and event coor-
dination. He has a B. A. degree in political science from East 

	
Profiles	
149
Carolina University and has experience with over 40 campaigns 
for public office. He has created new voter outreach methods 
for campaigns and issue advocacy. He served as the NC senate 
sergeant-at-arms, 1997–2003, and as legislative assistant in the 
NC General Assembly, and as a registered lobbyist, and has 
helped pass several laws addressing illegal immigration while 
maintaining the national operations of ALIPAC.
Jim Gilchrist (b. 1949)
Jim Gilchrist is an American political activist and the cofounder 
and president of the Minuteman Project, an activist group 
whose aim is to prevent illegal immigration across the south-
ern border of the United States. He served in the U.S. Marine 
Corps, and is active with the Constitution Party. He organizes 
individuals and groups of volunteers to patrol the U.S.-Mexican 
border to intercept undocumented immigrant border-crossers.
Robert Goldsborough (no birth date available)
Goldsborough founded the Americans for Immigration Con-
trol in 1982. He is a columnist for Middle America News and 
is a harsh critic of U.S. immigration policy, calling for drasti-
cally reduced legal immigration and stricter control over illegal 
immigration. He is especially critical of any legalization pro-
gram and any guest-worker program. He is prominent in the 
English-only movement.
Bob Goodlatte (b. 1952)
Rep. Bob Goodlatte took his B.A. in 1974 from Bates College, and 
his JD from Washington and Lee Law School in 1977. He began 
his political career working for Congressman Caldwell Butler in 
1977. He practiced law from 1970 until 1992, when he was first 
elected to the House. He serves on the Agriculture Committee, 
and as the new Chairman of the House Judiciary Committee and 
its Crime, Terrorism and Homeland Security Subcommittee, and 
on the Select Committee on Homeland Security and its Subcom-
mittee on Infrastructure and Border Security. He has sponsored a 

150	
Illegal Immigration
law imposing tougher penalties on commercial counterfeiters. He 
has compiled a conservative voting record. He sponsored a bill to 
end the visa lottery. He is chair of the House Judiciary Commit-
tee and has sponsored the Secure Our Borders First bill.
Trey Gowdy (b. 1964)
Gowdy (R-SC) is a member of the House Judiciary Committee 
and serves as chair of its Subcommittee on Immigration and 
Border Security, and as chairman of the House Select Com-
mittee on the Events Surrounding the 2012 Terrorist Attack 
in Benghazi. He continues to serve on the House Committee 
on Ethics, Oversight and Government Reform, and Judiciary. 
He has been a leading spokesman against any comprehensive 
immigration reform measure in the House, sponsoring its 
“Secure Our Borders First Act” currently in the House com-
mittee. He is sponsor of HR1148: To amend the Immigration 
and Nationality Act. Gowdy graduated from Baylor University 
in 1986 with a degree in history, and the University of South 
Carolina School of Law in 1989, where he was a member of 
the scholastic honor society: “Order of the Wig and Robe.” He 
served six years as a federal prosecutor prior to his election to 
the House of Representatives.
Lindsey Graham (b. 1955)
Senator Graham (R-SC) is one of the Senate’s “Gang of Eight,” 
which sponsored and helped pass, in 2013, S.744, the bipar-
tisan comprehensive immigration reform bill. He was a mem-
ber of the Senate Judiciary Committee; and is on the Senate 
Armed Services Committee, 2008–2014. He graduated with a 
BA degree from the University of South Carolina in 1977, and 
took his JD from the South Carolina School of Law in 1981. 
He served in the U.S. Air Force from 1982 to 1988, and is an 
Air Force Reserves officer. He served in the House of Repre-
sentatives from 1995 to 2002, and was elected to the Senate 
in 2002, 2008, and 2014. He is a declared candidate for the 
Republican Party nomination for president in 2016.

	
Profiles	
151
Charles “Chuck” Grassley (b. 1933)
Senator Grassley (R-IA) is chairman of the Senate Judiciary 
Committee, which oversees all legislative matters concerning 
immigration, and its Subcommittee on Immigration, Refugees 
and Border Security. He served in the House of Representatives 
from 1975 to 1981, and was first elected to the U.S. Senate and 
1981 and reelected in 1987, 1993, 1997, 2003, and 2010.
Luis Guitierrez (b. 1953)
Guitierrez (D-IL) is a key member of the House of Represen-
tatives’ “Gang of Eight” who sponsored the House version of 
S.744. He is emerging as a key progressive congressman on 
immigration matters. He is in his 12th term, having served 
since 1992. He is a Northwestern Illinois University gradu-
ate. He is a leading member of the Congressional Hispanic 
Caucus, serving as chairman of its Immigration Task Force, 
and has played an instrumental role in President Obama’s deci-
sion to use executive action regarding DACA and DAPA. He 
is a leading Latino and immigrant spokesperson. He serves on 
the House Judiciary Committee and on its Subcommittee on 
Immigration and Border Security.
Andrew Hanen (b. 1953)
Andrew Hanen is an article III federal judge for the United 
States District Court for the Southern District of Texas. He was 
appointed to the federal bench by President George Bush in 
2002. Judge Hanen took his undergraduate degree from Deni-
son University in 1975, and his JD from the Baylor University 
School of Law in 1978. He was confirmed by the U.S. Senate 
in May 2002, on an unopposed vote of 97–0. His February 16, 
2015, decision in a case brought by the attorneys general of 
25 Republican-dominated states put an injunction (a judicial 
hold) to halt implementation of key elements of the immigra-
tion initiative by the Obama administration’s DOJ regarding 
the president’s executive actions known as DAPA. He ruled 

152	
Illegal Immigration
that President Obama lacked the authority to implement the 
new immigration program regarding granting a deferred status 
to illegal immigrants who are the parents of U.S. citizens or 
legal residents. The Obama administration has filed a suit chal-
lenging his ruling with the Federal Circuit Court.
Orrin Hatch (b. 1934)
Senator Hatch (R-UT) is a key member and chair of the Senate 
Judiciary Committee, and the most senior Republican in the 
Senate, having been elected in 1977. Senator Hatch is noted 
for his sponsorship of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
He failed in his bid for the Republican Party’s nomination for 
president in 2000. He attended Brigham Young University and 
the University of Pittsburgh and has his JD from the University 
of Pittsburgh Law School. He is chair of the Senate Commit-
tee on Finance, and is in his seventh term in the Senate and is 
president pro tempore of the Senate.
Ruben Hinojosa (b. 1940)
Hinojosa (D-TX) is chairman of the Congressional Hispanic 
Caucus. He is in his 9th term in the Congress, having first been 
elected to the House of Representatives in 1996. He has a BA 
degree in business and an MA in business administration from 
the University of Texas-Austin. He is ranking member of the 
House Financial Services Committee. In 2014 he received the 
Hispanic Heritage Award for his advocacy of Latino/Hispanic 
issues.
Donald Huddle (no birth date available)
Donald Huddle is a leading economist and scholar of ways to 
measure the cost-benefit ratio of immigration generally and 
illegal immigration specifically. He is professor emeritus of 
Rice University, in Economics. His 1993 study for the carry-
ing capacity set off the debate over the “burden or benefit” 
controversy regarding illegal immigration. Since 1993, he has 

	
Profiles	
153
authored numerous and influential articles on the subject of 
the cost and benefits of immigration and is generally viewed 
as a leading authority on the subject. His groundbreaking 
journal article, based on the 1993 study, is: Huddle, Don-
ald and David Simcox. “The Impact of Immigration on the 
Social Security System,” Population and Environment 16, no. 1 
(September 1994).
Cristina Jimenez (no birth date available)
Cristina Jimenez is the cofounder and managing director of the 
United We Dream advocacy organization based in Washing-
ton, D.C. It is a leading advocacy organization for the “Dream-
ers,” and lobbies congress and the Obama administration for 
pro-Dreamer policy. United We Dream was important in push-
ing President Obama to issue his executive actions on DACA 
and DAPA. Ms. Jimenez was born in Ecuador and came to the 
United States at age 13, attending both high school and col-
lege as an unauthorized immigrant. For the last decade she has 
organized immigrant youth and workers to advocate for proim-
migration policies at the local and national levels. Jimenez was 
recognized among Forbes “30 and under 30 in Law and Policy,” 
and the Chronicle of Philanthropy named her one of its five non-
profit leaders who will influence public policy. She cofounded 
the New York State Youth Leadership Council and the Dream 
Membership Program at Queens College, and served as an 
immigration policy analyst for the Drum Major Institute for 
Public Policy. She is an immigrant rights organizer at Make the 
Road New York. She took her master’s degree in public admin-
istration and public policy from the School of Public Affairs at 
Baruch College, CUNY, and graduated cum laude with a BA 
in political science and business at Queens College, CUNY.
Jeh Johnson (b. 1957)
Jeh Johnson is the secretary of the Department of Homeland 
Security, appointed by President Obama in 2013, and thus 

154	
Illegal Immigration
oversees the implementation of all laws, policies, and proce-
dures pertaining to illegal immigration and legal immigration. 
He is an American civil and criminal trial lawyer. He is a gradu-
ate of Morehouse College and took his JD from Columbia Law 
School. He served s the Air Force General Counsel and, then in 
2009, as the general counsel in the Department of Defense. He 
was also an United States Assistant States Attorney in the South 
District of New York.
Ron Johnson (b. 1955)
Sen. Ron Johnson (R-WI), who as of 2015, is the new chair of 
the Homeland Security and Government Affairs Committee. 
He is a sponsor of the Secure Our Borders First Act of 2014. 
He is a University of Minnesota graduate. He was elected to 
the U.S. Senate in 2011 and serves also as a member of the 
Committee on Foreign Relations.
Don M. Kerwin Jr. (no birth date available)
Don Kerwin is executive director of the Center for Migration 
Studies in New York, the leading progressive “think tank,” 
which is a proimmigration organization studying and advo-
cating for comprehensive immigration reform. He became 
director in 2011, succeeding Lydio Tomasi as such. He is the 
author of Migrant Children, Uninvited Guests, and Welcoming 
the Stranger, 2014. Prior to his coming to the CMS, he worked 
for the Catholic Legal Immigration Network, Inc. (CLINIC) 
between 1992 and 2008, serving as its executive director for 
15 years. He coordinated CLINIC’s political asylum project 
for Haitians. CLINIC, a subsidiary of the United States Con-
ference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB), is a public interest legal 
corporation supporting a national network of charitable legal 
programs for immigrants. Between 2008 and 2011, Kerwin 
served as vice president for Programs at the Migration Policy 
Institute, where he frequently wrote on immigration, labor stan-
dards, and refugee policy issues. He also served as an associate 

	
Profiles	
155
fellow at the Woodstock Theological Center coordinating its 
Theology of Migration Project, and as a member of the Ameri-
can Bar Association’s Commission on Immigration, a member 
of the Council on Foreign Relations’ Immigration Task Force, 
a board member for the Jesuit Refugee Services-USA, a board 
member for the Capital Area Immigrant Rights Coalition, and 
as adviser to the USCCB Committee on Migration. He cur-
rently serves on the board of directors for the Border Network 
for Human Rights in El Paso, Texas.
Peter King (b. 1944)
King was born in Manhattan; his parents were Irish immi-
grants and Democrats; his father was an NYPD detective. He 
received a BA degree from St. Francis College in 1965 and took 
his JD degree from the University of Notre Dame in 1968. He 
served in the Army National Guard from 1968 to 1973. He 
practiced law from 1968 to 1972, worked as deputy attorney 
for Nassau County from 1972 to 1974, and was later both the 
executive assistant to the county executive and general counsel. 
He was elected to the Hempstead Town Council from 1977 
to 1981 and served as Nassau County comptroller in 1977. 
Now in his 12th term, he was first elected to the House in 
1992. He has a moderately conservative voting record. King 
serves on the Financial Services Committee, on the Interna-
tional Relations Committee and its subcommittee on Interna-
tional Terrorism, and on the Select Committee on Homeland 
Security and its subcommittees on Emergency Preparedness 
and Response, and Intelligence and Counterterrorism. He has 
sponsored English-only legislation and generally opposes aid to 
illegal immigrants.
Amy Klobuchar (b. 1960)
Senator Klobuchar (D-MN) is a leading minority member of 
the Senate Judiciary Committee and on its subcommittee on 
Immigration. She is the senior senator from Minnesota, first 

156	
Illegal Immigration
elected to the U.S. Senate in 2007. She graduated from Yale 
University in 1982, and the University of Chicago Law School 
in 1985. Prior to her service in the Senate, Amy Klobuchar was 
the county attorney for Hennepin County, Minnesota, from 
1999 to 2007. She has strongly supported President Obama’s 
use of executive actions in DACA and DAPA, and advocates 
comprehensive immigration reform, having voted for S.744.
Mark Krikorian (b. 1961)
Mark Krikorian has a BA degree from Georgetown University 
and took a master’s degree from the Fletcher School of Law and 
Diplomacy at Tufts University. He also studied for two years at 
Yerevian State University in the then-Soviet nation of Armenia. 
He has held various editorial and writing positions, and in 1995, 
he joined the Center for Immigration Studies in Washington, 
D.C., and serves as its executive director. He frequently testifies 
before Congress and has published numerous articles in such 
periodicals as the Washington Post, the New York Times, Com-
mentary, and the National Review. He has appeared on 60 Min-
utes, Nightline, the News Hour with Jim Lehrer, CNN, National 
Public Radio, and similar television and radio programs.
Jon Kyl (b. 1942)
Sen. Jon Kyl was born in Oakland, Nebraska. He was the 
junior senator from Arizona; he was elected to that office 
in 1994 and reelected in 2000, and retired from the Senate 
in 2013. He moved to Arizona and went to college and law 
school there, practiced law in Phoenix, and headed its chamber 
of commerce. He won the heavily Republican 4th District in 
1986. In the House he became a leading Republican on mis-
sile defense and the balanced-budget amendment. He had a 
solidly conservative record and in the Senate became a major 
force on defense policy and a champion of the missile-defense 
system. Senator Kyl served on the Judiciary Committee and 
cosponsored, with Sen. Dianne Feinstein, a constitutional 
amendment on victims’ rights. Before 9/11 Kyl and Feinstein 

	
Profiles	
157
also cosponsored a bill to prepare for attacks by terrorists with 
chemical and biological weapons. In 2001, the two introduced 
a bill to establish a comprehensive lookout database that would 
combine data from the CIA, FBI, and the State Department 
to make it available to the Border Patrol and consular officials. 
Senator Kyl worked to beef up the Border Patrol and to track 
legal immigrants who overstayed their visas; he supported cuts 
in legal immigration and new rules for family-based immigra-
tion. He worked for more federal reimbursement of states and 
localities for the costs of hospitalizing and incarcerating illegal 
aliens. He cosponsored a limited guest-worker bill that com-
peted with the more comprehensive Kennedy-McCain pro-
posal. Of importance to illegal immigration matters, Senator 
Kyl served as chair of the Republican Policy Committee and 
on the Judiciary Committee and its subcommittees on Con-
stitution, Civil Rights and Property Rights, and on Immigra-
tion, Border Security and Citizenship; and at the time of his 
retirement, chaired the Subcommittee on Terrorism, Technol-
ogy, and Homeland Security. He cosponsored the Cornyn/
Kyle bill, the Comprehensive Enforcement and Immigration 
Control Act of 2005.
Patrick Leahy (b. 1940)
Senator Leahy (D-VT) is the ranking member of the Senate 
Judiciary Committee, which considers all proposals dealing 
with immigration matters, and served as its chair from 2007 
to 2015. He is president Pro Tempore Emeritus, 2012–2015, 
of the Senate. He has served in the U.S. Senate since 1975. 
He is a graduate of St. Michael’s College and took his JD from 
Georgetown University Law School. Senator Leahy is a mem-
ber of the Appropriations Committee and the ranking member 
of the Senate Judiciary’s subcommittee on Immigration.
Joseph I. Lieberman (b. 1942)
Former senator Lieberman took his BA from Yale University 
in 1964 and received an LLB from Yale in 1967. He was a 

158	
Illegal Immigration
practicing attorney from 1964 to 1980. In his political career, 
he served in the Connecticut state senate from 1970 to 1980, 
including serving as its majority leader from 1974 to 1980. He 
was attorney general of Connecticut from 1983 to 1988, at 
which time he was elected to the U.S. Senate, where he served 
until 2014. In 2000, Lieberman ran (with Al Gore) as the 
Democratic nominee for vice president and also for reelection 
to the U.S. Senate. He lost the former election but won the 
latter. In terms of illegal immigration policy reforms, he was 
the leading spokesman for and the Senate sponsor of the bill 
for the establishment of the Department of Homeland Security 
with its broad implications for restructuring the INS.
Zoe Lofgren (b. 1947)
Rep. Zoe Lofgren (D-CA) is a member of the House Judiciary 
Committee, the House Science, Space and Technology Com-
mittee, and the Committee on House Administration. She was 
first elected to the House in 1995, representing the Silicon Val-
ley area. She graduated Stanford University with a BA degree 
in political science in 1970. She took her law degree, cum 
laude, from Santa Clara University School of Law in 1975. 
She practiced and taught immigration law. She is the ranking 
member and former chair of the Subcommittee on Immigra-
tion and Border Security, a lifetime immigration attorney and 
law professor, and is recognized as a champion of comprehen-
sive immigration reform and a national leader on immigration 
policy. She played a key role in negotiating a comprehensive 
reform bill in the House in 2013 (one of the House of Rep-
resentatives’ “Gang of Eight”). Lofgren was a key sponsor of 
the Dream Act, and then Speaker Nancy Pelosi presented her 
with the gavel used to preside over the passage of the bill in the 
House of Representatives. She is chair of the California Demo-
cratic Congressional Delegation of 38 Democratic members 
from California, the most diverse and largest delegation in the 
House of Representatives.

	
Profiles	
159
John McCain (b. 1936)
John McCain, the senior senator from Arizona, was born in the 
Panama Canal Zone. A career naval officer from 1958 to 1980, 
he is the son and grandson of navy admirals and is a decorated 
navy pilot who was shot down in Vietnam and spent five years 
as a prisoner of war. In March 1973 McCain returned to the 
United States, where he served his final term in the navy as a 
Senate liaison. In 1980 he retired and moved to Arizona, ran 
in 1982 for a House seat, and won in both 1982 and 1984. 
In 1986 he ran and won a U.S. Senate seat. He strongly sup-
ported President Bush in the war on terrorism after 9/11. His 
independent and bipartisan stands, and particularly his cru-
sades for campaign finance regulation and against pork-barrel 
spending, have often made him unpopular among his col-
leagues. He brings to his work a strong sense of righteousness 
and conviction. His most notable legislative achievement was 
enactment of the McCain-Feingold campaign-finance law in 
2001. He ran for president in 2000 but failed to get his party’s 
nomination. After his failed presidential bid, he became more 
active in the Senate—increasingly allying with Democrats and 
opposing most Republican positions on campaign finance and 
on tobacco-related matters. He took a significant role in the 
post-9/11 legislative battles and called for government-run air-
port security. Senator McCain was the Republican presidential 
nominee in 2008, losing to President Obama. He cosponsored 
with Senator Kennedy of Massachusetts the comprehensive bill 
to reform illegal immigration policy, and is today a member of 
the “Senate Gang of Eight,” which advocated and helped pass 
S.744, the current most comprehensive immigration reform 
bill, and has advocated for an extensive guest-worker/earned 
legalization program.
Claire McCaskill (b. 1953)
Senator McCaskill (D-MO) is the ranking minority member 
of the Homeland Security Committee and a leading supporter 

160	
Illegal Immigration
and often outspoken critic of the Department of Homeland 
Security. She took her JD from the University of Missouri Law 
School, Columbia. From 1978 to 1982 she was the Kansas 
City prosecutor. In 1999 she was elected the Missouri State 
auditor, and in 2004, governor of Missouri. She was elected to 
the U.S. Senate in 2006 and reelected in 2012. She chaired the 
Commerce Committee and the Armed Services Committee.
Michael McCaul (b. 1962)
Rep. Michael McCaul (R-TX) is the newly selected chairman 
of the House of Representatives Committee on Homeland 
Security. First elected to the House in 2002, he is in his sixth 
term. He is also chairman of the U.S.-Mexico International 
Parliamentary Group and serves on the Committee on Foreign 
Affairs. His conservative voting record earned him recognition 
by the American Conservative Union’s coveted ACU Ratings 
Award. Prior to his election to the House, he served as Chief of 
Counterterrorism and National Security in the U.S. Attorney’s 
office, Western District of Texas, and led the Joint Task Force 
charged with detecting, deterring, and preventing terrorist 
activity. He served as Texas Deputy Attorney General and as a 
federal prosecutor in the Department of Justice’s Public Integ-
rity Section, Washington, D.C. He has a BA degree in his-
tory from Trinity University, and took his JD from St. Mary’s 
University School of Law. He is also a graduate of the Senior 
Executive Fellows Program of the School of Government, Har-
vard University.
Mitch McConnell (b. 1942)
Senator McConnell (R-KY) became Senate majority leader 
after the 2014 Senate elections, only the second senator from 
Kentucky to serve as majority leader. As such, he plays the key 
role in all Senate legislative proceedings and, in particular, a 
leading role in forming the Senate Republicans’ position on 
immigration reform. He previously served as Senate minority 

	
Profiles	
161
leader in the 110th–113th Congresses, and as majority whip 
in the 108th and 109th Congresses. He served as chairman of 
the National Republican Senatorial Committee, 1998–2000. 
He was first elected to the Senate in 1984. He graduated cum 
laude from the University of Louisville College of Arts and Sci-
ences, and took his JD from the University of Kentucky Col-
lege of Law where he served as president of the Student Bar 
Association. Prior to his elective office in the Senate, he served 
as deputy assistant attorney general to President Gerald Ford, 
and as judge-executive of Jefferson County, Kentucky, from 
1978 to 1985. He serves as a senior member of the Appropria-
tions, Agriculture and Rules Committees in the Senate.
Robert Menendez (b. 1954)
Senator Menendez (D-NJ) is one of the Senate’s “Gang of 
Eight,” who sponsored and wrote the bipartisan S.744 bill to 
enact comprehensive immigration reform that passed the Sen-
ate in 2013. He served as chair of the Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee, 2013–2015, and is now its ranking member. He 
served in the House of Representatives from 1993 to 2006. He 
is a member of the Banking subcommittee and is on the Hous-
ing, Transportation and Community Development Commit-
tee. He took his BA from St. Peter’s College, Jersey City, and his 
JD from Rutgers University School of Law. While in the House, 
he chaired the House Democratic Caucus from 2003 to 2006. 
He is a strong advocate of comprehensive immigration reform.
Candice Miller (b. 1954)
Miller was born in Detroit. She attended Macomb County 
Community College and Northwood University and served as 
secretary-treasurer of a marina. In elected offices, she served as 
trustee of the Harrison Township Board, as a Harrison Town-
ship supervisor, then as Macomb City treasurer before being 
elected Michigan’s secretary of state, a position she held from 
1994 to 2002. She was first elected to the House in 2002 and 

162	
Illegal Immigration
now serves on the Armed Services and Governmental Reform 
committees and is vice chair of the Intergovernmental Rela-
tions and Census subcommittee. She has a solidly conserva-
tive voting record and describes herself as a “Bush Republican”; 
she was very active in passage of North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA). She recently sponsored a constitutional 
amendment that would stipulate that only citizens be counted 
for the purpose of census data to determine representation to 
Congress and has sponsored the Birthright Citizenship Act and 
the Secure Our Borders First Act of 2015.
Janet Murguia (b. 1960)
Janet Murguia was elected, in 2014, president of the National 
Council of La Raza, the largest national Hispanic civil rights 
and advocacy organization in the United States, and is a lead-
ing political activist for Hispanic interests and the Latino com-
munity, including education, health care, immigration reform, 
civil rights, and the economy. In her role as spokesperson for 
La Raza, she is frequently interviewed by news outlets and has 
appeared on many news programs. Murguia serves as a board 
member of the Independent Sector, a coalition of nonprofits, 
foundations, and corporations, and is an executive committee 
member of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, and 
she sits on the board of the Hispanic Association on Corporate 
Responsibility and the National Hispanic Leadership Agenda. 
She serves on the advisory board of the National Hispanic Uni-
versity. In 2001 she joined the University of Kansas as its vice 
chancellor for University Relations and managed its strategic 
planning and marketing efforts on four campuses. She has a BS 
degree in journalism, 1982; a BA degree in Spanish, 1982; and 
a JD degree from Kansas University, 1985.
Demetrios Papademetriou (b. 1946)
Demetrios Papademetriou has published in the United States 
and abroad on immigration and refugee policies, with an empha-
sis on the labor market and developmental repercussions. He 

	
Profiles	
163
has taught at American University, the University of Maryland, 
and Duke University, and is on the graduate faculty of the New 
School for Social Research. He has served as director of emi-
gration policy and research at the U.S. Department of Labor 
and chaired the secretary of labor’s Immigration Policy Task 
Force. He also served as U.S. representative to the Migration 
Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development (OECD). Before his governmental service, 
he was executive editor of the International Migration Review 
and directed the research activities of the Center for Migration 
Studies in New York. Papademetriou now directs the Carn-
egie Endowment’s International Migration Policy Program and 
also serves as chair of the OECD Migration Committee. He 
concentrates on U.S. immigration policies and practices, the 
migration politics and practices of advanced industrial societ-
ies, and the role of multilateral institutions in developing and 
coordinating collective responses to voluntary and involuntary 
international population movements. He is a leading author-
ity/scholar of immigration policy matters.
Jeffrey S. Passel (no birth date available)
Jeffrey Passel is a senior demographer at the Pew Research 
Center, and a nationally known expert on immigration to 
the United States, and on the demography of racial and eth-
nic groups. He served as the principal research associate at the 
Urban Institute’s Labor, Human Services and Population Cen-
ter. He has authored numerous studies on immigrant popula-
tions in America, and focused on undocumented immigration, 
the economic and fiscal impact of the foreign-born, and the 
impact of welfare reform on immigrant populations. Ameri-
can Demographics magazine named him, in 2004, a “Demo-
graphic Diamond.” He served as senior statistician in the U.S. 
Bureau of the Census, 1974–1989, and is a fellow of the Amer-
ican Statistical Association, the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science, and a former member of the Popu-
lation Association of America. He took his PhD in statistics 

164	
Illegal Immigration
from Johns Hopkins University, an MA from the University of 
Texas at Austin, and a BS from the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology.
Nancy Pelosi (b. 1940)
Nancy Pelosi was first elected to the House in 1987. She was 
born in Baltimore, Maryland, and now resides in San Fran-
cisco. She took her BA from Trinity College in 1962. She also 
studied at the Institute of Notre Dame, and at Washington 
University. She was a PR executive from 1986 to 1987 and 
served as California Democratic Party northern chairman from 
1977 to 1981; she was state chair from 1981 to 1983, and 
served as the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee 
finance chair from 1985 to 1987. She once again serves as the 
minority leader in the House of Representatives, after a distin-
guished term as Speaker of the House, 2001–2014. She has an 
almost perfect liberal voting record. She has been elected and 
reelected by huge margins. Currently, as minority leader she 
has taken very vocal stances on immigration and guest-worker 
programs. She joined with Senator Feinstein on sponsoring 
bills to increase border security along the California-Mexico 
border, and voted for the House comprehensive immigration 
reform bill in 2013.
Rick Perry (b. 1950)
Rick Perry was the 47th governor of Texas, 2000–2015, cam-
paigned for the Republican Party presidential nomination in 
2010, and is a declared candidate for the Republican Party 
presidential nomination again in 2016. He was elected lieuten-
ant governor of Texas in 1998, and assumed the governorship 
when George W. Bush resigned the office to become president 
in 2000. Governor Perry was the longest-serving governor 
in Texas history. He was elected to a full term in 2002, and 
reelected in 2006 and 2010. He is an outspoken critic of Presi-
dent Obama’s immigration policy and use of executive action 
regarding DACA and DAPA.

	
Profiles	
165
Harry Reid (b. 1939)
Sen. Harry Reid (D-NM) is now the Senate minority leader, 
after serving as Senate majority leader from 2007 to 2014. As 
minority leader he continues to play a key role in all legislative 
proceedings concerning immigration matters and is the Demo-
cratic Party leader in the Senate. He was first elected to the 
Senate in 1986, and reelected in 1992, 1998, 2004, and 2010. 
He is Nevada’s senior senator. He graduated from Utah State 
in 1961 and took his JD from George Washington University. 
He was elected to the House of Representatives in 1982, and 
to the Senate in 1986. He has strongly supported comprehen-
sive immigration reform and helped manage successfully the 
bipartisan passage in the Senate of S.744, the comprehensive 
reform bill.
Marco Rubio (b. 1971)
Senator Rubio (R-FL) is one of the Senate’s “Gang of Eight” 
who sponsored S.744, the bipartisan comprehensive immigra-
tion reform bill that passed the Senate in 2013. He is a declared 
candidate for the Republican Party nomination for president 
in 2016. He was elected to the U.S. Senate in 2010. Senator 
Rubio serves on the Foreign Relations Committee, Commerce, 
Science and Transportation, Small Business and Entrepreneur-
ship. He has a BA degree for the University of Florida, and 
took his JD from the University of Miami Law School. He 
served in the Florida House from 2000 to 2009, and as its 
Speaker in 2007–2009, before being elected to the U.S. Senate.
Charles E. Schumer (b. 1950)
Now the senior senator from New York, Charles Schumer took 
his BA from Harvard in 1971 and his JD from there in 1974. 
He served in the New York Assembly from 1974 to 1980 and 
then in the U.S. House from 1980 to 1998. He was elected 
to the Senate in 1998. He was critically important in crafting 
compromises making possible the passage of the Immigration 

166	
Illegal Immigration
Reform and Control Act of 1986 and has continued to play a 
critical role in all immigration-related bills since then, essen-
tially taking the lead among progressive senators in the role 
played by the late senator Ted Kennedy. He is a leading mem-
ber of the Senate’s “Gang of Eight” and sponsor of S.744, the 
bipartisan comprehensive immigration reform bill that passed 
the Senate in 2013. In the Senate he serves on several com-
mittees including Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs; Inter-
national Trade and Finance; Judiciary and its subcommittees 
of Administrative Oversight and the Courts; Criminal Justice 
Oversight; Immigration (where he is the ranking minority 
member); and Rules and Administration.
James Sensenbrenner (b. 1943)
Sensenbrenner was first elected to the House in 1978. He was 
born in Chicago. He received an AB degree from Stanford 
University in 1965 and his JD degree from the University of 
Wisconsin in 1968. He practiced law from 1968 to 1969 and 
was elected to the Wisconsin assembly (1968–1974) and the 
Wisconsin senate (1974–1978). He was staff assistant to Con-
gressman Arthur Younger in 1965. He serves as the chair of 
the powerful Judiciary Committee in the House and on the 
Select Committee on Homeland Security. He staunchly sup-
ported the use of force in Iraq and creation of the Department 
of Homeland Security but was critical of Attorney General 
Ashcroft’s possible violations of civil liberties and calls for addi-
tional investigative powers for law enforcement. Sensenbrenner 
insisted on sunset provisions (which would expire after four 
years) for the USA Patriot Act and the Patriot Act II. He spon-
sored a bill to split the INS into two separate agencies, and 
when these agencies were moved to the new Department of 
Homeland Security, he expressed strong concerns that inter-
nal problems would remain unresolved. He has long opposed 
racial quotas and preferences and was vocal in his support of 
Milwaukee’s school-choice program. He has won election and 
reelection by wide margins and has often been unopposed in 

	
Profiles	
167
the general election. His most notable recent legislation con-
cerning illegal immigration is his sponsorship of the REAL 
ID Act.
Jeff Sessions (b. 1946)
Senator Sessions (R-AL) is chair of the Senate Judiciary’s Sub-
committee on Immigration and National Interest. He was first 
elected to the Senate in 1997 and reelected for his third term 
in 2008. In 2011 he was the ranking minority member of the 
Budget Committee, and the subcommittee on Banking. He is 
sponsor of a bill to block any funding for amnesty. He serves 
on the Senate Armed Forces Committee, the Environment 
and Public Utility Committee. He took his BA degree from 
Huntingdon College in 1969, and his JD from the University 
of Alabama School of Law in 1973. Prior to his election to the 
U.S. Senate, he served as a President Reagan appointee to the 
U.S. attorney, Alabama Southern District. Senator Sessions is 
an outspoken opponent of comprehensive immigration reform 
and any sort of amnesty provision.
Frank Sharry (no birth date available)
Frank Sharry directs one of the nation’s leading immigration 
policy organizations and is an advocate of upholding America’s 
tradition as a nation of immigrants. He is a leading spokes-
person for proimmigration policies and frequently appears in 
print and on television. Prior to joining the National Immi-
gration Forum (NIF), he was executive director of the Centro 
Presente, which helps Central American refugees. He helped 
found the Massachusetts Immigration and Refugee Advocacy 
Coalition and led efforts to resettle refugees from Vietnam and 
Cuba; he also led the campaign against passage of California’s 
Proposition 187. He is currently starting up a new organiza-
tion called America’s Voice to advocate for broad immigration 
reform rooted in the American values of earned citizenship, the 
rule of law, and the promise of the American Dream. For the 
past 25 years he has been involved in every major legislative 

168	
Illegal Immigration
and policy debate related to immigration. He was also execu-
tive director of Centro Presente, a local organization working 
with Central Americans in the greater Boston area.
Christopher H. Smith (b. 1953)
Rep. Christopher Smith (R-NJ) received a B.S. from Trenton 
State College in 1975. He was a sales executive in a family-owned 
sporting goods business from 1975 to 1980. He served as 
executive director of New Jersey Right to Life from 1976 to 
1978. He was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives 
in 1980. He serves on the International Relations Commit-
tee and chairs its subcommittee on International Operations 
and Human Rights, Western Hemisphere. He also holds vice 
chair positions on the Veterans Affairs Committee and on the 
Health Committee. His most notable immigration reform 
measure was sponsoring the Trafficking Victims Protection Act 
in 2003. He is a member of the Caucus on Human Trafficking, 
the Pro-Life Caucus, and the Congressional Poland Caucus. 
He was officially a Democrat prior to 1978, and switched to 
the Republican Party since then. He took his BA from the Col-
lege of New Jersey.
Lamar S. Smith (b. 1947)
Smith was born in San Antonio. He took a BA from Yale in 
1969 and his JD from Southern Methodist University in 1975. 
He worked for the U.S. Small Business Administration from 
1969 to 1970 and was a business writer for the Christian Sci-
ence Monitor from 1970 to 1972. He practiced law from 1975 
to 1976. He was elected to the Texas House of Representatives 
from 1981 to 1982. He served on the Bexar County Commit-
tee from 1982 to 1985 and was elected to the U.S. House of 
Representatives in 1986. Smith serves on the Judiciary Com-
mittee, where he is chair of its Immigration and Claims Sub-
committee; on the Science Committee; and on the Standards 
of Official Conduct Committee, which he also chairs. Since his 

	
Profiles	
169
arrival in the House, he has been an outspoken critic of immi-
gration policy and is one of the House’s strongest advocates for 
restricted immigration, illegal immigration reform, strengthen-
ing of the Border Patrol, and opposition to amnesty propos-
als. He chaired the House Ethics Committee, 1999–2001, and 
previously chaired the House Judiciary Committee.
Roberto Suro (no birth date available)
Roberto Suro is the founding director of the Pew Hispanic 
Center, a Washington-based research and policy-analysis orga-
nization that he founded in 2001. He was born in Washing-
ton, D.C., to Puerto Rican and Ecuadorian parents, and has 
chronicled Hispanic and related issues as a journalist for some 
30 years. He began a career in journalism in Chicago in 1974. 
During his career as a journalist, he researched and wrote about 
Latinos for the Washington Post. He has also worked as a for-
eign correspondent for Time magazine and the New York Times 
in Latin America, Europe, and the Middle East. He was bureau 
chief for the New York Times in Rome, Italy. He is author of 
Strangers among Us: Latino Lives in a Changing America (1999), 
and he is author of two Twentieth Century Fund papers on 
immigration matters: “Remembering the American Dream” 
and “National Policy and Watching America’s Door: The Immi-
gration Backlash and the New Policy Debate.” He is a graduate 
of Yale University, where he took his BA in 1973, and Colum-
bia University, where he received an MS degree in 1974. He is 
currently professor at the University of Southern California. 
He is an affiliate of the Brookings Institution as a nonresident 
senior fellow in metropolitan policy (since 2005), the Migra-
tion Policy Institute as a nonresident fellow (2007–2010), on 
the advisory board, since 2008, of E Pluribus Unum Prizes, 
awards for initiatives to promote immigrant integration. He is 
a member of the Network for Multicultural Research in Health 
and Healthcare; is a senior investigator (since 2007) in the 
School of Medicine, UCLA; and serves on the Pacific Council 

170	
Illegal Immigration
on International Policy’s Mexican Council of Foreign Relations 
and Bi-national Task Force on the U.S.-Mexico Border (since 
2009).
John H. Tanton (no birth date available)
John Tanton is a widely recognized leader in the anti-immigration 
and “official English” movements in the United States. Tanton 
cofounded the Federation for American Immigration Reform 
and NumbersUSA in 1996, founded Pro-English in 1993, 
founded the Center for Immigration Studies in 1985, and 
cofounded and became chair of U.S. English in 1982. Tanton 
played a central role in mobilizing neoconservatives, the New 
Right, and the Christian Right against center-left politics in 
the United States, and he mobilized backlash sentiment against 
immigrants. He co-organized E Pluribus Unum in 1992, the 
Emergency Committee on Puerto Rican Statehood in 1990, 
and he became founder and chairman of US Inc. in 1982. 
He has worked with the Sierra Club, the National Audubon 
Society, and Zero Population Growth, and he is founder and 
publisher of Social Contract Press, which publishes books that 
shape a nationalist ideology and focus on the perceived threat 
of immigration to the white, English-speaking population. He 
is a retired eye surgeon, and a graduate of Michigan State Uni-
versity and the University of Michigan Medical School, 1960; 
and has an MS  from the University of Michigan, 1964, in 
Ophthalmology and is Diplomate, American Board of Oph-
thalmology, 1956. He is coauthor, with Wayne Lutton, of The 
Immigration Invasion.
Bennie Thompson (b. 1948)
Rep. Bennie Thompson (D-MS) is the ranking minority mem-
ber of the House of Representatives Committee on Homeland 
Security. He served as an alderman from 1968 to 1972 and 
then as mayor, 1973–1980, of Bolton, Mississippi. He was 
founding member and president of the Mississippi Association 

	
Profiles	
171
of Black Mayors. He was first elected to the House of Rep-
resentatives in 1993 and is currently the longest-serving Afri-
can American elected official in the state of Mississippi. He 
authored, in 2000, legislation creating the National Center for 
Minority Health and Health Care Disparities. In 2006 he was 
elected the first Democratic chairman of the House Homeland 
Security Committee. He has served on the Agriculture, Budget 
and Small Business committees. Thompson has a BS degree 
from Tougaloo College and an MS degree from Jackson State 
University.
Lydio F. Tomasi (no birth date available)
Father Lydio F. Tomasi, CS, PhD, is executive director emeri-
tus of the Center for Migration Studies in New York. He is its 
founding member and directed the agency from 1968 to 2001. 
He was the founding editor of Migration World Magazine, a 
bimonthly review of current issues in migration policy. He 
was also editor of the annual volume, In Defense of the Alien, 
the proceedings of an annual conference held on immigrants’ 
rights and immigration policy. His younger brother, and CMS 
cofounder, is Archbishop Silvano Tomasi, who serves as the 
Permanent Observer to the Holy See at the United Nations 
and Specialized Organizations in Geneva, Switzerland. Father 
Tomasi was born in Vincenza, Italy, attended the Pontifical 
Gregorian University in Rome where he earned his philosophy 
and theology licenses, and was ordained in 1962. In 1984, he 
received his PhD in sociology from New York University.
Georges Vernez (b. 1939)
Dr. Vernez took his PhD in urban and regional development 
from the University of California, Berkeley. He has directed 
and conducted studies on a broad range of immigration issues, 
including most notably a comprehensive assessment of the 
implementation of the Immigration Reform and Control Act 
of 1986, with particular focus on its effects on undocumented 

172	
Illegal Immigration
immigration, the supply of labor, and relations between the 
United States and Mexico. He has analyzed issues related to 
the effects of immigration on the demand for state and local 
services and on labor markets, and issues related to the social 
and economic adjustments of immigrants in the United States. 
He has also made comparative studies of policies on immigra-
tion and refugee movements and their outcomes in Western 
nations, and he has recently completed a comprehensive assess-
ment of the demographic, economic, institutional, and distri-
butional effects of 30 years of immigration in California. He is 
currently conducting a study of the performance of immigrant 
women in the U.S. labor market and a study of the social ben-
efits from increasing the educational attainments of Hispanics. 
In 1991 he became the founding director of the RAND Insti-
tute on Education and Training, which examines all forms of 
education and training.
David Vitter (b. 1961)
Sen. David Vitter (R-LA) has been a leading opponent of any 
comprehensive immigration reform measure in the Senate, an 
ardent opponent of any amnesty bill, and one of the key spon-
sors and authors of the Birthright Citizenship bill of 2013. He 
is the leader of a congressional coalition to secure the borders 
and to stop illegal immigration, and an outspoken critic for 
reforming the Army Corps of Engineers to ensure better hurri-
cane and flood protection. He was first elected to the House of 
Representatives in 1999, and to the U.S. Senate in 2004, and 
reelected in 2010. He serves as chairman of the Committee on 
Small Business and Entrepreneurship; and on the Committee 
on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, the Committee on 
Environment and Public Works, and the Committee on the 
Judiciary. In 2015 he began service as the Republican Party’s 
deputy whip in the Senate. He has an AB degree from Harvard 
University, a BA degree from University College, Oxford, and 
a JD from Tulane Law School.

	
Profiles	
173
Ron Wyden (b. 1949)
Sen. Ron Wyden took his BA from Stanford University in 
1971, and his JD from the University of Oregon in 1974. He 
served as the codirector and cofounder of the Oregon Gray 
Panthers from 1974 to 1980 and then as director of Oregon’s 
Legal Services for the Elderly, 1977 to 1979. He was also pro-
fessor of gerontology at the University of Oregon, 1976, and 
at Portland State University of Oregon, 1980. He served in the 
U.S. House of Representatives from 1980 to 1996, when he 
was elected to the U.S. Senate. His Senate committees of note 
are Aging; Budget; Commerce, Science and Transportation; 
Energy and Natural Resources; and Environment and Pub-
lic Works. His most notable action on the immigration issue 
was his cosponsorship, with Sen. Gordon Smith, of the 1998 
guest-worker bill. As senator from a state near the Canadian 
border, immigration matters continue to be a major focus of his 
legislative agenda. He continues to be an important advocate 
of a guest-worker program and of the earned legalization provi-
sion accompanying it. He is a relentless critic of the national 
security community’s abuse of secrecy, and forced the declas-
sification of the CIA Inspector General’s 9/11 Report, helped 
shut down the controversial Total Information Awareness pro-
gram, and focused on both the Bush and Obama administra-
tions’ reliance on secret law, and he successfully fought to have 
controversial antileaks provisions removed from the latest intel-
ligence authorization bill.
Directory of Organizations and Agencies
National Government Agencies and Organizations
There are many federal agencies involved in the administra-
tion and implementation of U.S. immigration policy. They 
are all involved in immigration policy reform affairs as well, 
and they have an impact on illegal immigration reform, either 
through attempts to control or mitigate illegal immigration 

174	
Illegal Immigration
or by indirectly providing service to illegal immigrants.  
Twenty principal federal agencies follow, with their contact 
information and a brief description of their involvement in the 
issue.
U.S. Census Bureau
The bureau collects and does analysis of statistical data on the 
population, including immigrants. Its data form the basis for 
the most accurate information available to project or analyze 
the level and distribution of illegal immigrants throughout the 
United States and to track trends in the illegal immigration flow 
over time. Its numerous statistical studies and reports make pos-
sible the tracking of all immigrants. Its reports provide demo-
graphic data as to the gradual incorporation of immigrants into 
the major institutions of American society.
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights
The commission is an independent, bipartisan, fact-finding 
agency of the executive branch established under the Civil 
Rights Act of 1957. It investigates complaints as to discrimi-
nation; appraises federal laws and policies with respect to dis-
crimination because of race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, 
or national origin; studies and collects information relating to 
such discrimination; serves as a clearinghouse for such infor-
mation; and submits reports, findings, and recommendations 
to the president and the Congress, many of which concern 
rights of immigrants and refugees, the problems generated by 
the illegal immigration flow, and civil rights guaranteed to all 
persons, including illegal immigrants, as basic human rights.
U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform
This was a bipartisan commission on immigration reform 
authorized by the Immigration Act of 1990 that was man-
dated to review and evaluate implementation and impact of 
U.S. immigration policy and to transmit reports of its findings 

	
Profiles	
175
and recommendations to the U.S. Congress. It issued its first 
interim report on September 30, 1994, its second interim report 
in 1995, and two final reports in 1997: “U.S. Refugee Policy: 
Taking Leadership” and “Becoming an American: Immigration 
and Immigration Policy.” Like the SCIRP commission report 
of the 1980s, the recommendations contained in these two 
reports formed the basis for several legislative proposals aimed 
at better coping with the illegal immigration problem.
U.S. Department of Agriculture
The department’s immigration role is largely supportive of 
other departments and agencies. Given the importance of ille-
gal immigrants to the agricultural sector, particularly the flow 
of seasonal agricultural workers, the Department of Agriculture 
plays a crucial role in supplying information and data on the 
need for temporary agricultural workers. It assists immigrants 
through programs such as its Food and Nutrition Service. 
Although legally and technically it cannot provide such service 
to illegal aliens, given the poor quality of documentation con-
trol, the department undoubtedly does help, if inadvertently, 
to provide services to illegal as well as legal immigrants.
U.S. Department of Education
The department is the agency of the federal government that 
establishes policy for, administers, and coordinates most federal 
assistance to education. The immigration role of the depart-
ment is to assist, supplement, and complement the efforts of 
states, the local school systems and other state agencies, the 
private sector, public and private educational institutions, 
public and private nonprofit educational research institutions, 
and community-based organizations to serve the educational 
needs of immigrants, particularly in the educational aspects 
of the naturalization process. By federal law and especially as 
the result of several critical court decisions, education must 
be provided to the children of illegal immigrants despite the 
status of the parents. Federal programs that assist local school 

176	
Illegal Immigration
districts, in providing health services or school lunch programs, 
for example, are therefore extended to the children of illegal 
immigrants as well as to those whose parents are in the United 
States as permanent legal residents.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
HHS impacts immigration policy through administration of 
programs such as the Administration for Children and Fami-
lies; Health Care Financing Administration; Division of State 
Legalization Assistance; Financial Support Administration; 
U.S. Public Health Service Office of Refugee Health; and 
Office of Planning, Research and Evaluation. Its intergovern-
mental role is significant in coping with illegal immigration. It 
is an important actor involved with illegal immigration. Should 
an expanded guest-worker program with “earned legalization” 
be enacted, HHS would undoubtedly have a major role in its 
implementation.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security
Established in 2002 with the merging of the functions of many 
federal agencies into this newest cabinet-level department of 
the federal bureaucracy, the DHS is now the principal agency to 
administer immigration-related policy. Its immigration-related 
functions are implemented by two bureaus headed by an under-
secretary: a Bureau of Border and Transportation Security and 
a Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services.
The department deals with all visa, passport, and citizenship 
matters; monitors all U.S. borders; ensures mass transit secu-
rity; and provides airport and seaport security. It supervises the 
U.S. Border Patrol operations, the principal agency charged 
with controlling the illegal immigration flow and problem. Its 
antiterrorism responsibilities also involve monitoring the ille-
gal immigration flow for suspected terrorist and terrorist cells. 
It has newly established policy related to bioterrorism, as well, 
that overlaps its illegal immigration control functions.

	
Profiles	
177
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
HUD’s mission is to promote a decent, safe, sanitary, and suit-
able home environment for every American. Its impact on 
immigration matters is primarily through programs designed to 
assist low-income persons; to create, rehabilitate, and maintain 
the nation’s affordable housing; to enforce fair housing laws; 
to help the homeless; to spur economic growth in distressed 
neighborhoods; and to help local communities meet their 
development needs. Federal law specifically bans the provisions 
of HUD aid to illegal aliens, but the extensiveness of document 
fraud in the matter likely results in its providing some benefits 
to persons who are in fact in the United States illegally.
U.S. Department of Labor
The department oversees all labor-related policy and law, 
including matters related to temporary labor. Other agencies 
within the department with immigration-related policy roles 
are its Office of Federal Contract Compliance Program and its 
Wage and Hour Division. Its role related to the implementa-
tion of IRCA, to date the most directly related federal pro-
gram attempting to control and decrease illegal immigration, 
was significant. Strict enforcement of U.S. labor laws may be 
one of the more effective ways to discourage employers from 
using the “cheap” labor source of undocumented workers. The 
department also plays a role in informing Congress or in cer-
tifying the need for temporary workers. It plays an important 
role in H-1A, H-1B, H-2A and H-2B guest-worker programs. 
Its data collection has helped certify the extent of discrimina-
tion against workers who are or were suspected of being undoc-
umented workers.
U.S. Department of State
The Department of State is primarily involved in legal immi-
gration, of course, but its consular affairs division, which issues 
visas, has a role in illegal immigration mostly related to visa 

178	
Illegal Immigration
overstayers. It has occasionally been embroiled in scandals in 
which “sting operations” have led to consular officials who have 
been caught selling visas and work certification cards (com-
monly referred to as green cards, although in fact they are now 
white cards) to illegal aliens, allowing them to enter the coun-
try with false documents or work authorizations.
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Housed in the Department of Health and Human Services, the 
EEOC administers three programs: affirmative employment, 
special emphasis/diversity, and discrimination complaint. 
It attempts to promote and ensure equal opportunity for all 
employees and fosters a culture and environment free from dis-
crimination. It impacts illegal immigration primarily through 
its antidiscrimination program and monitoring the employer 
sanctions provisions of current policy.
U.S. Government Accountability Office
The Government Accountability Office is an agency that works 
for the U.S. Congress and the American people. Congress asks 
GAO to study the programs and expenditures of the federal 
government. The GAO is commonly called the investigative 
arm of Congress or the congressional watchdog. It is indepen-
dent and nonpartisan. It studies how the federal government 
spends taxpayer dollars, and advises Congress and the heads 
of executive departments about ways to make government 
more effective and responsive. It evaluates federal programs, 
audits federal expenditures, and issues legal opinions, many of 
which over recent years have focused on the INS and the DOJ’s 
efforts and programs and now the DHS's programs related to 
illegal immigration law and policy. Its reports are among the 
most reliable estimates of the size, nature, and impact of illegal 
immigration on the economy, on state and local government 
finances and services, and on society more generally. A number 
of its reports directly linked to the illegal immigration problem 
are listed in the print sources that follow.

	
Profiles	
179
U.S. House Committee on the Judiciary
This standing committee of the U.S. House of Representatives 
deals with all bills introduced to the Congress that concern 
immigration law and policy matters. Its members have become 
leading voices in efforts to reform policy to deal with illegal 
immigration and border control and security issues particularly 
or to stop or block such legislative efforts. Generally speaking, 
any bill introduced in Congress on immigration matters, per-
taining to legal or illegal problems, will be sponsored by one or 
more members of the Judiciary Committee. Generally speak-
ing, the House Committee has favored a “piecemeal” approach 
to immigration reform rather than a comprehensive reform 
measure. It notably favors restricting illegal immigration, the 
removal of illegal immigrants now in country, and a “tougher, 
crack down” stance on border control and management.
U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary
This standing committee of the U.S. Senate deals with all legis-
lative matters concerning immigration policy and law. Like its 
counterpart in the House, its members and staff become prin-
cipal actors in the illegal immigration reform effort. While both 
the House and the Senate committees are strongly supportive 
of efforts to beef up the Border Patrol and increase border secu-
rity at airports and seaports, the Senate Judiciary Subcommit-
tee has been notably more amenable to a guest-worker program 
than has its counterpart in the House. It has favored and has 
passed a comprehensive immigration reform bill (S.744) where 
the House has failed to even bring such a proposal to the floor 
for a vote.
U.S. Social Security Administration
The SSA’s role in immigration policy matters is also support-
ive of other agencies. Its data bank is used to verify a person’s 
identity and to guard against fraud, waste, abuse, and misman-
agement in administration of the benefit programs based upon 

180	
Illegal Immigration
contributory financing of social insurance programs to ensure 
that protection was available as a matter of right as contrasted 
with a public assistance approach whereby only those persons 
in need would be eligible for benefits, whether natural-born 
citizens, naturalized citizens, or legal resident aliens who had 
worked in and contributed to the system. As a system, it col-
lects benefit payments from all workers, including illegal aliens, 
who pay into the system. The large number of illegal workers 
who pay into the system yet who do not withdraw benefits 
from it results in a net benefit estimated to be in the billions of 
dollars annually. Given the increasing age of the citizen work-
force, the illegal aliens, who generally are much younger and 
therefore work longer and pay into the system for longer peri-
ods of time, are significant in filling the gap or shortfall between 
income and payments of the system. In no small measure, these 
estimated billions of dollars in contributions from illegal work-
ers help to keep the Social Security system solvent. Although 
they are only a stopgap factor in the financial strength of the 
Social Security system, their impact is nonetheless important. 
If policy designed to cut off that illegal alien flow were to be 
efficient, the Social Security system would suffer a noticeable 
decrease of considerable size.
International Organizations
Human Rights Watch
An organization dedicated to protecting human rights of peo-
ple around the world, it stands with victims and activists to 
prevent discrimination, to uphold political freedom, and to 
protect people from inhumane conduct in wartime and bring 
offenders to justice. It investigates and exposes human rights 
violations and holds abusers accountable, challenging gov-
ernments to respect international human rights laws. It is an 
independent, nongovernmental organization supported by 
private individuals and foundations worldwide. It plays a criti-
cal role in providing information on the exploitation of illegal 

	
Profiles	
181
immigrant workers in many countries around the world. It has 
been critical in the past of procedures of the United States deal-
ing with expedited removal and with the way in which claims 
of “fears of persecution” have been handled with respect to per-
sons applying for refugee status; it strongly criticized the man-
ner in which Haitian refugees were detained and processed.
International Committee of the Red Cross
Established in 1863, the ICRC is an impartial, neutral, inde-
pendent organization whose humanitarian mission is to protect 
the lives and dignity of victims of war and internal violence and 
to provide them with assistance. It also directs and coordinates 
international relief activities of the Red Crescent Movement 
in situations of conflict. It endeavors to prevent suffering by 
promoting and strengthening humanitarian law and universal 
humanitarian principles. It plays an especially important role 
in dealing with refugees. In the post-tsunami and post-Katrina 
natural disasters, it provided relief to survivors without regard 
to their legal status as residents.
International Immigrants Foundation
Founded in 1973, the IIF has consultative status with the UN 
Economic and Social Affairs Council, and is associated with 
the Department of Public Information as a charitable, nongov-
ernmental, nonpolitical, nonprofit, tax-exempt organization. 
Its stated mission is to help immigrant families and children to 
achieve their aspirations for a better life in the United States. 
It does so without regard to and without checking on the legal 
status of the immigrant. The organization addresses its mis-
sion by providing support to promote positive intercultural 
relations. It supports family reunification goals of legal immi-
gration policy and supports legalization programs as a more 
effective way to bring illegal immigrants out of the shadow of 
illegality.

182	
Illegal Immigration
UN Department of Humanitarian Affairs
The UN Department of Humanitarian Affairs, established by 
the General Assembly, was created to “mobilize and coordinate 
the collective efforts of the international community, in partic-
ular those of the UN system, to meet in a coherent and timely 
manner the needs of those exposed to human suffering and 
material destruction in disasters and emergencies. This involves 
reducing vulnerability, promoting solutions to root causes and 
facilitating the smooth transition from relief to rehabilitation 
and development.”
UN High Commissioner for Refugees
The UN agency responsible for all matters relating to refugees, 
it leads and coordinates international action for the worldwide 
protection of refugees and the resolution of refugee problems. 
Its primary purpose is to safeguard the rights and well-being of 
refugees, the right to asylum and safe refuge in another state, 
and the right to return home voluntarily. It was established by 
the 1951 UN Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 
and its 1967 protocol. It seeks to reduce situations of forced 
displacement by encouraging states and other institutions 
to create conditions that are conducive to the protection of 
human rights and the peaceful resolution of disputes, assists 
in the reintegration of returning refugees into their country 
of origin, and offers protection and assistance to refugees and 
others in an impartial manner, on the basis of their need irre-
spective of their race, religion, political opinion, gender, or 
legal status in the host nation. It pays particular attention to 
the needs of children and seeks to promote the equal rights of 
women and girls.
Domestic Advocacy Agencies and Organizations/NGOs 
and Nonprofits
American Bar Association
The ABA claims to be the largest voluntary professional associa-
tion in the world, with more than 400,000 members. It provides 

	
Profiles	
183
law school accreditation, promotes education and information 
about the law, offers programs of assistance to lawyers and 
judges in their work, and sponsors initiatives to improve the 
legal system for the public. Its members defend refugees and 
persons charged with being in the nation illegally and advocates 
for legalization programs.
American Civil Liberties Union
Founded in 1920, the ACLU works nationally and with local 
chapters to protect the civil rights of citizens as guaranteed in 
the U.S. Constitution. It annually publishes many policy state-
ments, pamphlets, studies, and reports on civil rights issues. 
Its newsletter, Civil Liberties Alert, is published semiannually. 
It has been a leading coalition partner in efforts to reform or 
amend the USA Patriot Act, and to rectify what it determines are 
civil rights abuses in procedural matters dealing with the pro-
cess to remove illegal aliens in an expedited manner. It has been 
an active member of the coalition to promote a guest-worker 
program and legalization proposals more generally. Its sectors 
include LGBT rights, Civil Liberties, and Immigration.
American Conservative Union
The American Conservative Union is the oldest and largest of 
the numerous conservative lobbying organizations. Its purpose 
is to communicate effectively and advance the goals and prin-
ciples of conservatism through one multi-issue, umbrella orga-
nization. ACU supports capitalism, belief in the doctrine of 
original intent of the framers of the Constitution, confidence in 
traditional moral values, and commitment to a strong national 
defense. Since 1994 it has sponsored “town meetings” to spear-
head the conservative response to the health care reform issue, 
and since then has used the approach to support issues such as 
military protection and defending the homeland, and against 
more liberal immigration policy reforms. It rates the members 
of Congress according to their votes on issues of concern to 
conservatives; those ratings are used in a host of almanac and 

184	
Illegal Immigration
reference guides across the political spectrum. Its rating system 
has been copied by many other organizations. It publishes a 
significant amount of print, audio, and video material and tele-
vision documentaries to promote public opinion on its issues 
of concern. Since 1974 it has hosted the Conservative Political 
Action Conference, where thousands of conservative activists 
and leaders from across the country meet to discuss issues and 
controversies and has become a factor in the Republican Party’s 
presidential nomination process.
American Immigration Control Foundation
The AIC Foundation is a nonprofit research and educational 
organization whose stated primary goal is to inform Ameri-
cans about the need for a reasonable immigration policy based 
on the nation’s interests and needs. It is a large publisher of 
publications on America’s immigration crisis. Founded in 
1983, it is a prominent national voice for immigration con-
trol and is committed to educating citizens on what it views 
as the disastrous effects of uncontrolled immigration, and 
most particularly advocates for reform to better control ille-
gal immigration. Besides its lobbying activity for immigra-
tion control, AIC conducts public education campaigns to 
influence public opinion of the issue, campaigning through 
direct mail, paid advertisements, opinion surveys, and pub-
lic appearances by its spokesmen on radio and television. Its 
president is Robert Goldsborough, who also is a columnist 
with Middle America News.
American Immigration Law Foundation
It was founded in 1987 as a tax-exempt, nonprofit educational 
and service organization, and its stated mission is to promote 
understanding among the general public of immigration law and 
policy through education, policy analysis, and support to litiga-
tors. It has three core program areas: the Legal Action Center, the 
Public Education Program, and an Exchange Visitor Program.

	
Profiles	
185
American Immigration Lawyers Association
The American Immigration Lawyers Association is the national 
association of immigration lawyers established to promote jus-
tice, advocate for fair and reasonable immigration law and 
policy, advance the quality of immigration and nationality law 
and practice, and enhance the professional development of its 
members. Its members defend individuals charged with being 
in the United States illegally and in deportation hearings. It 
advocates against what it considers unfair or anti–civil liberty 
provisions in immigration law, particularly the USA Patriot 
Act and the Department of Homeland Security Act.
American Library Association
ALA is the oldest and largest library association in the world, 
with more than 64,000 members. Its stated mission is to pro-
mote the highest quality library and information service and 
public access to information. ALA offers professional services 
and publications to members and nonmembers. It entered the 
fray by joining in coalition with other organizations attempt-
ing to amend the USA Patriot Act.
American Refugee Committee International Headquarters USA
Begun in 1978, the ARC’s stated mission is to work for the 
survival, health, and well-being of refugees, displaced persons, 
and those at risk, and it seeks to enable them to rebuild pro-
ductive lives of dignity and purpose, striving always to respect 
the values of those served. ARC is an international, nonprofit, 
and nonsectarian organization that has provided multisector 
humanitarian assistance and training to millions of beneficia-
ries for more than 20 years.
Americans against Illegal Immigration
It claims to be the largest archive about illegal immigration and 
illegal immigrants, and the history of illegal immigration. It 
advocates strict enforcement of illegal immigration law.

186	
Illegal Immigration
Americans for Legal Immigration
Founded by William Gheen, it is a social media outreach for 
the Americans against Illegal Immigration.
Border Action Network
A human rights organization begun in 1999 and headquar-
tered in Tucson, Arizona, it claims as its mission to establish 
safety, equity, dignity, understanding, and respect across cul-
tures in border and immigrant communities.
Business Roundtable
The Business Roundtable is the association of chief execu-
tive officers of leading U.S. corporations with a combined 
workforce of more than 10 million employees in the United 
States. It is committed to advocating public policies that fos-
ter vigorous economic growth, a dynamic global economy, 
and a well-trained and productive U.S. workforce essential for 
future competitiveness. It is selective in the issues it studies; 
a principal criterion is the impact the problem will have on 
the economic well-being of the nation. Working in task forces 
on specific issues, it directs research, supervises the preparation 
of position papers, recommends policy, and lobbies Congress 
and the administration on selected issues. It supports propos-
als to establish an expanded guest-worker program, including 
“earned legalization” provisions with the proposed comprehen-
sive immigration reform measures in the House and Senate 
committees.
California Coalition for Immigration Reform
CCIR is a Huntington Beach, California–based political advo-
cacy group founded by Barbara Coe in 1994 primarily to fight 
against Proposition 187. Coe died in 2013. It has since joined 
in the coalition of groups forming what has become known as 
the Dreamer network.

	
Profiles	
187
Catholic Charities USA
Catholic Charities USA is a membership organization based 
in Alexandria, Virginia. It provides leadership, technical assis-
tance, training, and other resources to enable local agencies to 
better devote their own resources to serving their communities. 
It promotes innovative strategies that address human needs and 
social injustices. It advocates policies that aim to reduce pov-
erty, improve the lives of children and families, and strengthen 
communities. One of its major service programs involves refu-
gee and immigration assistance. It has favored and advocated 
for enactment of comprehensive immigration reform.
Center for American Progress
Founded in 2003 by John Podesta, it is a progressive public 
policy research and advocacy think tank–type organization 
based in Washington, D.C. It advocates for comprehensive 
immigration reform.
Center for Democracy and Technology
The Center for Democracy and Technology works to promote 
democratic values and constitutional liberties in the digital 
age. With expertise in law, technology, and policy, the CDT 
seeks practical solutions to enhance free expression and privacy 
in global communications technologies. CDT states that it is 
dedicated to building a consensus among all parties interested 
in the future of the Internet and other new communications 
media. It has become a lobbying organization on the issue and 
has joined in coalition with other organizations concerned 
with civil liberty issues around the DHS, the USA Patriot Act, 
and Patriot Act II.
Center for Human Rights and Constitutional Law
The CHRCL is the organization that helps homeless 12- to 
17-year-old inner-city youth to find an alternative to life on 
the streets through its Homeless Youth Project. It provides 

188	
Illegal Immigration
case management, job assistance, individual counseling, place-
ment assistance, school placement, legal and medical referrals, 
life skills training, and aftercare. Of particular importance to 
immigrants, it assists in ESL classes, tutoring, clerical, recre-
ation, outdoor activities, art, gardening, and a variety of other 
assignments. It does so without regard to the legal status of the 
immigrant being so served.
Center for the Applied Study of Prejudice and Ethnoviolence
The center examines responses to violence and intimidation 
based on prejudice—racial, ethnic, and so on. It issues a quar-
terly newsletter, Forum, as well as periodic reports and study 
papers. It is critical of efforts to control illegal immigration 
that it sees as often resulting from racial and ethnic prejudice 
against “undesirable” aliens.
Center for the Study of Hate Crimes and Extremism
A nonpartisan, domestic research and policy center that exam-
ines bigotry on both the regional and national levels, methods 
used to advocate extremism, and the use of terrorism to deny 
civil or human rights to people on the basis of race, ethnicity, 
religion, gender, sexual orientation, disability, or other relevant 
status characteristic. It sponsors public conferences, collabo-
rates with international news media, and maintains an Internet 
site with information about and in cooperation with govern-
ment organizations, human relations organizations, nonprofit 
organizations, and law enforcement.
Central American Resource Center
The CARC is a nonprofit immigration and human rights orga-
nization serving the refugee community on Long Island and 
throughout the southern portion of the state of New York. 
Founded in 1983, it works to protect the civil rights of immi-
grants, increase understanding between the native-born and 
newcomer communities, and raise awareness of the interaction 

	
Profiles	
189
of human rights disasters and immigration. It provides its ser-
vices to persons without regard to their legal status.
Church World Service
Founded in 1946, the CWS is the relief, development, and 
refugee assistance ministry of 36 Protestant, Orthodox, and 
Anglican denominations in the United States. Working with 
indigenous organizations in more than 80 countries, it works 
worldwide to meet human needs and to foster self-reliance for 
all whose way is hard. One of its major programs is Immi-
gration and Refugee Services. It advocates for more liberalized 
immigration policy and provides relief assistance to individu-
als without regard to their legal status. It supports “sanctuary” 
programs and provides emergency medical assistance to illegal 
immigrants. Critics allege that its sanctuary programs in fact 
promote and encourage illegal immigration. It works in coali-
tion with other organizations to reform immigration law in a 
more fair and humanitarian way.
Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles
Founded in 1986 to lobby over IRCA, it is now an American 
political advocacy organization promoting immigrant rights 
and humane treatment of unauthorized immigrants. It helped 
form a national coalition of groups currently promoting enact-
ment of the Dream Act, and supporting President Obama’s 
executive actions regarding DACA and DAPA.
Colorado Alliance for Immigration Reform
This organization, largely a Web site to organize a coalition of 
groups and persons concerned about illegal immigration, is 
a nonprofit, Colorado-based organization that developed in 
response to the growing number of immigrants, and particu-
larly illegal immigrants, who have dispersed to states beyond 
the traditional “gateway states.” It is exemplary of similar coali-
tions that have sprung up in many states newly experiencing 

190	
Illegal Immigration
significant immigration influxes. CAIR promotes a proactive 
national policy to stabilize the population and conserve natu-
ral resources by insisting that Congress limit legal immigration 
(not to exceed 100,000 per year) and to crack down firmly on 
illegal immigration. It considers that both major political par-
ties are supporting an “open borders” policy, which it adamantly 
opposes. It organizes protests and anti-immigration rallies focus-
ing on the negative impacts of illegal immigration. It has been 
a leading supporter of former Colorado congressman Tom Tan-
credo. It sponsors “Defend Colorado Now”—a ballot initiative 
that would amend Colorado’s constitution to require that per-
sons who are trying to access certain public services be required 
to show that they are present in the United States legally—a 
Colorado version of California’s Proposition 187. It advocates 
an immigration moratorium, no more amnesty programs, strict 
enforcement of immigration laws both at the borders and in 
the interior, enhanced employer sanctions, and, through the 
ballot-initiative process, ending government-sponsored benefits 
and entitlements for illegal immigrants. It promotes a U.S. con-
stitutional amendment that would deny citizenship to children 
of illegal immigrants born in the United States. It has launched 
educational billboard campaigns and, most recently, the Colo-
rado Alliance News, an all-volunteer news service, to promote 
its views on the immigration issue. Among its more notable 
directors is former Colorado governor Richard Lamm.
The Dream Is Now
http://www.thedreamisnow.org/
A Web site for the Dreamer movement.
Episcopal Migration Ministries
The EMM serves as the organizational arm of the Episcopal 
Church in all matters related to immigration and migration 
relief and assistance, and works in close consultation and 

	
Profiles	
191
coalition with other churches in pursuing humanitarian immi-
gration policy and providing assistance and even sanctuary to 
persons accused of or suspected of being in the United States 
illegally.
Essential Worker Immigration Coalition
Supported by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the EWIC is 
a coalition of business groups, trade associations, and other 
organizations nationwide and across the industrial spectrum 
concerned about the shortage of both skilled and less skilled 
(“essential worker”) labor. It lobbies the administration and 
the Congress to push forward immigration reform issues. It 
supports policies that facilitate the employment of essential 
workers by U.S. companies and organizations—that is, an 
expanded guest-worker program. It advocates reforming U.S. 
immigration policy to facilitate a sustainable workforce for 
the national economy while ensuring national security and 
prosperity.
Ethiopian Community Development Council
The ECDC’s stated mission is to resettle refugees; promote 
cultural, educational, and socioeconomic development in 
the refugee and immigrant community in the United States; 
and conduct humanitarian and development programs in the 
Horn of Africa. It provides programs and services to assist 
newcomers to the United States to become productive mem-
bers of their community; conducts outreach and educational 
activities to increase public awareness of refugee and immi-
grant issues; promotes civic participation by newcomers in the 
decision-making processes of local, state, and national levels; 
provides cross-cultural training to service providers; and assists 
in educational development and cultural preservation of the 
Ethiopian community. It does so without regard to the legal 
status of the immigrant or refugee being served.

192	
Illegal Immigration
Federal Immigration Reform and Enforcement Coalition
Largely a Web site approach to coalition building, FIRE is 
an offshoot of AIC. It claims to be a nationwide coalition of 
individuals and groups dedicated to influencing federal, state, 
and local laws to stop the flood of immigration and to pro-
mote policies to limit and control legal immigration. It pushes 
government to vigorous enforcement of immigration laws, 
the repatriation of illegal immigrants, and the removal of all 
incentives for individuals to illegally cross the borders through 
the enforcement and strengthening of existing laws penalizing 
those who employ or harbor illegal immigrants, and to inform 
public opinion as to the consequences of illegal immigration. 
It describes itself as a nonpartisan, direct-action, public educa-
tion, and political campaigning coalition.
Federation for American Immigration Reform
Founded in 1979 by John Tanton, FAIR is a national, nonpar-
tisan, nonprofit, public-interest membership organization of 
concerned citizens who share a common belief that the unfore-
seen mass immigration that has occurred largely since 1980 
should be curtailed. It advocates a moratorium on all immigra-
tion except for spouses and minor children of U.S. citizens, 
and a limited number of refugees. In its view, a workable immi-
gration policy is one that allows time to regain control of the 
U.S. borders and reduce overall levels of immigration to more 
traditional levels of about 300,000 a year. It believes that the 
United States can and must have an immigration policy that is 
nondiscriminatory while at the same time is designed to serve 
the social, economic, and environmental needs of the United 
States.
Free Congress Foundation
Free Congress is a politically conservative, culturally conserva-
tive think tank that is more of an advocacy organization that 
promotes the “Culture War” and advocates returning the nation 

	
Profiles	
193
and its policies to the traditional, Judeo-Christian, Western 
cultural heritage by stopping what it calls the long slide into 
the moral and cultural decay of “political correctness.” It is 
strenuously opposed to illegal immigration and to any amnesty 
or legalization policy, favors strict enforcement of immigration 
law and English-only policy, and rejects multiculturalism.
Freedom Works
Founded in 1984, Freedom Works has full-time staffed offices 
in 10 states. It claims to be a coalition of some 700,000 volun-
teers nationwide. The organization is chaired by former U.S. 
House majority leader Dick Armey. It fights for lower taxes, less 
government, and more freedom. It has strongly backed a private 
business–based approach to a guest-worker program developed 
by the Krieble Foundation. It has developed into a serious force 
in the Republican Party’s presidential nomination process, tilt-
ing such to the more extreme right of the political spectrum.
Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society
Founded in 1881, HIAS has assisted more than 4.5 million 
people in their quest for freedom, including the million Jew-
ish refugees it helped to migrate to Israel and the thousands it 
helped resettle in Canada, Latin America, Australia, New Zea-
land, and elsewhere. As the oldest international migration and 
refugee resettlement agency in the United States, it played a 
major role in the rescue and relocation of Jewish survivors of 
the Holocaust and Jews from Morocco, Ethiopia, Egypt, and 
the communist countries of Eastern Europe. It advocates on 
behalf of refugees and migrants on the international, national, 
and community levels. It provides its services without regard 
to the legal status of the immigrant being assisted. It works in 
coalition with other church organizations of immigrant/refu-
gee assistance and has lobbied on behalf of legislation aimed 
at liberal immigration reform in favor of legalization and 
guest-worker programs.

194	
Illegal Immigration
Heritage Foundation
The Heritage Foundation was founded in 1973 as a research 
and educational institute—one of the early think tanks. Its 
stated mission is to formulate and propose conservative public 
policies that are based upon the principles of free enterprise, 
limited government, individual freedom, traditional American 
values, and a strong national defense. On the illegal immigra-
tion issue, it promotes immigration reform that lessens total 
legal immigration levels, strengthens the enforcement of laws 
against illegal immigration, opposes amnesty, and increases bor-
der control to better secure the homeland against international 
terrorism. Since former senator Jim DeMint was selected to 
lead the foundation, it has shifted away from research and edu-
cation and now is a more conservative advocacy group, lobby-
ing and fund-raising for electoral politics on the right and often 
backing “Tea Party” challengers to establishment Republicans.
Human Rights Watch
Based in New York City, and cofounded by Aryeh Neier, Jeri 
Laber, and Robert Bernstein in 1978, it monitors countries for 
human rights violations. It received the UN Prize in the Field 
of Human Rights in 2008, and the Peabody Award in 2011.
Humane Borders
The mission statement of Humane Borders describes itself as 
an organization of people motivated by faith and committed 
to work to create a just and humane border environment. Its 
members respond with humanitarian assistance to those risk-
ing their lives and safety crossing the U.S. border with Mexico. 
It encourages the creation of public policies toward a humane, 
nonmilitarized border with legalized work opportunities for 
migrants in the United States and legitimate economic oppor-
tunities in migrants’ countries of origin. It favors legalization 
and guest-worker programs. It lobbies and advocates in coali-
tion with other organizations promoting more liberalized 
immigration policy.

	
Profiles	
195
League of United Latin American Citizens
LULAC is organized to promote the democratic principles 
of individual, political, and religious freedom, and the right 
to equal social and economic opportunities, and works in the 
cooperative endeavor toward the development of a U.S. society 
wherein the cultural resources, integrity, and dignity of every 
individual and group constitute basic assets of the American 
way of life. Among its goals are to be a service organization to 
actively promote and establish cooperative relations with civic 
and governmental institutions and agencies in the field of pub-
lic service, to uphold the rights guaranteed to every individual 
by state and national laws, to ensure justice and equal treat-
ment under those laws, and to oppose any infringement upon 
the constitutional political rights of an individual to vote and 
or be voted upon at local, state, and national levels. It brought 
the court case that overturned as unconstitutional many of the 
provisions of California’s Proposition 187. It works in coali-
tion with other organizations to oppose the USA Patriot Act 
and insists on amending some of its more egregious civil rights 
infringements. It favors legalization and a guest-worker pro-
gram such as that contained in the Senate-passed (S.744) com-
prehensive immigration reform bill.
Lutheran Immigration and Refugee Service
The LIRS states as its mission to welcome the stranger, bring-
ing new hope and new life through ministries and justice. It 
mobilizes action on behalf of uprooted people and sees that 
they receive fair and equal treatment, regardless of national ori-
gin, race, religion, culture, or legal status. It advocates for just 
and humane solutions to migration crises and their root causes, 
both national and international; works to turn solutions into 
reality; and encourages citizens to take part in shaping just and 
fair public policies, practices, and laws. It works in coalition 
with other mostly church-based immigration and refugee ser-
vice organizations and lobbies to enact immigration reform 
that is more liberal. It favors legalization and a guest-worker 

196	
Illegal Immigration
provision. Some of the organization’s member churches have 
supported the sanctuary movement.
Major Cities Chiefs of Police Association
An organization of chiefs of police of major American cities 
that formed in 1949, currently it meets three times per year 
and advocates for issues of concern to city police. It opposes 
the mandated use of local police to enforce federal immigration 
law. It supported President Obama’s DACA and DAPA execu-
tive actions. Darrel Stephens is the association’s executive direc-
tor. In 2014, Chief Thomas Manger, the Montgomery County 
police chief, was elected to lead the association.
Mexican American Legal Defense Fund
Founded in 1968 in San Antonio, Texas, by Mario Obledo, and 
headquartered in Los Angeles, California, MALDEF is a leading 
nonprofit Latino litigation, advocacy, and educational outreach 
institution whose stated mission is to foster sound public policies, 
laws, and programs to safeguard the civil rights of the more than 
40 million Latinos living in the United States and to empower the 
Latino community to fully participate in society. It advocates in 
coalition with other organizations to promote legalization, favors 
a guest-worker program, and is highly critical of what it holds are 
the civil rights infringements of the Patriot Act. It strongly opposed 
state initiatives like California’s Proposition 187, and Arizona’s 
anti-illegal immigrant law, and the congressional acts of 1996, 
which it held were racist, anti-Hispanic, and anti-immigrant. It 
has legally opposed English-only laws and initiatives as well. Its 
major sector is on civil liberties of Mexican Americans.
Minutemen
Its founder and president is Jim Gilchrist. It is an anti-immigrant 
organization that advocates reduced legal immigration, recom-
mends stopping illegal immigration by strict border control, 
and organizes groups of members to voluntarily patrol the bor-
der areas “in support of the border patrol.”

	
Profiles	
197
Minuteman Colorado
It is public policy and issues advocacy organization that aggres-
sively addresses what it describes as the intensifying assaults 
that the American republic continues to endure.
Based in Denver, with Mike Zimmerle serving as its state 
director, it is part of the Minuteman Project alliance of 
“volunteer-patrol” groups.
Mothers against Illegal Aliens
Founded in 2006 by activist Michelle Dellacroce, MALA aims 
to “show every mother in American what is going on in our 
streets.” It is a Phoenix-based, ultra right-wing organization 
that is particularly “anti-anchor babies.” It joined in the Min-
uteman Civil Defense Corps rally in Arizona.
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
Headquartered in Baltimore and founded by Archibald Grim-
lee, Henry Moskowitz, Ida B. Wells, and Lilliam Wald in 1909, 
NAACP is the oldest and best-known black civil rights advo-
cacy organization. Its major sectors include antiracism and civil 
and political rights. It has formed coalitions with immigrant 
rights groups and lobbies for comprehensive, proimmigration 
reform.
National Conference of Catholic Bishops, Migration and Refugee 
Services, Office of Migration Policy and Public Affairs
Founded in 1966 and headquartered in Washington, D.C., it 
is the political advocacy arm of the Conference of Bishops and 
supports comprehensive immigration reform and immigrant 
rights.
National Council of La Raza
The NCLR is a private, nonprofit, nonpartisan, tax-exempt 
organization established in 1968 to reduce poverty and discrimi-
nation, and improve life opportunities for Hispanic Americans, 

198	
Illegal Immigration
assisting the development of Hispanic community-based orga-
nizations in urban and rural areas nationwide. It conducts 
applied research, policy analysis, and advocacy, providing a 
Hispanic perspective on issues such as education, immigration, 
housing, health, employment and training, and civil rights 
enforcement, to increase policy maker and public understand-
ing of Hispanic needs, and to encourage the adoption of pro-
grams and policies that equitably serve Hispanics.
Its Policy Analysis Center is a prominent Hispanic think 
tank serving as a voice for Hispanic Americans in Washington, 
D.C. It works in coalition with other Latino organizations and 
lobby efforts to reform immigration law in a more humane 
way. In 2014, it elected Janet Murguia as its president.
National Federation of Independent Business
The NFIB is the largest advocacy organization represent-
ing small and independent businesses in Washington, D.C., 
and all 50 state capitals. Its Education Foundation promotes 
the importance of free enterprise and entrepreneurship. Its 
Research Foundation researches policy-related small business 
problems and affects public policy debate by making its find-
ings widely available. Its Legal Foundation fights for small 
businesses in the courts and seeks to educate small employers 
on legal issues. It favors the guest-worker proposals of several 
bills before the Congress and “earned legalization” provisions.
National Immigration Forum
Founded in 1982, NIF’s stated mission is “to embrace and 
uphold America’s tradition as a nation of immigrants. The 
Forum advocates and builds public support for public policies 
that welcome immigrants and refugees and that are fair and 
supportive to newcomers in our country.” The forum works to 
unite families torn apart by what it characterizes as unreason-
able and arbitrary restrictions. It advocates to secure fair treat-
ment of refugees who have fled persecution; legalize the status 
of hardworking immigrants caught in legal limbo; promote 

	
Profiles	
199
citizenship as a pathway to full political participation (politi-
cal incorporation); secure equitable access to social protections; 
and protect immigrants’ fundamental constitutional rights, no 
matter their legal or undocumented status. It advocates to pro-
mote immigration policies that strengthen the U.S. economy 
by working with a diverse coalition of allies—immigrant, eth-
nic, religious, civil rights, labor, business groups, state and 
local governments, and other organizations—to forge and 
promote a new vision of immigration policy that is consistent 
with global realities, fosters economic growth, attracts needed 
workers to the United States, and protects the rights of work-
ers and families. It works to help newcomers settle into their 
communities; to help them climb the socioeconomic ladder of 
U.S. society; to help localities weave immigrants into the fabric 
of community life; and to build bonds of mutual understand-
ing between residents and newcomers. It supports President 
Obama’s DACA and DAPA executive actions.
National Immigration Law Center
The National Immigration Law Center is a national support 
center whose mission is to protect and promote the rights 
and opportunities of low-income immigrants and their family 
members. Its staff specializes in immigration law and immi-
grant welfare. It conducts policy analysis and impact litigation 
and provides publications, technical services, and training to a 
broad constituency of legal aid agencies, community groups, 
and pro bono attorneys. It has offices in Los Angeles, Oakland, 
and Washington, D.C., and operates the Sacramento policy 
office for the California Immigrant Welfare Collaborative. It 
lobbies and works in coalition with other organizations favor-
ing legalization and similar approaches to the illegal immigra-
tion problem.
National League of Cities
It serves as the national advocate for towns, villages, and more 
than 19,000 cities in the 49 states of the United States. It 

200	
Illegal Immigration
generally opposes any immigration measure that would involve 
unfunded mandates, especially on local police.
National Network for Immigrant and Refugee Rights
The NNIRR is a national organization composed of local 
coalitions and immigrant, refugee, community, religious, civil 
rights, and labor organizations and activists. It is a forum to 
share information and analysis, educate communities and the 
general public, and develop and coordinate plans of action 
on important immigrant and refugee issues. It promotes just 
immigration and refugee policy in the United States. It defends 
expanding the rights of all immigrants/refugees, regardless of 
their status. It seeks the enfranchisement of all immigrant and 
refugee in the United States through organizing and advocat-
ing for their full labor, environmental, civil, and human rights. 
It emphasizes the change in global, political, and economic 
structures exacerbating regional, national, and international 
patterns of migration, and builds support and cooperation to 
strengthen the rights, welfare, and safety of migrants.
National Organization for European American Rights
Founded in 2000, and led by David Duke, Grand Wizard 
of the Ku Klux Klan, NO FEAR is a loose alliance of white 
nationalist and white supremacist groups headquartered in 
Mandeville, Louisiana. It adamantly opposes any legalization 
provision, which it considers amnesty. It supports strict border 
control, reduced legal immigration, and the removal of all ille-
gal immigrants.
New York Association for New Americans
The NYANA works to help those new to the United States, 
and those who have been in the country for some time, to fash-
ion a roadmap for accomplishing their goals and dreams and 
to assist refugees and immigrants, their families, their sponsors, 
and companies that employ them, other institutions that serve 

	
Profiles	
201
them, and the communities in which they live. It serves immi-
grants without regard to their legal status.
No More Deaths
No More Deaths is a coalition of diverse individuals, faith com-
munities, and human rights organizers who work for justice in 
the United States by mobilizing a response to the escalating 
numbers of deaths among illegal immigrants crossing the bor-
ders in the U.S. Southwest. The coalition has established a bina-
tional network of immigrant-friendly organizations and people 
in the Southwest and in northern Mexico who participate in 
interventions designed to stop migrant deaths, espousing the 
principle that humanitarian aid is never a crime. It establishes 
movable desert camps, supports the maintenance of water sta-
tions, and regularly launches what it terms “good Samaritan 
patrols” that search the desert for migrants at risk. A nonprofit 
organization, it advocates on behalf of migrant-related issues, 
including promoting public demonstrations such as days of 
fast in remembrance of the lives claimed along the borders and 
protesting the policies that cause those deaths. Several of its 
volunteers have been arrested for giving aid to illegal aliens, 
and the coalition protests to call on government to drop the 
charges against its members. It organizes clergy and others to 
contact elected officials, particularly members of Congress, in 
an attempt to influence immigration reform.
NumbersUSA
NumbersUSA is a nonprofit, nonpartisan, public-policy advo-
cacy organization that seeks an environmentally sustainable 
and economically just society that protects individual liber-
ties by advocating policies to stop mass illegal immigration. 
Its stated goals are to examine numerical levels of annual legal 
and illegal immigration, and to educate the public about 
the immigration-reduction recommendations from two 
national commissions of the 1990s: the 1995 Bipartisan U.S. 

202	
Illegal Immigration
Commission on Immigration Reform (the Barbara Jordan 
Commission) and the 1996 President’s Council on Sustainable 
Development. It specifically advocates the elimination of chain 
migration and of the visa lottery. It views the elimination of 
those two immigration categories as the best way to protect 
vulnerable U.S. workers and their families. It promotes itself 
as proenvironment, proworker, proliberty, and proimmigrant. 
Its founders are John Tanton and Roy Beck. It networks with 
Americans of all races and includes many immigrants and their 
spouses, children, and parents. It advocates for illegal immi-
gration reform and against any guest-worker type of program. 
It seeks to reduce overall legal immigration and advocates the 
reduction and eventual elimination of all illegal immigration. 
It advocates stricter border control measures, such as expan-
sion of the Border Patrol and of the fences along the southern 
border.
Office of Migration and Refugee Services, U.S. Conference  
of Catholic Bishops
Since the turn of the 20th century, the Catholic Church in 
the United States has engaged in the resettlement of refugees, 
advocating on behalf of immigrants and people on the move, 
and providing pastoral care and services to newcomers from all 
over the world. Since 1970 alone it has assisted in resettlement 
of more than 1 million refugees. The MRS is committed to 
its resettlement, pastoral care, and advocacy roles on behalf of 
immigrants, migrants, and refugees. It assists the bishops in the 
development and advocacy of policy positions at the national 
and international levels, which address the needs and condi-
tions of immigrants, refugees, and other people on the move. 
It works with the federal government and with local churches 
in resettling refugees admitted to the United States into car-
ing and supportive communities. It serves its clientele without 
regard to their legal status and has worked in coalition with 
other church organizations in the sanctuary movement and for 
passage of comprehensive immigration reform.

	
Profiles	
203
Rights for All People
Rights for All People is a recently formed coalition to organize 
immigrants and their allies to achieve justice, dignity, and human 
rights for immigrants in Colorado. It was formed in response to 
the passage of anti-immigrant, anti–civil rights initiatives, such 
as Proposition 187 in California and “Defend Colorado Now.” 
Committed to the struggle for the rights of immigrants, the coali-
tion espouses that the protection of immigrant rights is directly 
connected to preserving the rights of all people. Its primary strat-
egy is to promote those rights by organizing with immigrants in a 
broad-based advocacy coalition. It sponsors direct action protests 
and marshals public opinion against specific legislation—such as 
the CLEAR Act. It counters by promoting legislation that would 
allow driver’s licenses for undocumented immigrants (backing 
Colorado senate bill SB67 in 2002).
The Social Contract Press
Another organization founded by John Tanton, it is an Ameri-
can publisher favoring reduction of U.S. legal immigration and 
advocated reforms to stop illegal immigration.
Southern Poverty Law Center
A civil rights advocacy organization headquartered in Mont-
gomery, Alabama, it was founded in 1971 by Joe Levin, Julian 
Bond, and Morris Dees. Its sectors are: antipoverty, antifas-
cism, and fund-raising, and it is an advocate for comprehensive 
immigration reform. Its current president is J. Richard Cohen.
The Stein Report
Founded by Marc Stein, a project of the Federation for Amer-
ican Immigration Reform, it is the social media, Web-based 
outlet for FAIR.
Tolstoy Foundation
The foundation describes itself as an organization that for 
more than a half-century has been committed to its founder, 

204	
Illegal Immigration
Alexandra Tolstoy, whose empathy for the plight of peoples of 
her homeland and abhorrence of all forms of oppression and 
human suffering remain at the heart of the foundation’s chari-
table activities today. Its stated mission is to promote respect 
for human dignity, freedom of choice, building of self-reliance 
through education and practical training, and assistance and 
relief to the distressed, children, the aged, the sick, and the 
forgotten at home and abroad. It is dedicated to enhancing 
the quality of life of its elderly population, providing a home 
and congenial surroundings to its residents, and caring for 
their physical, spiritual, and intellectual needs. It seeks to pre-
serve the cultural traditions, the heritage, and the resources of 
the Russian diaspora, and now has come full circle from its 
history of assisting new immigrants in their assimilation pro-
cess to helping the peoples of Russia and the former Soviet 
Union acquire the knowledge and skills necessary to achieve 
self-reliance in their own homeland.
United We Dream
United We Dream began in 2005, organized to fight for the 
dignity and fair treatment of immigrant youth regardless of 
legal status. The largest immigrant-youth led organization in 
the United States, it is a voice for a nonpartisan network of 
55 affiliated organizations with over 100,000 immigrant youth 
and their allies in 26 states with its headquarters in Washing-
ton, D.C. It is especially noted for fighting for the Deferred 
Action programs of DACA and DAPA
U.S. Chamber of Commerce
Constituting the largest umbrella organization for business 
in the United States, the U.S. Chamber represents more than 
3 million businesses organized into 2,800 state and local cham-
bers and 830 business associations. Its business members are 
from all sizes and sectors of the economy—from Fortune 500 
companies to small, one-person operations. Its staff consists 

	
Profiles	
205
of lobbyists, policy specialists, and lawyers who promote an 
economic, political, and social system based on individual 
incentive, initiative, opportunity, and responsibility. The U.S. 
Chamber founded the Americans for Better Borders coalition. 
Believing that the borders can and should be a line of defense 
against international terrorists but also allowing for legitimate 
commerce and travel, the coalition promotes the efficient allo-
cation of technology, personnel, and infrastructure resources 
to achieve those goals. The coalition unites regional business 
organizations, companies, and national trade associations in all 
sectors of the economy to ensure the efficient flow of exports 
and tourism across the borders while addressing national secu-
rity concerns. The chamber promoted a workable compromise 
on the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsi-
bility Act of 1996. The Americans for Better Borders Coalition 
was founded in 1998. It lobbied the Congress on the establish-
ment of the DHS. It currently endorses and promotes passage 
of the Senate proposal with its more comprehensive immigra-
tion reform provisions and an extensive guest-worker program 
plan that the U.S. Chamber considers essential to any effective 
immigration reform.
U.S. Committee for Refugees
USCR describes its mission as defending the rights of all 
uprooted people regardless of their nationality, race, religion, 
ideology, or social group. It believes that once the consciences of 
men and women are aroused, great deeds can be accomplished. 
It bases its work on the following principles: (1) refugees have 
basic human rights, and no person with a well-founded fear 
of persecution should be forcibly returned to his or her home-
land; (2) asylum seekers have the right to a fair and impartial 
hearing to determine their refugee status; and (3) all uprooted 
victims of human conflict, regardless of whether they cross a 
border, have the right to humane treatment as well as adequate 
protection and assistance.

206	
Illegal Immigration
V-DARE 
V-DARE, the Virginia-based outlet for its leader Peter 
Brimelow, begun in 1999. It describes itself as a national non-
profit educational organization dedicated to preserving the his-
torical unity of Americans into the 21st century. It monitors 
development on a broad range of economic, domestic, defense, 
and foreign policy issues related to the American nation-state, 
which it maintains can survive as the political expression of 
a distinct American people, in the face of emerging threats 
of mass immigration, multiculturalism, multilingualism, and 
affirmative action. It filed an amicus brief in Hamdi v. Rums-
feld, challenging the assumption an enemy combatant Saudi 
citizen is a U.S. citizen solely because he was a native-born son 
of a temporary worker.
It filed another amicus brief in The Barton Case, which over-
turned Mrs. Barton’s conviction and 45-day jail sentence for 
“expressing her opinion that immigrants should learn English.” 
It also filed an amicus brief in Alexander v. Sandoval, wherein 
the U.S. Supreme Court upheld Alabama’s law, passed by citi-
zen referendum, requiring applications for driver’s licenses be 
made in English only.
Voices of Citizens Together/American Patrol
America Patrol is West Texas’s largest and most experienced 
aerial patrol service. Its purpose is to “fight for U.S. sover-
eignty” by demanding apprehensions and the removal of all 
illegal immigrants and the restoration of border security
Immigration Research Centers and Think Tanks
American Assembly
The assembly’s major objectives are to focus attention and 
stimulate information on a range of critical U.S. policy topics, 
both domestic and international; to provide government offi-
cials, community and civic leadership, and the general public 
with factual background information and the range of policy 

	
Profiles	
207
options on a given issue; and to facilitate communications 
among decision makers and the public and private sectors.
Bell Policy Center
The Bell Policy Center is a research center located in Colorado 
and committed to making Colorado a state of opportunity for 
all. Its stated goal is to reinvigorate the debate on issues affect-
ing the well-being of Coloradoans and to promote policies 
that open gateways to opportunity. It conducts nonpartisan 
research on issues of concern, shares its research with policy 
makers, uses its staff and a network of supporters and consul-
tants to inform public opinion and to encourage responsible 
public dialogue and debate, and makes policy recommenda-
tions and advocates for changes that will increase opportunities 
for individuals and families. It has recently issued study briefs 
on the impact of immigration on Colorado as well as informa-
tion sheets on immigration bills before the state legislature and 
the U.S. Congress. It favors a guest-worker program and main-
tains that immigration drives economic growth in the nation 
as a whole and in Colorado. Its recent study found that wages 
and employment of native-born workers were not significantly 
affected by immigration, that 90  percent of undocumented 
immigrant men are working, and that immigration adds about 
$10 billion to the U.S. economy annually.
Brookings Institution, Center on Urban and Metropolitan Policy
Founded in 1916 by Peter Assoy, Robert Rubin, and Robert 
Brookings, the Brookings Institution is an independent, non-
partisan organization devoted to research, analysis, education, 
and publication focused on public policy issues in the areas of 
economics, foreign policy, and governance. Its stated goal is to 
improve the performance of U.S. institutions and the quality of 
public policy by using social science to analyze emerging issues 
and to offer practical approaches to those issues in language 
aimed at the general public. It does so through three research 

208	
Illegal Immigration
programs—Economic Studies, Foreign Policy Studies, and 
Governance Studies—as well as through the Center for Public 
Policy Education and the Brookings Institution Press, which 
publishes about 50 books a year. Its research is conducted to 
inform the public debate, not to advocate or advance a political 
agenda. It began in 1927. It is financed largely by endowment 
and through support by philanthropic foundations, corpora-
tions, and private individuals. It is consistently ranked as the 
most influential, most quoted, and most trusted think tank.
Cato Institute
The Cato Institute was founded in 1977 as a public policy research 
foundation headquartered in Washington, D.C. Named for 
Cato’s Letters, a series of libertarian pamphlets that helped lay the 
philosophical foundation of the American Revolution, the insti-
tute describes its mission as seeking to broaden the parameters 
of public policy debate to allow consideration of the traditional 
American principles of limited government, individual liberty, 
free markets, and peace. To pursue that goal, the institute strives 
to achieve greater involvement of the intelligent, concerned lay 
public in questions of policy and the proper role of government. 
It is a nonprofit, tax-exempt educational foundation.
Center for Equal Opportunity
The center is a think tank devoted to the promotion of color-
blind equal opportunity and racial harmony. It seeks to coun-
ter what it holds to be the divisive impact of race-conscious 
public policies. It focuses on three issues in particular: racial 
preferences, immigration and assimilation, and multicultural 
education. The center promotes the assimilation of legal immi-
grants into society and conducts research on their economic 
and social impact on the United States. It advocates against 
bilingual education, holding that such programs promote a 
racial ideology that risks balkanization of a multiracial society. 
It was founded and is headed by Linda Chavez.

	
Profiles	
209
Center for Immigration Studies
The CIS is an independent, nonpartisan, nonprofit research 
organization founded in 1985. It is the nation’s only think tank 
devoted exclusively to research and policy analysis of the eco-
nomic, social, demographic, fiscal, and other impacts of immi-
gration on the United States. Its stated mission is to expand the 
base of knowledge and understanding of the need for an immi-
gration policy that gives first concern to the broad national 
interest. It is animated by a proimmigrant, low-immigration 
vision that seeks fewer immigrants but a warmer welcome for 
those admitted. The center also publishes Immigration Review. 
It is led by Mark Kirkorian.
Center for Migration Studies
The CMS of New York was founded in 1964. It is one of the 
premier institutes for migration studies in the United States. 
Its stated mission is to facilitate the study of sociodemographic, 
historical, economic, political, legislative, and pastoral aspects 
of human migration and refugee movements. In 1969 it was 
incorporated as an educational nonprofit institute. It brings 
an independent perspective to the interdisciplinary study of 
international migration and refugees without the institutional 
constraints of government analysts and special interest groups, 
or the profit considerations of private research firms. It claims 
to be the only institute in the United States devoted exclusively 
to understanding and educating the public on the causes and 
consequences of human mobility at both origin and destina-
tion counties. It generates and facilitates the dissemination of 
new knowledge and the fostering of effective policies. It pub-
lishes the leading scholarly journal in the field, the Interna-
tional Migration Review.
Immigration History Research Center
Founded in 1965, the Immigration History Research Center is 
an international resource on American immigration and ethnic 

210	
Illegal Immigration
history. The IHRC collects, preserves, and makes available 
archival and published resources documenting immigration 
and ethnicity on a national scope and is particularly rich for 
ethnic groups that originated in Eastern, Central, and South-
ern Europe and the Near East. It sponsors academic programs 
and publishes bibliographic and scholarly works.
Manhattan Institute
The Manhattan Institute claims to have been an important force 
shaping American political culture for more than 25 years. It 
supports and publishes research on a host of challenging public 
policy issues, including welfare, crime, the legal system, urban 
life, education, and immigration—both legal and illegal. It 
publishes or supports the research for books, does book reviews 
and interviews, presents public speeches by its fellows, writes 
op-ed pieces for major public news outlets, and publishes the 
quarterly City Journal. It sponsors forums and conferences 
devoted to its research issues.
Migration Policy Institute
MPI is an independent, nonpartisan, nonprofit think tank in 
Washington, D.C., dedicated to the study of the movement of 
people worldwide. It provides analysis, development, and eval-
uation of migration and refugee policies at the local, national, 
and international levels. It aims to meet the rising demand 
for pragmatic and thoughtful responses to the challenges and 
opportunities that large-scale migration, whether voluntary or 
forced, presents to communities and institutions in an increas-
ingly integrated world. Founded in 2001 by Kathleen Newland 
and Demetrios G. Papademetriou, MPI grew out of the Inter-
national Migration Policy Program at the Carnegie Endow-
ment for International Peace.
National Immigration Forum
The purpose of the NIF is to embrace and uphold America’s 
tradition as a nation of immigrants. The forum advocates and 

	
Profiles	
211
builds public support for public policies that welcome immi-
grants and refugees and that are fair and supportive to new-
comers in the United States.
National Network for Immigrant and Refugee Rights
A national organization composed of local coalitions and 
immigrant, refugee, community, religious, civil rights, and 
labor organizations and activists, the network serves as a forum 
to share information and analysis, to educate communities 
and the general public, and to develop and coordinate plans of 
action on important immigrant and refugee issues. It works to 
promote a just immigration and refugee policy in the United 
States and to defend and expand the rights of all immigrants 
and refugees, regardless of immigrant status, advocating for 
their full labor, environmental, civil, and human rights.
Pew Hispanic Center
Founded in 2001, the PHC is a nonpartisan research organiza-
tion supported by the Pew Charitable Trusts. Its mission is to 
improve understanding of the U.S. Hispanic population and to 
chronicle Latinos’ growing impact on the entire nation. Timeli-
ness, relevance, and scientific rigor characterize its work. It does 
not advocate for or take positions on policy issues. Demogra-
phy, immigration, and remittances are its major research foci 
on illegal immigration.
Prejudice Institute
The Prejudice Institute describes itself as a resource for activists, 
lawyers, and social scientists. It is devoted to policy research 
and education on all dimensions of prejudice, discrimination, 
and ethnoviolence.
Public Policy Institute of California
The PPIC is a private, nonprofit organization dedicated to 
improving public policy in California through independent, 

212	
Illegal Immigration
objective, nonpartisan research. It was established in 1994 with 
an endowment from William R. Hewlett. Its research focuses 
on three program areas: population, economy, and governance 
and public finance. Its publications include reports, research 
briefs, surveys, fact sheets, special papers, and demographic bul-
letins. It also communicates its research and analysis through 
conferences, forums, luncheons, and other targeted outreach 
efforts.
RAND Corporation
RAND (a contraction of the terms “research and develop-
ment”) was the first organization to be called a think tank. 
Established in 1946 by the U.S. Air Force, today RAND is a 
nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decision 
making through research and analysis whose areas of expertise 
include child policy, civil and criminal justice, community and 
U.S. regional studies, drug policy, education, health, immi-
gration, infrastructure, international policy, methodology, 
national security, population and aging, science and technol-
ogy, and terrorism. On occasion its findings are considered so 
compelling that it advances specific policy recommendations. 
It serves the public interest by widely disseminating its research 
findings.
Tolerance.org
Tolerance.org is a Web project of the Southern Poverty Law 
Center, a national civil rights organization. Its stated mission 
is to create a national community committed to human rights 
by centralizing e-mail addresses and inviting users to view 
special features and stories on the Web site. It promotes and 
disseminates scholarship on all aspects of prejudice and dis-
crimination, promoting tolerance, exposing hate groups and 
hate news, providing assistance on litigation and legal matters, 
and publishing antihate and protolerance tracts such as: “Ten 
Ways to Fight Hate,” “101 Tools for Tolerance,” and “Center 
Information Packet.”

	
Profiles	
213
Urban Institute
One of the oldest of the think tanks, the Urban Institute 
researches policy matters in which it measures effects; com-
pares options; shows which stakeholders get the most and the 
least; tests conventional wisdom; reveals trends; and makes 
costs, benefits, and risks explicit on a broad array of public 
policy issues, employing the right methodologies and quantita-
tive modeling, survey design, and statistical analyses. It pub-
lishes an extensive list of books that follow standard academic 
peer-review procedures for an audience of program administra-
tors, other researchers and university students, the news media, 
nonprofit organizations, stakeholders in the private sector, and 
that important segment of the public engaged in policy debates 
through the media.
References
Barone, Michael, and Chuck McCutcheon, eds. 2014. The 
Almanac of American Politics. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Diller, Daniel C., and Stephen L. Robertson. 2001. The 
Presidents, First Ladies, and Vice Presidents: White House 
Biographies, 1789–2001. Washington, DC: Congressional 
Quarterly Press.
Graff, Henry A., ed. 1997. The Presidents: A Reference History. 
New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Hamilton, Neil A. 2001. Presidents: A Biographical Dictionary. 
New York: Facts on File.
Jacobson, Doranne. Presidents and First Ladies of the United 
States. New York: Smithmack, 1995.
LeMay, Michael. Illegal Immigration: A Reference Handbook, 
1st ed. Westport, CT: Praeger Press, 2007.
LeMay, Michael. Transforming America: Perspectives on 
Immigration, vol. 3: Immigration and Superpower Status, 
1945 to Date. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2013.

214	
Illegal Immigration
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services. 2006. http://
www.uscis.gov/.htm.
U.S. Department of Justice. 2006. http://www.usdoj.gov.
Web Sites
www.bennet.senate.gov/p=biography
www.govtrack.us/congress/members/michael-bennet/412330
www.black.house.gov/Home/About-Me
www.boehner.house.gov/
www.speaker.gov/
www.bishop.house.gov/biography
www.azcentral.com/story/news/. . . /03/arizona . . . 
brewer/632
www.nytimes.com/ . . . /
jan-brewer-arizona-governor-won’t-seek-re-election
www.gov.ca/m_about-php
www.carper.senate.gov/biography
www.governor.ny.gov/
www.andrewcuomo.com/
www.carper.senate.gov/biography
www.splc.org/who-we-are/leadership/richard-cohen
www.conyers.house.gov/index.cfm/biography
www.congress.gov/member/john-cornyn11692
www.uschamber.com/thomas-donohue
www.flake.senate.gov/biography
www.thesocialcontract.com/president
www.alipac.us/William_Gheen/
www.williamgheen.com/biography_william_gheen/
www.gowdy.house.gov/biography

	
Profiles	
215
www.grassley.senate.gov/biography
www.judgepedia.org/Andrew_Hanen
www.hatch.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/
www.hinojosa.house.gov/biography
www.fairus.org/issues/
huddle-1996-study-of-the-costs-of-illegal-immigration
www.unitedwedream.org/christina-jimenez-managing-director
www.dhs.gov/Home-about-DHS
www.ronjohnson.senate.gov/about
www.cmsny.org/tag/donald-kerwin/about-us/staff
www.klobuchar.senate.gov/biography
www.peterking.house.gov/about/full-biography
www.cis.org/krikorian
www.govtrack.us/congress/members/jon_kyl300062
www.leahy.senate/gov/biography
www.logren.house.gov/biography
www.mccain.senate.gov/about-biography
www.mccaskill.senate.gov/about-claire
www.mcconnell.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?p=Biography
www.mccaul.house.gov/about/full-biography
www.menendez.senate.gov/biography
www.candicemiller.house.gov/about-full-biography
www.nclr.org/janet-murgia
www.migrationpolicy.org/about/staff/
demetrios-papademetriou
www.pelosi.house.gov/full-biography
www.pewresearch.org/staff/jeffrey-s-passel/
www.immigration.procon.org/source/biographies
www.rickperry.org/about/

216	
Illegal Immigration
www.reid.senate.gov/about-Senator-Harry-Reid
www.rubio.senate.gov/About-Marco
www.schumer.gov/biography
www.govtrack.us/congress/members/charles_schumer/30087
www.sensenbrenner,house.gov/about-jim-biography
www.sessions.senate.gov/biography
www.americasvoiceonline.org/experts/frank_sharry
www.chrissmith.house.gov/about-chris
www.lamarsmith.house.gov/about
www.annenburg.usc.edu/. . . .media/faculty/roberto_suro
www.thesocialcontract.com/answering_our_critics/
tanton_resume
www.numbersusa.org/about
www.benniethompson.house.gov/about-bennie
www/cmsny.org/about-us/staff
www.vitter.senate.gov/about-david
www.wyden.senate.gov/meet-ron/biography

This page intentionally left blank


219
Introduction
Public policy has been defined as “a purposive course of action fol-
lowed by an actor or set of actors in dealing with a problem or matter 
of concern” (Anderson 1979: 3). Chapter 4 presented biographical 
sketches of the major actors involved. In its first section, this chap-
ter presents data on illegal immigration–related trends in table and 
graphic formats. In its second section it presents summaries of the 
“actions”—some key legislative and judicial decisions. These laws 
and cases, taken together, constitute the “course” of immigration pol-
icy and its frequent reforms aimed at controlling illegal immigration.
Data
Table 5.1  Comparison of Legal and Illegal Immigration 
Trends over Time
This table shows the number of legal immigrants to the United States, 
1992–2013; the number of illegal apprehensions at the borders, 1992–
2013; and the number of Mexican alien apprehensions, 2000–2013.
5	
Data and Documents
President Barack Obama meets with a group of “Dreamers” in the Oval 
Office of the White House in Washington on February 4, 2015. During 
an Oval Office meeting, the president spoke with six of the young immi-
grants who would be subject to eventual deportation under a bill passed 
by the House. New legislation would overturn Obama’s executive actions, 
DAPA and DACA, limiting deportations for millions here illegally and giv-
ing them the ability to work. (AP Photo/Evan Vucci)

220	
Illegal Immigration
FY
Total Legal  
Immigrants to the 
United States
Total Alien 
Apprehensions
Mexican Alien 
Apprehensions
1992
 973,977
1,199,560
—
1993
 904,191
1,263,490
—
1994
 804,416
1,031,666
—
1995
 720,461
1,324,202
—
1996
 915,900
1,549,876
—
1997
 718,378
1,412,953
—
1998
 654,451
1,555,778
—
1999
 646,568
1,579,010
—
2000
 849,807
1,678,438
1,636,883
2001
1,064,318
1,266,214
1,224,047
2002
1,059,902
 955,310
 917,993
2003
 703,542
 931,557
 882,012
2004
 957,883
1,160,395
1,086,006
2005
1,122,373
1,189,075
1,023,905
2006
1,266,129
1,089,092
 981,066
2007
1,052,415
 876,704
 808,688
2008
1.107,126
 723,825
 661,766
2009
1,120,818
 556,041
503,386
2010
1,042,625
 439,382
 404,385
2011
1,062,040
 340,252
 286,154
2012
1,031,631
 364,765
 265,755
2013
 990,553
 420,789
 267,734
Source: Adapted from Department of Homeland Security, 2011, “Persons Ob-
taining Permanent Resident Status, Fiscal Years 1820–2010.” Yearbook of Immi-
gration Statistics. Washington, DC: Department of Homeland Security. Updated 
by annual reports, 2011–2014. Online at http://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/
publications/ois_1pr_fr_2013.pdf.

	
Data and Documents	
221
Table 5.2  Estimated Unauthorized Mexican-Born 
Immigrant Population Compared to All Unauthorized 
Immigrants, Assorted Years, 1995–2012
This table presents the estimated unauthorized Mexican-born immigrant 
population in the United States compared to all unauthorized immigrants, 
for assorted years, 1995–2012.
Year
From Mexico
(Millions)
All Unauthorized
(Millions)
1995
2.9
 5.7
2000
4.5
 7.9
2005
6.3
11.1
2007
6.9
12.2
2008
6.4
11.3
2009
6.3
11.4
2010
6.2
11.5
2011
6.2
11.2
2012
5.9
11.3
Source: Data from Pew Research Center, based on augmented American Com-
munity Survey, 1998–2000. Online at http://www.pewhispanic.org/2014/11/18/
unauthorized_immigrant_total_rise_fall.
http://www.pewhispanic.org/2014/09/03/as_growth_stalls_unauthorized_ 
population_becomes_more_stable.
Table 5.3  Estimated Unauthorized Immigrants in the 
U.S. Labor Force, Assorted Years, 1995–2012
This table indicates the total number of estimated unauthorized immi-
grants in the labor force of the United States, 1995 to 2012, by which 
year it was exceeding 8 million. The table demonstrates dramatically 
that the employer sanctions approach enacted by IRCA, 1986, simply 
failed to achieve its goal of demagnetizing the draw of the U.S. labor 
market to unauthorized immigrants.
Year
Estimated Millions in U.S. Labor Force
1995
3.6
2000
5.6
2005
7.3
2006
8.2
(continued)

222	
Illegal Immigration
Year
Estimated Millions in U.S. Labor Force
2009
8.1
2011
8.3
2012
8.2
Source: Adapted from graphs and data from the Pew Research Center, esti-
mates based on augmented American Community Survey data. http://www.
pewhispanic.org/2014/11/18/unauthorized_immigrant_totals_rise_fall. Accessed 
March 10, 2015.
Table 5.3  (continued )
Table 5.4  Unaccompanied Alien Children Encountered, 
by Fiscal Year, Country of Origin, 2009–2014
This table presents the dramatic rise in the number of children unac-
companied by adults who arrived at U.S. borders from Mexico and 
Central America and promptly turned themselves in to Border Patrol 
authorities. The “crisis” nature of the influx prompted several legisla-
tive proposals to deal with the problem.
Country
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
El Salvador
1,221
1,910
1,394
3,314
5,990
16,404
Guatemala
1,115
1,517
1,56
3,835
8,068
17,057
Honduras
968
1.017
974
2,997
6,747
18,244
Mexico
16,114
13,724
11,768
13,974
17,240
15,634
Total
19,418
18,168
15,701
24,120
38,045
67,339
Source: Data from U.S. Customs and Border Patrol, http://www.cbp.gov/news 
room/stats/southwest-border-unaccompanied-children. Accessed March 10, 2015.
Table 5.5  Trends in Removals, 2011–2013
This table shows the rise in the number of removals of undocumented 
aliens for the years 2011–2013. Expedited removals increased signifi-
cantly during the Obama administration’s first term and continued, as 
the table shows, into his second term as well.
Year
2011 (%)
2012 (%)
2013 (%)
Expedited
122,236 (31.6)
163,308 (39.0)
193,032 (44.0)
Reinstatements
124,784 (32.2)
146,044 (34.9)
170,247 (38.8)
All others
140,114 (36.2)
109,045 (26.1)
 75,142 (17.1)
TOTAL
387,134 (100)
418,397(100)
438,421 (100)
Source: DHS, Yearbook of Immigration Statistics, 2013. http://www.dhs.gov/sites/ 
default/files/publications/ois_enforcement_ar_2013.pdf.

	
Data and Documents	
223
Table 5.6  Gallup Poll Trend Line, “Do You Think 
Immigration Is a Good Thing or a Bad Thing for the U.S. 
Today?,” 2001–2014
This table shows Gallup Poll public opinion data of whether Americans think 
immigration is a good or a bad thing for the U.S. today, for 2001 to 2014.
Year
%Good Thing
%Bad Thing
%Mixed
2001
62
31
 5
2002
52
42
 4
2003
58
36
 4
2004
61
34
 3
2005
67
28
 4
2007
60
33
 3
2008
64
30
 4
2009
58
36
 3
2010
57
36
 4
2011
59
37
 2
2012
66
29
 3
2013
72
25
 2
2014
63
33
 3
Source: Data from Gallup Polls, http://www.gallup.com/poll/1660/immigration.aspx.
Table 5.7  Gallup Poll Trend Line, 2001–2014, “Should 
Immigration Be Kept at Its Present Level, Increased, or 
Decreased?”
This table gives an overall depiction of Gallup Poll public opinion 
data as to whether immigration should be kept at its present level, 
increased, or decreased, presenting the trends for 2001 to 2014.
Year
%Kept at Present 
Level
%Increased
%Decreased
2001
42
 14
41
2002
36
 12
49
2003
37
 13
47
2004
33
 14
49
2005
34
 16
46
2006
42
 17
39
2007
35
 16
45
2008
39
 18
39
(continued)

224	
Illegal Immigration
Year
%Kept at Present 
Level
%Increased
%Decreased
2009
32
 14
50
2010
34
 17
45
2011
35
 18
43
2012
42
 21
35
2013
40
 23
35
2014
33
 22
41
Source: Data from Gallup Polls, http://www.gallup.com/poll/1660/immigration_aspx.
Table 5.7  (continued )
Table 5.8a  Gallup Poll Trend Line, 2006–2014, “What 
Should Be the Main Focus of U.S. Government in Dealing 
with Illegal Immigration?”
These tables show Gallup Public Opinion Poll data from 2006–2014, 
about the focus of government policy in dealing with illegal immigrants 
residing in the United States.
Year
%Halting Flow of 
Illegals
%Dealing With 
Those in U.S. 
Illegally
 %No Opinion
2006
52
43
4
2010
53
45
3
2011
50
45
3
2012
55
43
2
2013
46
55
4
2014
41
53
6
Table 5.8b  Gallup Poll Trend Line, 2006–2011, “What 
Should U.S. Policy Be Toward Illegal Immigrants Residing 
in the United States?”
% Deport 
All
Remain in U.S./ 
Allowed to Work
Remain in U.S./ 
Path to 
Citizenship
Na
2006
16
17
66
1
March 2007
24
15
59
2
June 2011
21
13
64
3
Source: Data from Gallup Polls, http://www.gallup.com/poll/1660/immigration_aspx.

Figure 5.1  U.S. Customs and Border Patrol, Sector Map, 2013
Source: U.S. Customs and Border Patrol. Online at http://ecso.swf.usace.army.mil/maps/SectorP.pdf.

Figure 5.2  Department of Homeland Security Organizational Chart
Source: Department of Homeland Security. Online at http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/dhs-orgchart.pdf

	
Data and Documents	
227
Documents
Key Illegal Immigration Legislative Actions, 1981–2013
Executive Summary Recommendations of the Select 
Commission on Immigration and Refugee Policy, 1981
Of great importance to the reform of immigration policy was the 
report of the Select Commission on Immigration and Refugee Pol-
icy (SCIRP). SCIRP was a joint presidential and congressionally 
appointed commission that began its work in the final days of the 
Carter administration in 1979. It studied thoroughly immigration 
law and, more particularly, the problem of illegal immigration. It 
issued its final report in 1981. Its recommendations informed sub-
sequent legislative action by Congress throughout the 1980s and 
1990s. The next document presents some of the major recommen-
dations of the SCIRP’s final report.
The Select Commission recommends:
  1.  The United States work with other nations and principal 
international organizations to collect information and 
research on migratory flows and treatment of international 
migration.
  2.  The United States expand bilateral consultation with other 
governments, especially Mexico and other regional neigh-
bors, regarding migration.
  3.  Border patrol funding levels be raised to provide for a 
substantial increase in the number and training of per-
sonnel, replacement sensor systems . . . and other needed 
equipment.
  4.  That regional border enforcement posts be established to 
coordinate work with the INS, the U.S. Customs Service, 
the DEA, and the U.S. Coast Guard in the interdiction 
of both undocumented/illegal migrants and illicit goods, 
specifically narcotics.
  5.  That high priority be given to the training of INS offi-
cers to familiarize them with the rights of aliens and U.S. 

228	
Illegal Immigration
citizens and to help them deal with persons of other cul-
tural backgrounds.
  6.  That legislation be passed making it illegal for employers 
to hire undocumented workers.
  7.  That a program to legalize illegal/undocumented aliens 
now in the United States be adopted.
  8.  That eligibility for legalization be determined by interrelated 
measurements of residence—date of entry and length of 
continuous residence—and by specified groups of exclud-
ability that are appropriate to the legalization program.
  9.  That voluntary agencies and community organizations be 
given a significant role in the legalization program
10.  An annual ceiling of 350,000 numerically limited immi-
grant visas with an additional 100,000 visas available for 
the first five years to . . . allow backlogs to be cleared.
11.  That a substantial number of visas be set aside for reuni-
fying spouses and unmarried sons and daughters, and it 
should be given top priority in the numerically limited 
family reunification. . . .
12.  That country ceilings apply to all numerically limited fam-
ily reunification preferences. . . .
13.  That “special” immigrants remain a numerically exempt 
group but be placed within the independent category.
14.  Creation of a small, numerically limited subcategory 
within the independent category to provide for the immi-
gration of certain investors.
15.  That specific labor market criteria be established by the 
selection of independent immigrants. . . .
16.  A fixed percentage limit to the independent immigration 
from any one country.
17.  That U.S. allocation of refugee numbers include both geo-
graphic considerations and specific refugee characteristics. . . .

	
Data and Documents	
229
18.  That state and local governments be involved in planning 
for initial refugee resettlement and that . . . a federal pro-
gram of impact aid [be established] to minimize the finan-
cial impact of refugees on local services. . . .
19.  That refugee achievement of self-sufficiency and adjust-
ment to living in the United States be reaffirmed as the 
goal of resettlement.
Source: The Select Commission on Immigration and Refu-
gee Policy, Final Report (Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office, March 1, 1981), xv–xxxii.
The Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986
The Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, commonly 
known as IRCA, had a lengthy and tangled history. In 1986 a 
joint Conference Committee finally agreed on a package that could 
be enacted into law. The next document offers portions of the major 
provisions of IRCA. Much of it is still relevant today, and reaction 
to its amnesty program drives Republican opposition to anything 
resembling amnesty in current proposals.
Title I—Control of Illegal Immigration
SEC. 101. CONTROL OF UNLAWFUL EMPLOYMENT 
OF ALIENS
In General, It is unlawful for a person or other entity to hire, 
or to recruit or refer for a fee, for employment in the United 
States—
(A)  an alien, knowing the alien is an unauthorized alien . . .
(B)  an individual without complying with the requirements of 
subsection (b).
Continuing employment—It is unlawful for a person or 
other entity, after hiring an alien for employment in accor-
dance with paragraph (1), to continue to employ the alien 

230	
Illegal Immigration
in the United States knowing the alien is (or has become) 
an unauthorized alien with respect to such employment.
Defense—A person or entity that establishes that it has com-
plied in good faith with the requirements of subsection (b) with 
respect to the hiring, recruiting, or referral for employment 
of an alien in the United States has established an affirmative 
defense that the person or entity has not violated paragraph (1)
(A) with respect to such hiring, recruiting, or referral.
Use of Labor through Contract—A person or other entity 
who uses a contract, subcontract, or exchange, entered into, 
renegotiated, or extended after the date of the enactment of 
this section, to obtain the labor of an alien in the United 
States knowing that the alien is an unauthorized alien, with 
respect to performing such labor, shall be considered to have 
hired the alien for employment in the United States in viola-
tion of paragraph (1)(A).
Use of State Employment Agency Documentation—A per-
son or entity shall be deemed to have complied with the 
requirements of subsection (b) with respect to the hiring of 
an individual who was referred for such employment by a 
State employment agency.
Employment Verification System—The requirements 
referred to [above] are, in the case of a person or other 
entity hiring, recruiting, or referring an individual for 
employment in the United States, the requirements speci-
fied in the following three paragraphs:
(1)	Attestation after Examination of Documentation—
(A)  In General—The person or entity must attest, under 
penalty of perjury and on a form established by the 
Attorney General by regulation, that it has verified 
that the individual is not an unauthorized alien by 
examining—
(i)	 a document described in subparagraph (B), or
(ii)	 a document described in subparagraph (C) and (D).

	
Data and Documents	
231
(B)  Documents Establishing Both Employment Author-
ization and Identity—A document described in this 
subparagraph is an individual’s—
(i)	 United States passport;
(ii)	 certificate of United States Citizenship;
(iii)	certificate of naturalization;
(iv)	unexpired foreign passport, if the passport has an 
appropriate, unexpired endorsement of the Attorney 
General authorizing the individual’s employment in 
the United States; or
(v)	 resident alien card or other alien registration, if said card 
contains a photograph of the individual, and is evidence 
of authorization of employment in the United States.
(C)  Documents Evidencing Employment Authorization— 
A document described [above] is
(i)	 a social security account number card;
(ii)	 certificate of birth in the United States or establish-
ing United States nationality at birth;
(iii)	other documents evidencing authorization of 
employment in the United States which the Attorney 
General finds, by regulation, to be acceptable for the 
purposes of this section.
(D)  Documents Establishing Identity of an Individual—A 
document described in this subparagraph is an individual’s
(i)	 driver’s license or similar document issued for the 
purpose of identification by a State, if it contains a 
photograph of the individual;
(ii)	 in the case of individuals under 16 years of age or 
in a State which does not provide for issuance of an 
identification document,
(iii)	documentation of personal identity of such type as 
the Attorney General finds, by regulation, provides a 
reliable means of identification. . . .

232	
Illegal Immigration
(3)  Definition of Unauthorized Alien—the term “unauthor-
ized alien” means, with respect to the employment of an 
alien at a particular time, that the alien is not at that time 
either (A) an alien lawfully admitted for permanent resi-
dence, or (B) authorized to be so employed by this Act or 
by the Attorney General.
Deferral of Enforcement with Respect to Seasonal 
Agricultural Services—
(A)  In General—it is unlawful for a person or entity (including a 
farm labor contractor) or an agent of such a person or entity, 
to recruit an unauthorized alien (other than an alien described 
in clause [ii]) who is outside the United States to enter the 
United States to perform seasonal agricultural services.
(ii)  Exception—Clause (i) shall not apply to an alien who 
the person or entity reasonably believes to meet the 
requirements of section 210(a)(2) of this Act (relating 
to the performance of seasonal agricultural services).
General Accounting Office Reports—
IN GENERAL—
Beginning one year after the date of enactment of this Act, and 
at intervals of one year thereafter for a period of three years 
after such date, the Comptroller General of the United States 
shall prepare and transmit to the Congress and to the task 
force established under subsection (k) a report describing the 
results of a review of the implementation and enforcement of 
this section during the preceding twelve-month period, for the 
purpose of determining if—
(A)  such provisions have been carried out satisfactorily;
(B)  a pattern of discrimination has resulted against citi-
zens or nationals of the United States or against eligi-
ble workers seeking employment; and
(C)  an unnecessary regulatory burden has been created for 
employers hiring such workers.

	
Data and Documents	
233
REVIEW BY TASK FORCE—
(1)  Establishment of Task Force—The Attorney General, 
jointly with the Chairman of the Commission on Civil 
Rights and the Chairman of the Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission, shall establish a task force to 
review each report of the Comptroller General.
(2)  Recommendations to Congress—If the report transmitted 
includes a determination that the implementation of this 
section has resulted in a pattern of discrimination in em-
ployment (against other than unauthorized aliens) on the 
basis of national origin, the task force shall, taking into 
consideration any recommendations in the report, report 
to Congress recommendations for such legislation as may 
be appropriate to deter or remedy such discrimination. . . .
TERMINATION DATE FOR EMPLOYER SANCTIONS—
(1)  If Report of Widespread Discrimination and Congressio-
nal Approval—The provisions of this section shall termi-
nate 30 days after receipt of the last report required to be 
transmitted under subsection (j), if—
(A)  the Comptroller General determines, and so reports 
. . . that a widespread pattern of discrimination has 
resulted against citizens or nationals of the United 
States or against eligible workers seeking employment 
solely from the implementation of this section; and
(B)  there is enacted, within such period of 30 calendar 
days, a joint resolution stating in substance that the 
Congress approves the findings of the Comptroller 
General contained in such report.
(2)  Senate Procedures for Consideration—Any joint 
resolution referred to in clause (B) of paragraph 
(1) shall be considered in the Senate in accor-
dance with subsection (n). . . .
Increased Authorization of Appropriations for INS and 
EOIR—In addition to any other amounts authorized to be 

234	
Illegal Immigration
appropriated, in order to carry out this Act, there are autho-
rized to be appropriated to the Department of Justice—
(1) for the [INS], for FY 1987, $12,000,000, and for FY 
1988, $15,000,000 . . . to provide for an increase in the border 
patrol personnel . . . so that the average level of such personnel 
in each fiscal year 1987 and 1988 is at least 50 per cent higher 
than such level for fiscal year 1986.
Title II—Legalization
SEC. 201. LEGALIZATION OF STATUS.
Temporary Resident Status—
The Attorney General shall adjust the status of an alien to that 
of an alien lawfully admitted for temporary residence if the 
alien meets the following requirements:
(1)  Timely Application—
(A)	 During Application Period—Except as provided in 
subparagraph (B), the alien must apply for such adjust-
ment during the 12-month period beginning on a date 
(not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of 
this section) designated by the Attorney General. . . . 
(2)  Continuous Lawful Residence Since 1982—
(A)	 In General—The alien must establish that he entered 
the United States before January 1, 1982, and that he 
has resided continuously in the United States in an 
unlawful status since such date and through the date 
the application is filed under this subsection.
(B)	 Nonimmigrants—In the case of an alien who entered 
the United States as a nonimmigrant before January 1, 
1982, the alien must establish that the alien’s period of 
authorized stay as a nonimmigrant expired before such 
date through the passage of time or the alien’s unlawful 
status was known to the Government as of such date.

	
Data and Documents	
235
Subsequent Adjustment to Permanent Residence and 
Nature of Temporary Resident Status—
(1) Adjustment to Permanent Residence—The Attorney Gen-
eral shall adjust the status of any alien provided lawful tem-
porary resident status under subsection (a) to that of an 
alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence if the alien 
meets the following requirements:
(A)	 Timely Application After One Year’s Residence—The 
alien must apply for such adjustment during the one-year 
period beginning with the nineteenth month that 
begins after the date the alien was granted such tempo-
rary status.
(B)	 Continuous Residence—The alien must establish that 
he has continuously resided in the United States since 
the date the alien was granted such temporary resident 
status.
(C)	 Admissible as Immigrant—The alien must establish 
that he or she—
(i)	 is admissible to the United States as an immigrant 
. . . and
(ii)	 has not been convicted of any felony or three or more 
misdemeanors committed in the United States.
Basic Citizenship Skills—The alien must demonstrate that 
he or she either—
(I) meets the requirements of section 312 (relating to mini-
mal understanding of ordinary English and a knowledge and 
understanding of the history and government of the United 
States), or (II) is satisfactorily pursuing a course of study (rec-
ognized by the Attorney General) to achieve an understanding 
of English and such knowledge and understanding of the his-
tory and government of the United States. . . .

236	
Illegal Immigration
Temporary Disqualification of Newly Legalized Aliens from 
Receiving Certain Public Welfare Assistance—
(1)  In General—During the five-year period beginning on the 
date an alien was granted lawful temporary resident status 
under subsection (a) except as provided in paragraphs (2) 
and (3), the alien is not eligible for—
(i)	 any program of financial assistance furnished under 
Federal law;
(ii)	 medical assistance under a State plan approved under 
Title XIX of the Social Security Act; and
(iii)	assistance under the Food Stamp Act of 1977; and State 
or political subdivision therein may, to the extent con-
sistent with paragraph (A) and paragraphs (2) and (3), 
provide that an alien is not eligible for the programs of 
financial assistance or for medical assistance described 
in subparagraph (A) (ii) furnished under the law of that 
State or political subdivision. . . .
Title III—Reform of Legal Immigration Part 
A—Temporary Agricultural Workers
SEC. 301. H-2A AGRICULTURAL WORKERS
(a) Providing New “H-2A” Nonimmigrant Classification for 
Temporary Agricultural Labor—Paragraph (15) (H) of sec-
tion 101 (a) (8 USC 1101(a)) is amended by striking out “to 
perform temporary services or labor,” in clause (ii) and insert-
ing in lieu thereof, “(a) to perform agricultural labor or ser-
vices, as defined by the Secretary of Labor in regulations and 
including agricultural labor defined in section 3121(g) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1954 and agriculture as defined in 
section 3(f) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 . . . or a 
temporary or seasonal nature, or (b) to perform other tempo-
rary service or labor.”
Source: Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA), Pub.L. 
99–603, 100 Stat. 3445, enacted November 6, 1986

	
Data and Documents	
237
Summaries of Laws on Immigration
In 1996, Congress passed two measures that essentially enacted the 
provisions of Proposition 187. Congress enacted a welfare reform 
act that contained several legal and illegal immigrant–related pro-
visions similar to those in Proposition 187. The illegal immigra-
tion provisions are shown in the next document.
Immigration Provisions of the Welfare Reform Act (HR 
3734—PL 104–193)
The welfare reform law imposed restrictions on both legal and 
illegal immigrants, including provisions to:
Illegal Aliens
Restrictions. Restrict the federal benefits for which illegal 
aliens and legal nonimmigrants, such as travelers and stu-
dents, could qualify. The benefits denied were those provided 
by a federal agency or federal funds for:
•  Any grant, contract, loan, professional license or commercial 
license.
•  Any retirement, welfare, health, disability, food assistance or 
unemployment benefit.
Exceptions. Allow illegal aliens and legal nonimmigrants to 
receive:
•  Emergency medical services under Medicaid, but denied 
coverage for prenatal or delivery assistance that was not an 
emergency, and short-term, noncash emergency disaster 
relief.
•  Immunizations and testing for treatment for the symptoms 
of communicable diseases.
•  Noncash programs identified by the attorney general that 
were delivered by community agencies such as soup kitch-
ens, counseling, and short-term shelter that were not con-
ditioned on the individual’s income or resources and were 
necessary for the protection of life and safety.

238	
Illegal Immigration
•  Certain housing benefits (for existing recipients only).
•  Licenses and benefits directly related to work for which a 
nonimmigrant had been authorized to enter the United 
States.
•  Certain Social Security retirement benefits protected by 
treaty or statute.
State and local programs. Prohibit states from providing 
state or local benefits to most illegal aliens, unless a state 
law was enacted after August 22, 1996, the day the bill was 
enacted, that explicitly made illegal aliens eligible for the 
aid. However, illegal aliens were entitled to receive a school 
lunch and/or breakfast if they were eligible for a free public 
education under state or local law and a state could opt to 
provide certain other benefits related to child nutrition and 
emergency food assistance.
From 1994 through 1996, Congress grappled with bills that would 
have reformed immigration law more generally—not just dealing 
with problems of illegal immigration. A  sufficient consensus to 
enact broad-scale legal immigration reform could not be reached. 
Congress cleared a measure to restrict illegal immigration only after 
folding its provisions into the omnibus fiscal 1997 spending bill 
that President Clinton signed into law on September 30, 1996. 
The full measure is over 200 pages long. The next document sum-
marizes the illegal immigration section of the omnibus spending 
bill.
Illegal Immigration Provisions of the Omnibus Spending 
Bill (HR 3610—PL 104–208)
Border Controls
•  Authorized funding to increase the number of Border Pa-
trol agents by 1,000 per year through fiscal 2001, doubling 
the total force from 5,000 to 10,000, and to increase the 
number of clerical workers and other support personnel at 
the border by 300 per year through fiscal 2001. The law 

	
Data and Documents	
239
ordered the INS to relocate as many agents as possible to 
border areas with the largest number of illegal immigrants, 
and to coordinate relocation plans with local law enforce-
ment agencies. The INS was required to report to Congress 
on these activities within six months of enactment.
•  Authorized funding of 900 additional INS agents to investi-
gate and prosecute cases of smuggling, harboring or employ-
ing illegal aliens; and 300 new agents to investigate people 
who overstay their visas.
•  Authorized $12 million for the second and third tiers of a 
triple fence along a 14-mile strip at the U.S.-Mexico border 
south of San Diego, and for roads surrounding the fence. 
The project was exempt from the strictures of the 1973 En-
dangered Species Act and the 1969 Environmental Policy 
Act if either would prevent expeditious construction and al-
lowed the attorney general to acquire land for the fence.
•  Required the INS to develop alien identification cards that 
include a biometric identifier, such as a fingerprint, that 
could be read by machine, and for future cards that could 
use such devices as retina scanners.
•  Created a penalty up to five years in prison for fleeing through 
an INS checkpoint, and deportation of those convicted.
•  Ordered the attorney general, within two years, to create 
a data base of information gathered from the documents 
people filled out as they legally entered and left the country 
which would allow the INS to match entry and exit records 
to identify people who overstayed their visas.
•  Required the INS to establish “preinspection” stations at five 
of the ten foreign airports that were the departure points 
for the largest number of inadmissible immigrants to screen 
people who did not have proper documents.
•  Allowed the INS to enter into agreements with state and 
local governments for help in investigating, arresting, de-
taining, and transporting illegal immigrants.

240	
Illegal Immigration
DOCUMENT FRAUD AND ALIEN SMUGGLING
•  Granted wiretap authority to the criminal division of the 
Justice Department for investigating cases of immigration 
document fraud.
•  Created felonies for alien smuggling for up to ten years in 
prison for the first and second offenses, and fifteen years 
for subsequent offenses; and making it a crime with up to 
five years in prison for employers who knowingly hired ten 
people or more who were smuggled into the United States.
•  Created twenty-five positions for assistant U.S. attorneys to 
prosecute cases of alien smuggling and document fraud.
•  Granted broad authority for the INS to conduct undercover 
operations to track organized illegal immigration rings that 
allowed the INS to create or acquire companies, deposit 
funds in bank accounts without regard to federal regula-
tions, and use profits from such front companies.
•  Increased the penalty for document fraud from five years to ten 
or fifteen years in most cases; and if fraud was used in facilitating 
a drug trafficking crime, a new penalty of twenty years in prison, 
and if involving terrorism, a new penalty of twenty-five years.
•  Created a civil penalty for hiring someone to make a false 
application for public benefits such as food stamps, and cre-
ated a criminal penalty for “knowingly and willfully” failing 
to disclose it, punishable by up to fifteen years.
•  Created a criminal penalty of up to five years in prison for 
falsely claiming U.S. citizenship.
•  Created a criminal penalty for up to one year in prison for 
unlawfully voting in a federal election.
•  Allowed courts, in imposing sentences against violators of 
immigration statutes, to seize vehicles, boats, airplanes, and 
real estate if they were used in the commission of a crime or 
profit from the proceeds of a crime.
•  Increased the penalty from five years in prison to ten years for 
employers who kept workers in a state of involuntary servitude.

	
Data and Documents	
241
•  Allowed INS agents to subpoena witnesses and to videotape 
testimony at deportation proceedings.
DETEN TION AND DEPORTATION
•  Barred any alien who had been deported from reentry into 
the United States for five years; and up to ten years if the 
alien left while deportation proceedings were in progress 
or attempted to reenter the country unlawfully; and barred 
repeat offenders for two years, and people convicted of ag-
gravated felonies.
•  Denied legal status to anyone who resided in the United 
States unlawfully for at least 180 days; and persons so con-
victed could not gain legal status for three years. People in 
the country illegally for a year or more could not become 
legal for ten years, except for minors or persons with a pend-
ing application for asylum, or were battered women and 
children, or were people granted protection under the fam-
ily unity provision of the 1990 Act, or spouses and minor 
children granted amnesty under the Immigration Reform 
and Control Act of 1986 to stay in the United States even if 
they entered illegally, while their application for legal status 
was pending.
•  Allowed people who arrived in the United States without le-
gitimate documentation to be detained and deported with-
out hearing unless they could demonstrate a credible fear 
of persecution back home. An asylum officer was to screen 
each case and if decided there was no credible fear, could 
summarily deport the applicant. The applicant could re-
quest a review by an immigration judge within seven days, 
during which time the applicant had to remain in detention.
•  Required the detention of most illegal aliens serving criminal 
sentences after their prison terms were completed. The at-
torney general could release certain illegal immigrants from 
detention centers if there was insufficient space and if he 
determined their release did not pose a security risk or a risk 

242	
Illegal Immigration
of fleeing, or who came from countries that would not take 
them back.
•  Streamlined deportation by replacing multiple proceedings 
with one, allowing proceedings by telephone or teleconfer-
ence after ten-day notice of a hearing.
•  Required aliens be deported within ninety days of a deporta-
tion order, with mandatory detention during that period. 
Violent criminals would have to complete their prison terms 
before being deported; some nonviolent criminal aliens 
could be deported before their term was up.
•  Limited judicial review of deportation orders. The state de-
partment could discontinue all visas for countries that de-
clined to take back their deported nationals.
•  Authorized $5 million for a criminal alien tracking center 
using criminal alien data base authorized in the 1994 crime 
law (PL 103–322) to be used to assist local governments in 
identifying criminals who might be deportable.
•  Advised the president to negotiate bilateral prisoner transfer trea-
ties to allow criminals to serve their terms in their home coun-
tries. The secretary of state and attorney general were to report 
to Congress by April 1, 1997, on the potential for such treaties.
•  Made a potential immigrant who did not have proof of 
proper vaccinations inadmissible.
•  Added stalking, domestic violence, and child abuse to the 
crimes that made someone deportable.
•  Permanently barred from entry anyone who renounced his 
or her citizenship to avoid taxes.
•  Allowed the attorney general to authorize local law enforce-
ment officials to perform the duties of an immigration of-
ficer in the event of a mass influx of immigrants.
•  Broadened authority of judges to issue deportation orders; 
allowing someone deported as part of probation or a plea 
agreement.

	
Data and Documents	
243
•  Created a pilot program on the use of closed military bases as 
INS detention centers.
EMPLOYEE VERIFICATION
•  Ordered the attorney general to set up three pilot programs—a 
basic pilot program, a Citizen Attestation Program, and a 
Machine-Readable Document Pilot Program—to test the 
effectiveness of workplace verification systems. Participation 
in the pilot programs by employers would be voluntary; and 
the attorney general was to choose the states where each pro-
gram would be tested, though in some cases employers in 
nonselected states could participate. All federal departments 
and agencies within the chosen states were required to par-
ticipate in the program.
•  Allowed participating employers to contact the INS via tele-
phone, fax, or e-mail, to check job applicant’s immigration 
status. INS was to maintain a database of names, Social Se-
curity numbers, and other information useful to verify an 
applicant’s eligibility to work; and the INS was to respond 
to inquiries within three days, and if the tentative response 
was that the person was not legal, the INS had ten days to 
confirm that determination. The program was to be tested 
in five of the seven states with the largest number of illegal 
immigrants.
•  Created a similar program that would allow applicants to 
bypass the check if they attested that they were U.S. citizens. 
The penalty for false claims of such was set at five years in 
prison.
•  Allowed employers to scan a card into a machine to verify 
the owner’s Social Security number with the INS data base. 
These were to be placed in states selected by the attorney 
general in which driver’s licenses or other state documents 
included Social Security numbers that could be read by 
machine.

244	
Illegal Immigration
•  Made it harder for the government to sue employers who 
used immigration laws to discriminate against certain work-
ers, job applicants, or other individuals by placing the bur-
den on the government to show that the employer “acted for 
the purpose, or with the intent to discriminate” against the 
individual.
PUBLIC BENEFITS
•  Allowed any consular agent to deny an immigrant visa on the 
basis that the person was likely to become a public charge.
•  Allowed states to create pilot programs to explore the feasi-
bility of denying driver’s licenses to illegal immigrants. The 
attorney general was to report to Congress on such after 
three years.
•  Clarified that Social Security benefits were not to be paid to 
illegal immigrants.
•  Ordered the General Accounting Office to study the use of 
student aid by illegal immigrants and to report on such to 
Congress within one year of enactment.
•  Required the GAO to report to Congress within 180 days 
on the unlawful use of means-tested benefits—such as food 
stamps and cash welfare—by illegal immigrants.
•  Amended the new welfare law to permit certain illegal im-
migrants who were victims of domestic violence to qualify 
for public benefits.
•  Amended the welfare law so that nonprofit charitable orga-
nizations were no longer required to verify the immigration 
status of applicants to determine their eligibility for benefits.
•  Allowed judges to double the monetary penalty and triple 
the prison terms for anyone who forged or counterfeited any 
U.S. seal to make a false application for public benefits.
•  Allowed reimbursement to states and localities for emer-
gency medical care of illegal immigrants, if the care was not 
already reimbursed via existing federal programs.

	
Data and Documents	
245
•  Required the secretary of Housing and Urban Development 
to deny financial assistance through subsidized housing 
programs to families in which all members were illegal im-
migrants. If families were split between legal and illegal im-
migrants, HUD could adjust the size of the benefit to match 
the percentage of family members who were in the United 
States legally.
OTHER PROVISIONS
•  Created a crime punishable by prison for performing female 
genital mutilation.
•  Required “international matchmaking organizations” to dis-
seminate to their clients information about U.S. immigra-
tion laws under penalty of a $20,000 fine for failure to do 
so; and requiring the attorney general to prepare a report to 
Congress on the mail-order bride business within a year of 
enactment.
•  Required the INS to report by the end of 1996 whether or 
not the United States had an adequate number of temporary 
agricultural workers.
•  Set national standards for birth certificates, driver’s licenses, 
and other identification documents. The Department of 
Transportation was to set standards for IDs, which had to 
include Social Security numbers, and agencies issuing them 
had to keep those numbers on file and confirm their accuracy 
with the Social Security Administration. The standards were 
intended to make such documents more tamper-resistant; 
were to be issued within one year; and to be complied with 
by October 1, 2000.
•  Required the Social Security Administration to develop a 
prototype tamperproof identity card.
In response to the 9/11 international terrorist attacks, Congress passed 
the USA Patriot Act, a bill of 288 pages. Its key immigration-related 
provisions broadened the definition of terrorism, expanded grounds 

246	
Illegal Immigration
for inadmissibility to include aliens suspected of terrorist activity 
or who publicly endorsed such, and required the attorney general 
to detain aliens whom he certified as threats to national security. 
The following document presents its key provisions relating to illegal 
immigration.
USA Patriot Act of 2001—HR 3162, October 24, 2001
Title IV—Protecting the Border.
SUBTITLE A—PROTECTING THE NORTHERN 
BORDER
Sec. 401—Ensures adequate personnel on the northern border.
Sec. 403—Grants access by the Department of State and the 
INS to certain identifying records of visa applicants and 
applicants for admission to the United States.
Sec. 405—Establishes an integrated automated fingerprint iden-
tification system for ports of entry and overseas consular posts.
SUBTITLE B—ENHANCED IMMIGRATION 
PROVISIONS
Sec. 412—Mandates detention of suspected terrorists; sus-
pends habeas corpus under certain conditions; and limits 
judicial review.
Sec. 413—Ensures multilateral cooperation against terrorists.
Sec. 414—Provides for increased integrity and security of visas.
Sec. 415—Mandates the participation of the Office of Home-
land Security on the Entry-Exit Task Force.
Sec. 416—Establishes a foreign student monitoring program.
Sec. 417—Calls for machine-readable passports.
Title X—Miscellaneous
Sec. 1006—Provides for the inadmissibility of aliens engaged 
in money laundering.

	
Data and Documents	
247
On November  19, 2002, Congress passed the Department 
of Homeland Security (DHS) Act. It is in excess of 400 printed 
pages. It merged 22 federal agencies, the most extensive reorgani-
zation of the federal bureaucracy since the creation of the Depart-
ment of Defense after World War II. It creates within DHS two 
bureaus, each headed by an undersecretary: Border and Transpor-
tation Security, and the Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration 
Services. Key provisions from Title IV of the Act are highlighted 
next.
H.R. 5005—Homeland Security Act of November 19, 2002
Title IV—Border and Transportation Security.
SUBTITLE A—GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 401. Creates the Under Secretary for Border and Trans-
portation Security.
Sec. 402. Responsibilities—Transfers functions of the INS to 
the DHS.
The Secretary, acting through the Under Secretary for Bor-
der and Transportation Security, shall be responsible for the 
following:
(1)  Preventing the entry of terrorists and the instruments of 
terrorism into the U.S.
(2)  Securing the borders, territorial waters, ports, terminals, 
waterways, and air, land and sea transportation systems of 
the United States, including managing and coordinating 
those functions transferred to the Department at ports of 
entry.
(3)  Carrying out the immigration enforcement functions 
vested by statute in, or performed by, the Commissioner of 
Immigration and Naturalization (or any officer, employee, 
or component of the Immigration and Naturalization 
Service) immediately before the date on which the trans-
fer of functions specified under section 441 takes effect 
[March 1, 2003].

248	
Illegal Immigration
(4)  Establishing and administering rules, in accordance with 
section 428, governing the granting of visas or other forms 
of permissions, including parole, to enter the United States 
to individuals who are not a citizen or an alien lawfully 
admitted for permanent residence in the United States.
(5)  Establishing national immigration enforcement policies 
and priorities.
Subtitle B—Immigration and Nationality Functions
CHAPTER 1—IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 411. Details the transfer of functions of the Border Patrol, 
INS, to the Under Secretary for Border and Transportation 
Security in the DHS.
Sec. 412. Establishes a Bureau of Border Security headed by a 
Director.
Sec. 415. Calls for a report to Congress on improving enforce-
ment functions.
CHAPTER 2—CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION 
SERVICES
Subchapter A—Transfer of Functions
Sec. 421. Establishes a Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration 
Services headed by a Director
Sec. 422. Establishes a Citizenship and Immigration Services 
Ombudsman office.
Sec. 425. Establishes an Office of Immigration Statistics within 
Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Sec. 426. Concerns preservation of the Attorney General’s 
authority.
SUBCHAPTER B—OTHER PROVISIONS
Sec. 432. Calls for elimination of backlogs.
Sec. 433. Requires a report to Congress on efforts at improving 
immigration services.

	
Data and Documents	
249
Sec. 435. Calls for the application of Internet-based 
technologies.
CHAPTER 3—GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 41. Abolishes the INS as of March 1, 2003.
Sec. 45. Requires reports and implementation plans to 
Congress.
Sec. 46. Details immigration functions.
The Dream Act, as it is commonly referred to, is a bill proposed in 
various versions from 2001 through 2012. Its name is from the acro-
nym for the formal title of the proposed bill: Development, Relief, 
and Education for Alien Minors. In summary, the various bills, if 
enacted, would provide conditional permanent residence status to 
certain immigrants of good moral character who graduated from 
U.S. high schools, arrived in the country as minor children (under 
age 16), and lived in the United States continuously for at least five 
years prior to the bill’s enactment. In most versions of the bill, such 
minors were required to complete two years military service or to 
attend a two- or four-year institution of higher learning. They would 
be granted temporary residency for six years and would qualify for 
permanent status if they had acquired a degree from an institution of 
higher learning, had completed at least two years, in good standing, 
of a program for a bachelor’s or higher degree, or have served in the 
armed services for at least two years and been honorably discharged.
Proponents argue it should not be considered an “amnesty pro-
gram,” and if enacted, the law would produce a variety of social 
and economic benefits. Critics argue it would be an amnesty pro-
gram and would reward and thus encourage more illegal immigra-
tion, invite fraud, and shield gang members from deportation.
Versions of the bill by various sponsors were introduced in sub-
sequent years but to date have failed to pass one or both houses of 
Congress. As of 2013, 15 states have enacted some sort of their 
own version of the Dream Act: Texas, California, Illinois, Utah, 
Nebraska, Kansas, New Mexico, New Jersey, New York, Wash-
ington, Wisconsin, Massachusetts, Maryland, Minnesota, and 

250	
Illegal Immigration
Oregon. It is worth noting that the Maryland Dream Act was 
approved by a statewide ballot, winning 59 percent of the vote, in 
2012.
The Dream Act (various proposed bills):
In virtually all its variations in Congress, Dream Act beneficia-
ries are designated as:
•  Not have entered the United States on a non-immigrant Visa 
(no overstayers).
•  Can provide proof of having arrived in the United States 
before age 16.
•  Have proof of having resided in the United States for five 
consecutive years since their date of arrival.
•  Be between the ages of 12 and 35 at the time of the bill’s 
enactment.
•  Have graduated from an American high school, obtained a 
GED, or been admitted to an institution of higher education.
•  Be of good moral character.
Since 2007, several senior officials of the DOD have argued 
in favor of including a provision promising resident status to 
members of the military as a means of boosting recruitment.
Legislative versions of the Dream Act, proposed in the U.S. 
Congress:
•  In 2001, HR 1582, sponsored by Rep. Luis Gutierrez (D-IL), 
with 34 co-sponsors.
•  Later, in May, 2001, a more limited version was introduced, 
entitled “Student Adjustment Act of 2001.” HR 1918. In 
the Senate, Orrin Hatch introduced a similar bill, S. 1291.
Since 2001, some version of the Dream Act has been introduced as:
In the U.S. Senate:
•  S. 1545, 108th Congress, 2004
•  S. 2075, 109th Congress, 2006

	
Data and Documents	
251
•  S. 744, 110th Congress, 2008
•  S. 2205, 110th Congress, 2010
In the U.S. House of Representatives:
•  H.R. 1684, 108th Congress, 2004
•  H.R. 5131, 109th Congress, 2006
•  H.R. 1275, 110th Congress, 2010
The gist of the Dream Act has been folded into other immigration- 
related bills as well:
•  The Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act of 2006, S. 
2611, 109th Congress; and again in the 2007 version, S. 
1348. Senator Durbin included a version of the bill in a 
2008 Department of Defense Authorization bill, S. 2619.
•  In 2007, Senators Dick Durbin, Charles Hagel, and Richard 
Lugar re-introduced the bill as S. 2205. Other Republican 
senators insisted the bill require as filibuster-proof count of 
60 affirmative votes, and the measure failed, as it has in years 
since then.
•  In 2009 it was reintroduced in both chambers, during the 
111th Congress, sponsored by Senators Dick Durbin (D-IL), 
Richard Lugar (R-IN), Harry Reid (D-NV), Mel Martinez 
(R-FL), Patrick Leahy (D-VT), Joseph Lieberman (I-CT), 
Ted Kennedy (D-MA), and Russ Feingold (D-WI). In the 
House it was sponsored by Rep. Howard Berman (D-CA) 
and to date has be co-sponsored by 128 representatives and 
39 senators, but again failed to reach the 60 vote threshold.
•  In 2010, the 111th Congress considered new versions of the 
bill with various amendments to address concerns voiced 
by opponents. In 2011, a version was incorporated into the 
National Defense Authorization Act, but a Senate filibuster 
of the bill was maintained, 56–43.
•  In 2011, then Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid intro-
duced his version of the Dream Act, with some bi-partisan 

252	
Illegal Immigration
support (Sen. John Cornyn, TX, and John Kyl and John 
McCain, AZ, and Lindsey Graham, SC) but the Republi-
can senators withheld their votes objecting it should not be 
approved without first increasing border enforcement. In 
2011, California enacted a version of the Dream Act, and 
in August, Illinois authorized a privately funded scholarship 
plan for children of immigrants whether legal or illegal.
•  In 2012, President Barack Obama issued his executive ac-
tions announcing the Justice Department would stop de-
porting young illegal aliens who matched criteria previously 
included under Dream Act proposals.
On December  17, 2004, 108th Congress enacted Public Law 
108–458, entitled “The Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Pre-
vention Act of 2004.” The full bill runs hundreds of pages, and 
has a total of eight titles, each of which has numerous subtitles and 
many sections. The following is the table of contents for the titles 
and sections most related to border protection, immigration, and 
visa matters, a few sections related to terrorism prevention that 
relate to illegal immigration, and implementation of certain sec-
tions of the 9/11 Commission’s recommendations.
Title V—Border Protection, Immigration, and Visa 
Matters
SUBTITLE A—ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY NORTH-
ERN BORDER SECURITY PILOT PROGRAM
Sec. 5102. Program requirements.
Sec. 5103. Administrative provisions.
Sec. 5104. Report.
Sec. 5105. Authorization of appropriations.
SUBTITLE B—BORDER AND IMMIGRATION  
ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 5201. Border surveillance.

	
Data and Documents	
253
Sec. 5202. Increase in full-time Border Patrol agents.
Sec. 5203. Increase in full-time immigration and customs 
enforcement investigators.
Sec. 5204. Increase in detention bed space.
SUBTITLE C—VISA REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 5301. In-person interviews of visa applicants.
Sec. 5302. Visa application requirements.
Sec. 5304. Revocation of visas and other travel 
documentation.
SUBTITLE D—IMMIGRATION REFORM
Sec. 5401. Bringing in and harboring certain aliens.
Sec. 5402. Deportation of aliens who have received 
military-type training from terrorist organizations.
Sec. 5403. Study and report on terrorists in the asylum system.
SUBTITLE E—TREATMENT OF ALIENS WHO  
COMMIT ACTS OF TORTURE, EXTRAJUDICIAL  
KILLINGS, OR OTHER ATROCITIES  
ABROAD
Sec. 5501. Inadmissibility and deportability of aliens who have 
committed acts of torture or extrajudicial killings abroad.
Sec. 5502. Inadmissibility and deportability of foreign govern-
ment officials who have committed particularly severe viola-
tions of religious freedom.
Sec. 5503. Waiver of inadmissibility.
Sec. 5504. Bar to good moral character for aliens who have 
committed acts of torture, extrajudicial killings, or severe 
violations of religious freedom.
Sec. 5505. Establishment of the Office of Special Investigations.

254	
Illegal Immigration
Title VI—Terrorism Prevention. . .
SUBTITLE D—ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT TOOLS
Sec. 6301. Bureau of Engraving and Printing security printing.
Sec. 6302. Reporting of certain cross-border transmittal of funds.
Sec. 6303. Terrorism financing.
Subtitle E—Criminal History Background Checks
Sec. 6402. Reviews of criminal records of applicants for pri-
vate security officer employment.
Sec. 6403. Criminal history background checks.
Title VII—Implementation of 9/11 Commission 
Recommendations
SUBTITLE B—TERRORIST TRAVEL AND EFFEC-
TIVE SCREENING
Sec. 7201. Counterterrorist travel intelligence.
Sec. 7202. Establishment of human smuggling and trafficking 
center.
Sec. 7204. International agreements to track and curtail terror-
ist travel through the use of fraudulently obtained documents.
Sec. 7205. International standards of transliteration of names 
into Roman alphabet for international travel documents and 
name-based watchlist system.
Sec. 7206. Immigration security initiative.
Sec. 7207. Certification regarding technology for visa waiver 
participants.
Sec. 7208. Biometric entry and exit data system.
Sec. 7209. Travel documents.
Sec. 7210. Exchange of terrorist information and increased 
preinspection at foreign airports.
Sec. 7211. Minimun standards for birth certificates.
Sec. 7212. Driver’s licenses and personal identification cards.
Sec. 7213. Social security cards and numbers.

	
Data and Documents	
255
Sec. 7215. Terrorist travel program.
Sec. 7216. Increase in penalties for fraud and related activity.
Sec. 7217. Study on allegedly lost or stolen passports.
Sec. 7218. Establishment of visa and passport security program 
in the Department of State.
Title VIII—Other Matters
SUBTITLE B—DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SE-
CURITY MATTERS
Sec. 8201. Homeland Security geospatial information.
Subtitle C—Homeland Security Civil Rights and Civil Liber-
ties Protection
Sec. 8302. Mission of the Department of Homeland Security.
Sec. 8303. Officer for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties.
Sec. 8304. Protection of Civil Rights and Civil Liberties by 
Office of Inspector General.
Title 1—Reform of the Intelligence Community
National Security Intelligence Reform Act of 2004, 50 USC 
401 note. 118 STAT. 3644, Public Law 108–458—Decem-
ber 17, 2004, President, Congress, 50 USC 403.
Subtitle A—Establishment of Director of National 
Intelligence
Sec. 102 (a) DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE.
(1)  There is a Director of National Intelligence who shall 
be appointed by the President, by and with the advice 
and consent of the Senate. Any individual nominated 
for appointment as Director of National Intelligence 
shall have extensive national security expertise.
(2)  The Director of National Intelligence shall not be lo-
cated within the Executive Office of the President.

256	
Illegal Immigration
(b)	 Principal Responsibility—Subject to the authority, di-
rection, and control of the President, the Director of 
National Intelligence shall—
(1)	 serve as head of the intelligence community;
(2)	 act as the principal adviser to the President, to the 
National Security Council, and the Homeland Se-
curity Council for intelligence matters related to 
the national security;
(3)	 consistent with section 1018 of the National Secu-
rity Intelligence Reform Act of 2004, oversee and 
direct the implementation of the National Intel-
ligence Program.
(c)	 Prohibition of Dual Service—the individual serving in 
the position Director of National Intelligence shall not, 
while so serving, also serve as the Director of the Central 
Intelligence Agency or as the head of any other element 
of the intelligence community.
In 2005, Congress passed the law commonly known as the Real ID 
Act, Title II, H.R.1268: The Emergency Supplemental Appropria-
tions Act for Defense, the Global War on Terror, and Tsunami Relief, 
2005 (Enrolled and agreed to or passed by both House and Senate).
Title II—Improved Security for Drivers’ Licenses and 
Personal
IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
Section. 202—MINIMUM DOCUMENT REQUIRE-
MENTS AND ISSUANCE STANDARDS FOR FEDERAL 
RECOGNITION.
(a)	 Minimum Standards for Federal Use—
(1)  IN GENERAL—beginning 3 years after the date 
of enactment of this division, a Federal agency 
may not accept, for any official purpose, a driver’s 
license or identification card issued by a State to 

	
Data and Documents	
257
any person unless the State is meeting the require-
ments of this section.
(2)  STATE CERTIFICATIONS—The Secretary shall 
determine whether a State is meeting the require-
ments of this section based on certifications made by 
the State to the Secretary. Such certifications shall be 
made at such times and in such manner as the Secre-
tary, in consultation with the Secretary of Transporta-
tion, may prescribe by regulation.
(b)	 Minimum Document Requirements.—To meet the 
requirements of this section, a State shall include, at a 
minimum, the following information and features on 
each driver’s license and identification card issued to a 
person by the State:
(1)  The person’s full legal name.
(2)  The person’s date of birth.
(3)  The person’s gender.
(4)  The person’s driver’s license or identification card 
number.
(5)  A digital photograph of the person.
(6)  The person’s address of principle residence.
(7)  The person’s signature.
(8)  Physical security features designed to prevent tam-
pering, counterfeiting, or duplication of the docu-
ment for fraudulent purposes.
(9)  A common machine-readable technology, with 
defined minimum data elements.
(c)  Minimum Issuance Standards—
(1)  IN GENERAL—To meet the requirements of this 
section, a State shall require, at a minimum, presen-
tation and verification of the following information 
before issuing a driver’s license or identification card 
to a person:

258	
Illegal Immigration
(A)  A photo identification document, except that a 
non-photo identity document is acceptable if it 
includes both the person’s full legal name and date 
of birth.
(B)  Documentation showing the person’s date of birth.
(C)  Proof of the person’s Social Security account 
number or verification that the person is not eli-
gible for a social security account number.
(D)  Documentation showing a person’s name and ad-
dress of physical residence.
(2)  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS—
(A)  IN GENERAL—To meet the requirements of 
this section, a State shall comply with the mini-
mum standards of this paragraph:
(B)  EVIDENCE OF LAWFUL STATUS—A State 
shall require, before issuing a valid driver’s license 
or identification card to a person, valid documen-
tary evidence that the person:
  (1)  is a citizen or national of the United States;
  (2)  is an alien lawfully admitted for permanent 
resident status or temporary residence in the 
United States;
  (3)  has conditional permanent resident status in 
the United States;
  (4)  has an approved application for asylum in the 
United States or has entered into the United 
States in refugee status;
  (5)  has a valid, unexpired nonimmigrant visa or 
nonimmigrant visa status for entry into the 
United States;
  (6)  has a pending application for asylum in the 
United States;

	
Data and Documents	
259
(7)  has a pending or approved application for 
temporary protected status in the United 
States;
(8)  has approved deferred action status; or
(9)  has a pending application for adjustment of 
status to that of an alien lawfully admitted 
for permanent resident status in the United 
States.
(C)  Temporary Driver’s Licenses and Identification 
Cards
(1)  IN GENERAL—If a person presents evi-
dence under any clauses (5) through (9) of 
subparagraph B, the State may only issue a 
temporary driver’s license or temporary iden-
tification card to such person.
(2)  EXPIRATION DATE—a temporary driver’s 
license or temporary identification card is-
sued pursuant to this subparagraph shall be 
valid only during the period of time of the 
applicant’s authorized stay in the United 
States or, if there is no definite end to the 
period of the authorized stay, a period of 
one year.
(3)  DISPLAY OF EXPIRATION DATE—a 
temporary driver’s license or temporary 
identification card issued pursuant to this 
subparagraph shall clearly indicate that it 
is temporary and shall state the date upon 
which it expires.
(4)  RENEWAL—temporary driver’s license or 
temporary identification card issued pursu-
ant to this subparagraph may be renewed 
only upon presentation of valid documen-
tary evidence that the status by which the 

260	
Illegal Immigration
applicant qualified for the temporary driver’s 
license or temporary identification card has 
been extended by the Secretary of Homeland 
Security.
(3)	 VERIFICATION OF DOCUMENTS—to meet the 
requirements of this section, a State shall implement 
the following procedures:
(A)  Before issuing a driver’s license or identification 
card to a person, the State shall verify, with the is-
suing agency, the issuance, validity, and complete-
ness of each document required to be presented by 
the person under paragraph (1) or (2).
(B)  The State shall not accept any foreign document, 
other than an official passport, to satisfy a require-
ment of paragraph (1) or (2).
(C)  Not later than September  11, 2005, the State 
shall enter into a memorandum of understand-
ing with the Secretary of Homeland Security to 
routinely utilize the automated system known 
as Systematic Alien Verification of Entitlement, 
as provided for by section 404 of the Illegal Im-
migration Reform and Immigrant Responsibil-
ity Act of 1996 (110 Stat. 3009–664), to verify 
the legal presence status of a person, other than 
a United States citizen, applying for a driver’s li-
cense or identification card.
(D)  Other requirements—To meet the requirements 
of this section, a State shall adopt the following 
practices in the issuance of driver’s licenses and 
identification cards:
(1)  Employ technology to capture a digital image of 
identity source of documents so that the images 
may be retained in electronic storage in a transfer-
able format.

	
Data and Documents	
261
(2)  Retain paper copies of source documents for a 
minimum of 7 years or images of source docu-
ments presented for a minimum of 10 years.
(3)  Subject each person applying for a driver’s license 
or identification card to mandatory facial image 
capture.
(4)  Establish an effective procedure to confirm or ver-
ify a renewing applicant’s information.
(5)  Confirm with the Social Security Administration 
a social security account number presented by a 
person using the full social security account num-
ber. In the event that a social security account 
number is already registered to or associated with 
another person to which any State has issued a 
driver’s license or identification card, the State 
shall resolve the discrepancy and take appropriate 
action.
(6)  Refuse to issue a driver’s license or identification 
card to a person holding a driver’s license issued 
by another State without confirmation that the 
person is terminating or has terminated the driv-
er’s license.
(7)  Ensure the physical security of locations where 
driver’s licenses and identification cards are pro-
duced and the security of document materials and 
papers from which driver’s licenses and identifica-
tion cards are produced.
(8)  Subject all persons authorized to manufacture or 
produce driver’s licenses and identification cards 
to appropriate security clearance requirements.
(9)  Establish fraudulent document recognition train-
ing programs for appropriate employees engaged 
in the issuance of driver’s licenses or identification 
cards.

262	
Illegal Immigration
(10)  Limit the period of validity of all driver’s licenses 
and identification cards that are not temporary 
to a period that does not exceed 8 years.
(11)  In any case in which State issues a driver’s license 
or identification card that does not satisfy the 
requirements of this section, ensure that such 
license or identification card—
(a)  clearly states on its face that it is may not 
be accepted by any Federal agency for fed-
eral identification or any other official 
purpose; and
(b)  uses a unique design or color indicator to alert 
Federal agency or other law enforcement per-
sonnel that it may not be accepted for such 
purpose.
(12)  Provide electronic access to all other States to in-
formation contained in the motor vehicle data-
base of the State.
(13)  Maintain a State motor vehicle database that 
contains, at a minimum—
(a)  all data fields printed on driver’s licenses and 
identification cards issued by the State; and
(b)  motor vehicle drivers’ histories, including 
motor vehicle violations, suspensions, and 
points on licenses.
SECTION 203. TRAFFICKING IN 
AUTHENTIFICATION FEATURES FOR USE  
IN FALSE IDENTIFICATION DOCUMENTS.
(a)  Criminal penalty—Section 1028(a)(8) of title 18, United 
States Code, is amended by striking “false authentica-
tion features” and inserting “false or actual authentication 
features,” (1) IN GENERAL—The Secretary shall enter, 
into the appropriate aviation security screening database, 

	
Data and Documents	
263
appropriate information regarding any person convicted of 
using a false driver’s license at an airport (as such term is 
defined in section 40102 of title 49, United States Code). 
(2) FALSE DEFINED—In this subsection, the term 
“false” has the same meaning such term has under sec-
tion 1028(d) of title 18, United States Code.
SECTION 204. GRANTS TO STATES.
(a)  In General—The Secretary may make grants to a State to 
assist the State in conforming to the minimum standards 
set forth in this title.
(b)  Authorization of Appropriations—There are authorized to 
be appropriated to the Secretary for each of the fiscal years 
2005 through 2009 such sums as may be necessary to carry 
out this title.
SECTION 205. AUTHORITY.
(a)  Participation of Secretary of Transportation and States—All 
authority to issue regulations, set standards, and issue 
grants under this title shall be carried out by the Secretary, 
in consultation with the Secretary of Transportation and 
the States.
(b)  Extension of Deadlines—The Secretary may grant to a 
State an extension of time to meet the requirements of sec-
tion 202(a)(1) if the State provides adequate justification 
for noncompliance.
SECTION 207. LIMITATION ON STATUTORY 
CONSTRUCTION.
Nothing in this title shall be construed to affect the authori-
ties or responsibilities of the Secretary of Transportation or the 
States under chapter 303 of title 49, United States Code.
In 2006, Congress passed the Secure Fence Act, which provided 
for the construction of a fence along the U.S. southwestern border 

264	
Illegal Immigration
(with Mexico) as a “hard” method to secure greater control of the 
border.
The Secure Fence Act of 2006. (H.R. 6061) An Act to Estab-
lish Operational Control Over the International and Mari-
time Borders of the United States.
SECTION 2: ACHIEVING OPERATIONAL CONTROL 
ON THE BORDER.
(a)  IN GENERAL—Not later than 18 months after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland 
Security shall take all actions the Secretary determines nec-
essary and appropriate to achieve and maintain operational 
control over the entire international land and maritime 
borders of the United States, to include the following—
(1)  systematic surveillance of the international land and 
maritime borders of the United States through more 
effective use of personnel and technology, such as 
unmanned aerial vehicles, ground-based sensors, satel-
lites, radar coverage, and cameras; and
(2)  physical infrastructure enhancements to prevent unlaw-
ful entry by aliens into the United States and facilitate 
access to the international land and maritime borders 
by United States Customs and Border Protection, such 
as additional checkpoints, all weather access roads, and 
vehicle barriers.
(b)  OPERATIONAL CONTROL DEFINED.—In this sec-
tion, the term “operational control” means the prevention 
of all unlawful entries into the United States, including 
entry by terrorists, narcotics, other unlawful aliens, instru-
ments of terrorism, narcotics, and other contraband.
(c)  REPORT.—Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act and annually thereafter, the Secretary 
shall submit to Congress a report on the progress made 
toward achieving and maintaining operational control over 

	
Data and Documents	
265
the entire international land and maritime borders of the 
United States in accordance with this section.
SECTION  3. CONSTRUCTION OF FENCING AND 
SECURITY IMPROVEMENTS IN BORDER AREA FROM 
PACIFIC OCEAN TO GULF OF MEXICO.
Section 102(b) of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immi-
grant Responsibility Act of 1996 (Public Law 104–208; 8 
U.S.C. 1103 note) is amended—
(a)  REINFORCED FENCING.—In carrying out subsection 
(a), the Secretary of Homeland Security shall provide for at 
least 2 layers of reinforced fencing, the installation of addi-
tional physical barriers, roads, lighting, cameras, and sensors—
(i)	 extending from 10 miles west of the Tecate, California, 
port of entry to 10 miles east of Tecate, California, port 
of entry;
(ii)	 extending from 10 miles west of Calexico, California, 
port of entry to 5 miles east of the Douglas, Arizona, 
port of entry;
(iii)	extending from 5 miles west of Columbus, New Mex-
ico, port of entry to 10 miles east of El Paso, Texas;
(iv)	 extending from 5 miles northwest of the Del Rio, 
Texas, port of entry to 5 miles southwest of the Eagle 
Pass, Texas, port of entry; and
(v)	 extending 15 miles to the Brownsville, Texas, port of entry.
(b)  PRIORITY AREAS.—With respect to the border described—
(i)	 In subparagraph (A)(ii), the Secretary shall ensure that 
an interlocking surveillance camera system is installed 
along such area by Mary 30, 2007, and that fence con-
struction is completed by May 30, 2008; and
(ii)	 In subparagraph (A)(v), the Secretary shall ensure 
that fence construction from 15 miles northwest of 

266	
Illegal Immigration
the Laredo, Texas, port of entry to 15 miles southeast 
of the Laredo, Texas, port of entry is completed by 
December 31, 2008.
(c)  EXCEPTION—If the topography of a specific area has an 
elevation grade that exceeds 10 percent, the Secretary may 
use other means to secure such area, including the use of 
surveillance and barrier tools.
SECTION 4. NORTHERN BORDER STUDY.
(A)  IN GENERAL.—The Secretary of Homeland Security 
shall conduct a study on the feasibility of a state-of-the-art 
infrastructure security system along the northern interna-
tional land and maritime border of the United States and 
shall include in the study—
(1)  the necessity of implementing such a system;
(2)  the feasibility of implementing such a system;
(3)  the economic impact implementing such a system will 
have along the northern border.
(B)  REPORT.—Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Secu-
rity shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security 
of the House and Representatives and the Committee on 
Homeland Security and Government Affairs of the Senate 
a report that contains the results of the study conducted 
under subsection (A)
SECTION 5. EVALUATION AND REPORT  
RELATING TO CUSTOMS AUTHORITY TO  
STOP CERTAIN FLEEING VEHICLES.
(A)  EVALUATION.—Not later than 30 days after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland 
Security shall—

	
Data and Documents	
267
(1)  evaluate the authority of personnel of United States 
Customs and Border Protection to stop vehicles that 
enter the United States illegally and refuse to stop when 
ordered to do so by such personnel, compare such Cus-
toms authority with the authority of the Coast Guard 
to stop vessels under section 637 of title 14, United 
States Code, and make an assessment as to whether 
such Customs authority should be expanded;
(2)  review the equipment and technology available to United 
States Customs and Border Protection personnel to stop 
vehicles described in paragraph (1) and make an assess-
ment as to whether or not better equipment or technol-
ogy is available or should be developed; and
(3)  evaluate the training provided to United States Cus-
toms and Border Protection personnel to stop vehicles 
described in paragraph (1).
(B)  REPORT.—Not later than 60 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Secu-
rity shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Secu-
rity of the House of Representatives and the Committee 
on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the 
Senate a report that contains the results of the evaluation 
conducted under subsection (a).
In June 2013, a group of 19 conservative Republicans in the House 
of Representatives introduced a bill, the Strengthen and Fortify 
Enforcement Act (the SAFE Act), designed to “harden” the border 
to maintain control of the border and stop illegal immigration. 
The bill’s table of contents indicating its titles and sections makes 
clear its total reliance on a “crack-down” approach to border secu-
rity and law enforcement.
H.R. 2278. The SAFE Act, 2013.
TITLE 1—IMMIGRATION LAW ENFORCEMENT BY 
STATES AND LOCALITIES
Sec. 102. Immigration law by States and localities.

268	
Illegal Immigration
Sec. 103. Listing of immigration violators in the national crime 
information center database.
Sec. 104. Technology access.
Sec. 105. State and local law enforcement provisions of infor-
mation about apprehended aliens.
Sec. 106. Financial assistance to State and local police agencies 
that assist in the enforcement of immigration laws.
Sec. 107. Increased Federal detention space.
Sec. 108. Federal custody of inadmissible and deportable 
aliens in the United States apprehended by State or local law 
enforcement.
Sec. 109. Training of State and local law enforcement person-
nel relating to the enforcement of immigration laws.
Sec. 111. Criminal alien identification program.
Sec. 112. Clarification of congressional intent.
Sec. 113. State criminal alien assistance program (SCAAP).
Sec. 114. State violations of enforcement of immigration laws.
Sec. 115. Clarifying the authority of ICE detainers.
TITLE II—NATIONAL SECURITY
Sec. 201. Removal of, and denial of benefits to, terrorist 
aliens.
Sec. 202. Terrorist bar to good moral character.
Sec. 203. Terrorist bar to naturalization.
Sec. 204. Denaturalization of terrorists.
Sec. 205. Use of 1986 IRCA legalization information for 
national security purposes.
Sec. 206. Background and security checks.
Sec. 207. Technical amendments relating to the Intelligence 
Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004.

	
Data and Documents	
269
TITLE III—REMOVAL OF CRIMINAL ALIENS
Sec. 302. Precluding admissibility of aliens convicted of aggra-
vated felonies or other serious offenses.
Sec. 303. Espionage clarification.
Sec. 304. Prohibition of the sale of firearms to, or the posses-
sion of firearms by, certain aliens.
Sec. 305. Uniform statute of limitations for certain immigra-
tion, naturalization, and peonage offenses.
Sec. 308. Precluding refugee or asylee adjustment of status for 
aggravated felons.
Sec. 309. Inadmissibility and deportability of drunk drivers.
Sec. 310. Detention of dangerous aliens.
Sec. 311. Grounds of inadmissibility and deportability for 
alien gang members.
Sec. 312. Extension of identity theft offenses.
Sec. 313. Laundering of monetary instruments.
Sec. 314. Increases criminal penalties relating to alien smug-
gling and related offenses.
Sec. 315. Penalties for illegal entry.
Sec. 316. Illegal entry.
Sec. 317. Reform of passport, visa, and immigration fraud 
offenses.
Sec. 319. Expedited removal for aliens inadmissible on crimi-
nal or security grounds.
Sec. 320. Increased penalties barring the admission of con-
victed sex offenders failing to register and requiring deporta-
tion of sex offenders failing to register.
Sec. 321. Protecting immigrants from convicted sex offenders.
Sec. 322. Clarification of crimes of violence and crimes involv-
ing moral turpitude.
Sec. 323. Penalties for failure to obey removal orders.

270	
Illegal Immigration
TITLE IV—VISA SECURITY
Sec. 401. Cancellation of additional visas.
Sec. 402. Visa information sharing.
Sec. 403. Restricting waiver of visa interviews.
Sec. 404. Authorizing the Department of State to not inter-
view certain ineligible visa applicants.
Sec. 405. Visa refusal and revocation.
Sec. 406. Funding for the visa security program.
Sec. 407. Expeditious expansion of visa security program to 
high-risk posts.
Sec. 408. Expedited clearance and placement of Department 
of Homeland Security personnel at overseas embassies and 
consular posts.
Sec. 409. Increased criminal penalties for student visa integrity.
Sec. 410. Accreditation requirements.
Sec. 411. Visa fraud.
Sec. 412. Background checks.
Sec. 413. Flight schools not certified by FAA.
Sec. 414. Revocation of accreditation.
Sec. 415. Report on risk assessment.
TITLE V—AID TO U.S. IMMIGRATION AND CUS-
TOMS ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
Sec. 501. ICE immigration enforcement agents.
Sec. 502. ICE detention enforcement officers.
Sec. 503. Ensuring the safety of ICE officers and agents.
Sec. 504. ICE Advisory Council.
Sec. 505. Pilot program for electronic field processing.
Sec. 506. Additional ICE deportation officers and support staff.
Sec. 507. Additonal ICE prosecutors.

	
Data and Documents	
271
TITLE VI—MISCELLANEOUS ENFORCEMENT 
PROVISIONS
Sec. 601. Encouraging aliens to depart voluntarily.
Sec. 602. Deterring aliens ordered removed from remaining in 
the United States unlawfuly.
Sec. 603. Reinstatement of removal orders.
Sec. 605. Reports to Congress on the exercise and abuse of 
prosecutorial discretion.
Sec. 606. Waiver of Federal laws with respect to border security 
actions on Department of the Interior and Department of 
Agriculture lands.
TITLE 1—IMMIGRATION LAW ENFORCEMENT BY 
STATES AND LOCALITIES
(c)  SEVERABILITY.—If any provision of this title, or the appli-
cation of such provision to any person or circumstance, is held 
invalid, the remainder of this title, and the application of such 
provision to other persons not similarly situated or to other 
circumstances, shall not be affected by such invalidation.
Also in 2013, the Senate passed a comprehensive immigration 
reform bill, S. 744. The following summarizes some key sections 
of the bill, sponsored by Sen. Charles Schumer (D-NY) and passed 
Senate on June 27, 2013.
S. 744. THE BORDER SECURITY, ECONOMIC  
OPPORTUNITY, AND IMMIGRATION  
MOBILIZATION ACT.
Sec. 2. States passage of Act recognizes that the primary tenet of 
its success depends on securing U.S. sovereignty and estab-
lishing a coherent and just system for integrating those who 
seek to join American society.
Sec. 3. Prohibits the Secretary of Homeland Security from 
processing applications for registered provisional immigrant 

272	
Illegal Immigration
status (RPI) until the Secretary has submitted to Congress 
the notice of commencement of implementation of the 
Comprehensive Southern Border Security Strategy and the 
Southern Border Fencing Strategy.
Sec. 4. Establishes a Southern Border Security Commission.
Sec. 5. Directs the Secretary to implement a Comprehensive 
Southern Border Security Strategy for achieving and main-
taining effective control between and at the ports of entry in 
all border sectors along the Southern border; and a Southern 
Border Fencing Strategy as to where 700 miles of fencing and 
technology should be deployed.
Sec. 6. Establishes in the Treasury the Comprehensive Immi-
gration Reform Trust Fund.
Title 1: Border Security. Directs the Secretary to increase the 
number of trained full-time active U.S. Border Patrol agents 
deployed to the Southern Border to 38,405 by September 30, 
2021, and increase the number of CBP officers by 3,500 by 
September 30, 2017; and increase trained CBP Air and Marine 
unmanned aircraft systems crew, marine agent, and person-
nel by 160; and their flight hours to 130,000 annually by 
September 30, 2015.
Sec. 1103. Authorizes the governor of a state, with approval of 
the Secretary of Defense (DOD), to order National Guard 
personnel to perform operations in the Southwest border 
region.
Sec. 1104. Directs the Secretary to increase the number of cross-
ing prosecutions in the Tucson sector to up to 210 prosecu-
tions per day by increasing funding for additional attorneys 
and support staff, interpreters and U.S. marshals. Directs 
the Secretary to enhance border infrastructure by additional 
Border Patrol stations, upgrading and establishing additional 
Border Patrol operating bases, and establishing a grant pro-
gram with DOT to construct transportation improvements 

	
Data and Documents	
273
at international border crossings. Authorizes FY 2014–2018 
appropriations for such.
Directs the President to appoint additional district judges for 
Arizona, California, and Texas.
Increases fee for filing a civil action in U.S. district court to 
$360.
Sec. 1105. Directs USDA and Secretary of Interior to provide 
CBP personnel with immediate access to federal lands in the 
Southwest Border region in Arizona for security activities.
Sec. 1106. Requires CBP to deploy additional mobile, video, 
and portable surveillance systems, and unarmed, unmanned 
drone vehicles in the Southwest Border region to provide 
24-hour surveillance.
Sec. 1107. Directs the Secretary to establish a two-year grant 
program to improve communications in the border region 
and authorizes appropriations for such.
Sec. 1108. Directs Attorney General (DOJ) to reimburse state, 
county, tribal, and municipal governments for costs associ-
ated with the prosecution and pre-trial detention of feder-
ally initiated criminal cases and authorizes FY2014–2018 
appropriations.
Sec. 1110. Authorizes appropriations for the state criminal 
assistance program (SCAAP) through FY 2015.
Sec. 1112. Directs the Secretary to provide appropriate train-
ing for CBP officers, Border Patrol officers, ICE agents, U.S. 
Air and Marine Division agents, agriculture specialists sta-
tioned within 100 miles of any U.S. land or marine border, 
or at any U.S. port of entry; and to establish CBP child cus-
tody guidelines.
Sec. 1113. Establishes a DHS Border Oversight Task Force and 
authorizes FY2014-FY2017 appropriations.
Sec. 1114. Establishes an Ombudsman for Immigration 
Related Concerns in the DHS.

274	
Illegal Immigration
Sec. 1115. Directs the Secretary to consider safety and family 
concerns in any action of repatriation of individuals appre-
hended for immigration violations and provides for training 
for CBP personnel.
Sec. 1116. Revises maximum distances in a Northern Border 
sector or district which DHS personnel have the authority to 
board and search and search vehicles for aliens.
Sec. 1120. Human Trafficking Reporting Act of 2013.
Sec. 1133. DHS to report to Congress every six months on 
removals.
Sec. 1201. Directs the Secretary to initiate certain expedited 
removal proceedings relating to border security.
Title II: Immigrant Visas—Registration and Adjustment of 
Registered Provisional Immigrants.
Sec. 2101. After certification by the Secretary DHS about 
national security and law enforcement clearances, to grant 
RPI status to certain aliens unlawfully in the U.S. (enacting 
provisions of the Dream Act).
Sec. 2102. Essentially, establishes a process for the earned legal-
ization of certain aliens unlawfully in the U.S. Makes those 
authorized RPIs ineligible for any federal means-tested ben-
efit. Authorizes RPIs to be issued a Social Security number 
and to enlist in the Armed Forces.
Prohibits an RPI alien from applying for lawful permanent sta-
tus until the Secretary of State certifies that immigrant visas 
have become available for all approved petitions filed before the 
date of enactment of this Act.
States that an RPI alien may only adjust status under the 
merit-based system provided for by the Act.
Sec. 2013. Authorizes enactment of the DREAM ACT of 2013.
Sec. 2105. Sets a criminal penalty of up to $10,000 for a per-
son who knowingly uses, publishes or permits the improper 
use of RPI application information.

	
Data and Documents	
275
Sec. 2106. Authorizes USCIS to establish a program to award 
grants to eligible nonprofit organizations to assist RPI 
applicants
Subtitle B: Agriculture Worker Program. Enacts the Agri-
culture Worker Program Act of 2013 with all its various pro-
visions, including making a blue card alien ineligible for any 
federal means-tested benefit.
Sec. 2212. Requires payment of a $400 fine, and payment of 
any federal tax liability.
Sec. 2232. Establishes a nonimmigrant agricultural (W-3 and 
W-4 visa) worker program; and among its many provisions, 
excludes W-3 and W-4 workers from any need-based federal 
financial assistance program.
Subtitle C: Future Immigration.
Sec. 2301. Establishes a merit-based points immigration admis-
sion system with 120,000 admissions per year with increases 
based on certain specified admission and employment condi-
tions to a maximum admission cap of 250,000, allows recap-
ture of unused visas, and allows lawful permanent resident 
status for such entrants.
Sec. 2303. Repeals the diversity immigrant program as of 
October 1, 2014.
Sec. 2304. Sets forth worldwide levels of employment and 
family-based immigrants.
Sec. 2305. Includes spouses or minor child of a lawful perma-
nent alien in the definition of “immediate family.”
Sec. 2306. Eliminates the per-country limit for employment- 
based immigrants and increases the per-country limit for 
family tied immigrants.
Sec. 2307. Revises certain provisions of the family-based immi-
grant visa allocation system; including elimination of the visa 
category for brothers and sisters of U.S. citizens.

276	
Illegal Immigration
Sec. 2318. Extends the Iraqi and the Afghan special immigrant 
visa program.
Title IV: Reforms to Nonimmigrant Visa Programs-Subtitle 
A: Employment-based Nonimmigrant Visas.
Several sections revise and change the caps for H-1B to a cap of 
115,000 per fiscal year; and a minimum of 115,000 visas to a 
maximum of 180,000 visas in subsequent years.
Limits the exemption from H-1B numerical limitations to 
STEM occupations and increases the annual STEM allocation 
to 25,000.
Subtitle B: H-1B Visa Fraud and Abuse Protection. Several 
sections that revise H-1B provisions to deal with fraud and 
abuse.
Subtitle C: L Visa Fraud and Abuse Protection. Includes sev-
eral sections to address L visa fraud and abuse concerns.
Subtitle D: Other Nonimmigrant Visas. Includes numerous 
sections to revise nonimmigrant visas
Subtitle F: Reforms to the H-2B Visa Program. Includes 
numerous sections to revise and reform the H-2B visa 
program.
Subtitle G: W Nonimmigrant Visas. Establishes a Bureau 
of Immigration and Labor Market Research to supplement 
W-visa recruitment methods, conduct survey every three 
months on the need for W-visa cap of construction worker 
unemployment and report to Congress on employment-based 
immigrant and nonimmigrant visa programs.
Subtitle H: Investing in New Venture, Entrepreneurial 
Startups, and Technologies. Contains several sections to 
establish a nonimmigrant X-visa for qualified entrepreneur 
who invest certain amounts in U.S. business and which cre-
ate certain numbers of jobs and generate at least $250,000 in 
annual revenues to the U.S. A provision of which establishes 
a $1,000 X-visa fee.

	
Data and Documents	
277
Subtitle I: Student and Exchange Visitor Programs. Con-
tains a dozen or so provisions regarding student visa integrity.
These executive actions were projected to affect 4.4 million persons. 
DAPA program implementation was temporarily blocked by a fed-
eral district court in Texas which issued an order to cease accept-
ing applications for DAPA or expanded DACA until a higher 
court issues an order that allows the initiatives to go forward.
Deferred Action is an administrative relief from deportation 
that has been around for a long time. The president’s executive 
action authorizes the DHS to allow certain non-U.S. citizens to 
remain in the United States temporarily, granted on a case-by-case 
basis.
The Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) 
Program and the Deferred Action for Parents of Americans 
and Lawful Permanent Residents (DAPA).
PERSONS ELIGIBLE FOR DAPA INCLUDE:
-A parent of a U.S. citizen or lawful permanent resident.
-Have continuously lived in the U.S. since January 1, 2010.
-Have been present in U.S. on November 20, 2014.
-Not have a lawful immigration status as of November  20, 
2014—meaning one entered the country undocumented or 
if lawfully entered, must have stayed beyond the expiration 
of the temporary visa.
-Have not been convicted of certain criminal offenses, includ-
ing felonies and some misdemeanors.
DACA APPLICANTS MUST:
-Have come before their 16th birthday.
-Lived in the U.S. continuously since January 1, 2010.
-Be present in U.S. on June 15, 2012 and every day since.
-Have graduated or obtained a GED certificate, or be in school 
on the date the person submits an application.

278	
Illegal Immigration
-Pays an application fee of $465, which consists of a $380 
fee for employment authorization, and an $85 fee for 
fingerprints.
Sources: All summaries by author.
References
Anderson, James. 1979. Public Policy Making. New York: 
Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Information Plus. 2006. Immigration and Illegal Aliens: 
Burden or Blessing? Detroit: Thomson/Gale.
LeMay, Michael. 2004. U.S. Immigration: A Reference 
Handbook. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
LeMay, Michael, and Elliott Robert Barkan. 1999. 
U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Laws and Issues: 
A Documentary History. Westport, CT: Greenwood.
LeMay, Michael, ed. 2013. Transforming America: Perspectives 
on Immigration, 3 vols. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.

This page intentionally left blank


281
Introduction
This chapter lists and briefly discusses the major sources of informa-
tion the reader is encouraged to consult. It begins with print sources, 
first from the agencies and organizations involved in immigration 
policy and particularly those concerned with illegal immigration 
policy reforms.
Scholarly books on the subject follow, with more than 100 such 
cited and annotated. The major scholarly journals in the field are 
then covered and described. Major governmental reports are listed 
and described.
Finally, the chapter discusses nonprint sources; more than 50 
films and videos produced since 2000 and available for viewing. 
These nonprint sources often dramatically depict the issues and 
people involved, putting real “faces” to the numbers and statistics 
6	
Resources
Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers escort an arrestee in an 
apartment building, in the Bronx borough of New York, during a series of 
early-morning raids on March 3, 2015. Immigrant and Customs Enforce-
ment say an increasing number of cities and counties across the United 
States are limiting cooperation with the agency and putting its officers in 
dangerous situations as they track down foreign-born criminals. Instead, 
more of its force is out on the streets, eating up resources and conduct-
ing investigations because cities like New York and states like California 
have passed legislation that limits many of the detention requests issued by 
immigration authorities. Customs Enforcement finds it easier to apprehend 
illegal immigrants as they attempt to cross the border than to enforce immi-
gration law and deport undocumented immigrants once they have entered 
the United States. (AP Photo/Richard Drew)

282	
Illegal Immigration
so often referred to in debates over the illegal immigration contro-
versy. They highlight the human interest aspect of the issue.
Selected Print Resources
Books
Aleinikoff, T. Alexander, and Douglas Klusmeyer, eds. 2000. 
From Migrants to Citizens: Membership in a Changing World. 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. It is scholarly 
discussion of the incorporation of immigrants with discus-
sion of naturalization law and policy.
Aleinikoff, T. Alexander, and Douglas Klusmeyer, eds. 2001. 
Citizenship Today: Global Perspectives and Practices. Washing-
ton, DC: Brookings Institution Press. A Carnegie Endow-
ment for International Peace book by leading immigration 
lawyer experts in the subject.
Aleinikoff, T. Alexander, and Douglas Klusmeyer, eds. 2002. 
Citizenship Policies for an Age of Migration. Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution Press. A  Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace book by two leading immigration law-
yers focusing on naturalization policy in a global context.
Allport, Alan and John E. Ferguson, Jr., eds. 2009. Immigration 
Policy, 2nd ed. New York: Chelsea House/Facts on File. This 
book uses a point/counterpoint approach to a discussion of 
the complex topic of immigration. It covers controversies 
like the cost/benefits of illegal immigration and English as 
an official language, among a wide range of issues covered.
Anderson, Stewart. 2010. Immigration. Westport, CT: Green-
wood Press. This volume takes a comprehensive look at U.S. 
immigration policy and its impact on the nation, with a 
historic overview and a guide to how immigration works in 
practice for businesses and economics.
Andreas, Peter. 2000. Border Games: Policing the U.S.-Mexico 
Divide. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. It is an extensive 

	
Resources	
283
study of the difficulty of enacting and implementing policy 
to control illegal immigration, focusing on the southern 
border.
Andreas, Peter, and Timothy Snyder, eds. 2000. The Wall 
around the West: State Borders and Immigration Con-
trols in North America and Europe. Lanham, MD: Row-
man & Littlefield. A balanced but critical examination of 
the increasing barriers being enacted to control immigra-
tion flows into Canada, the United States, and the major 
immigration-receiving nations of Europe, particularly the 
European Union countries.
Arnold, Kathleen R., ed. 2011. Anti-Immigration in the 
United States: A  Historical Encyclopedia. Santa Barbara, 
CA: ABC-CLIO. This two-volume set is one of the first to 
address American anti-immigration sentiment. Organized 
alphabetically, it covers major historical periods and relevant 
concepts, leading figures and groups in the anti-immigration 
movement.
Arreola, Daniel D., ed. 2004. Hispanic Spaces, Latino Places: 
Community and Cultural Diversity in Contemporary America. 
Austin: University of Texas Press. It is a collection of original 
essays on Hispanic migration to the U.S. Southwest. Numer-
ous scholars examine a panorama of issues and sectors of 
society affected by the influx, and how those communities 
affect the incorporation of new Hispanic immigrants.
Baker, Susan Gonzales. 1990. The Cautious Welcome: The 
Legalization Program of the Immigration Reform and Con-
trol Act. Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation and the 
Urban Institute Press. It is a critical examination of IRCA’s 
legalization programs and the difficulties and failures in its 
implementation.
Bakken, Gordon M. and Alexandra Kindell. 2006. Encyclope-
dia of Immigration and Migration in the American West, 2 vol. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. This two-volume 

284	
Illegal Immigration
encyclopedia looks at the ethnic groups crossing the plains, 
landing at ports, and crossing borders. It contains focused 
biographies, community histories, economic enterprise anal-
yses, and a variety of demographic data.
Barone, Michael. 2013. Shaping Our Nation: How Surges of 
Migration Transformed America and Its Politics. New York: 
Crown Forum/Random House. The author examines the 
history of immigration and how past surges in immigration 
influenced American culture, society, and politics.
Barone, Michael and Chuck McClutcheon. 2014. The Alma-
nac of American Politics. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. The “gold standard” almanac of the Congress, updated 
every two years with a new congress, it covers all the mem-
bers, their districts, the politics involved in each, and aspects 
of the workings of Congress, committee assignments, and 
caucus memberships.
Barstram, David, Maristsa V. Poros, and Pierre Monfort. 2014. 
Key Concepts in Migration. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Pub-
lications. This volume uses a key concepts approach to the 
study of immigration. It considers three dozen concepts 
at the heart of migration studies. It is a valuable reference 
resource for students and scholars alike.
Bean, Frank B., and Stephanie Bell-Rose, eds. 1999. Immi-
gration and Opportunity: Race, Ethnicity, and Employment 
in the U.S. New York: Russell Sage. An extensive collection 
of essays from leading sociologists and demographers that 
provides a systematic account of the sundry ways in which 
immigration impacts the labor market experiences of the 
native-born.
Bean, Frank, Barry Edmonston, and Jeffrey Passell. 1990. 
Undocumented Migration to the U.S. Santa Monica, CA: 
Rand Corporation and the Urban Institute Press. It is a thor-
ough and scholarly look at illegal immigration focusing on 
that across the southern U.S. border.

	
Resources	
285
Bean, Frank D., and Gillian Stevens. 2003. America’s New-
comers: Immigrant Incorporation and the Dynamics of 
Diversity. New York: Russell Sage. A  demographer and 
a language specialist examine the factors influencing the 
gradual incorporation of immigrants and their children 
and what aspects influence the rate of incorporation.
Bean, Frank, George Vernez, and Charles B. Keely. 1989. 
Opening and Closing the Doors. Santa Monica, CA, and 
Washington, DC: Rand Corporation and the Urban Insti-
tute Press. One of the more important books in a series of 
excellent books and monographs published as a result of 
a joint Rand Corporation/Urban Institute major research 
project examining immigration policy particularly as to the 
impact of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 
(IRCA).
Beck, Roy H. 1996. The Case against Immigration. New York: 
Norton. It is a thorough articulation of all the arguments and 
data that can be marshaled against high levels of immigration.
Boeri, Tito, et al., eds. 2002. Immigration Policy and the Wel-
fare State. New York: Oxford University Press. This book 
draws together and unifies analysis of immigration into the 
major EU countries and the United States, covering the 
major trends and dramatic developments of the 1990s. It 
emphasizes the influence of the welfare state on immigration 
incentives, and examines other influences on both legal and 
illegal migration and on their market outcomes on these two 
continents.
Borjas, George. 1997. Friends and Strangers: The Effects of 
Immigration on the U.S. Economy. New York: Basic. A noted 
scholar examines and critically evaluates the economic 
impact of high levels of legal and illegal immigration to the 
United States.
Brewer, Stuart. 2006. Borderland and Bridges: A History of U.S.-
Latin American Relations. Westport, CT: Praeger Securities 

286	
Illegal Immigration
International. Brewer examines the complex relationship 
between the United States and Latin America with an intro-
duction to the most important events in the diplomatic, mil-
itary, social, and economic history of the relationship.
Briggs, Vernon M., Jr., and Stephen Moore. 1994. Still an Open 
Door? U.S. Immigration Policy and the American Economy. 
Washington, DC: American University Press. It is another 
volume of noted scholars of the economic impact of immi-
gration, stressing the negative effects of large-scale immigra-
tion and the negative effects of illegal migration.
Brubaker, William Roger, ed. 1989. Immigration and the Poli-
tics of Citizenship in Europe and North America. New York: 
University Press of America and the German Marshall Fund 
of the United States. It is an interesting collection of essays 
on naturalization, citizenship, and the impact of immigration 
on the politics of the United States and of the EU nations. 
Focus is on legal immigration.
Calavita, Kitty. 1992. Inside the State: The Bracero Program, 
Immigration, and the INS. New York: Routledge. One of the 
best examinations of the Bracero Program, with insights into 
temporary worker programs and the problems associated 
with that approach.
Camarota, Steven A. 1999. Immigrants in the United 
States–1998: A  Snapshot of America’s Foreign-Born Popula-
tion. Washington, DC: Center for Immigration Studies. 
An extensive demographic-data look at immigrants in the 
United States and the degree to which they are assimilating 
into the socioeconomic structures of society.
Chavez, Leo R. 1992. Shadowed Lives: Undocumented Immi-
grants in American Society. New York: Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich. It is a sharply focused examination of all the 
problems and negative impacts, and discrimination facing 
undocumented aliens.
Chiswick, Barry R. 2005. The Economics of Immigration: 
Selected Papers of Barry S. Chiswick. Cheltenham, UK: 

	
Resources	
287
Edward Edgar Publishing. A  thorough collection of the 
writings of Barry Chiswick, widely considered one of the 
leading scholars of the economics of immigration, and of 
the complexity of measuring the costs and benefits of legal 
immigration.
Cieslik, Thomas, David Felsen, and Akis Kalaitzdis. 2008. 
Immigration: A Documentary and Reference Guide. Westport, 
CT: Greenwood Press. These three respected authorities on 
immigration and international affairs examine the contem-
porary realities of immigration enmeshed as it is in econom-
ics, human rights, and national security issues.
Conover, Ted. 1987. Coyotes: A Journey through the Secret World 
of America’s Illegal Aliens. New York: Vintage. A reporter’s 
“inside” look at the illegal alien smuggling problem and how 
it operates and largely avoids border control.
Craig, Richard B. 1971. The Bracero Program: Interest Groups 
and Foreign Policy. Austin: University of Texas Press. One of 
the early scholarly analyses of the Bracero Program, focus-
ing on interest groups for and against and how they shaped 
the program and its implementation and relation to foreign 
policy concerns.
Crane, Keith, et al. 1990. The Effects of Employer Sanctions on 
the Flow of Undocumented Immigrants to the United States. 
Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation and the Urban Insti-
tute Press. One of an excellent series of studies by the Rand 
Corporation and the Urban Institute studying the impact 
of IRCA and especially the effects of the employer sanctions 
approach to control illegal immigration.
Crockoff, James D. 1986. Outlaws in the Promised Land: Mexi-
can Immigrant Workers and America’s Future. New York: 
Grove. It provides a critical view of the illegal immigration 
flow, the exploitation of undocumented workers, and the 
economic effects of illegal immigration on the U.S. economy.
Daniels, Roger. 1990. Coming to America: A History of Immi-
gration and Ethnicity in American Life. New York: Harper.  

288	
Illegal Immigration
It is a brief but insightful history of immigration and ethnic-
ity and their impact on U.S. society by a noted immigration 
historian.
Daniels, Roger. 2005. Guarding the Golden Door: American 
Immigration Policy and Immigration since 1882. New York: 
Hill and Wang. One of the leading authorities and immigra-
tion historians, Daniels gives a detailed analysis of immigra-
tion policy and how and why it changed over time, from 
1882 to 2000.
Daniels, Roger, and Otis L. Graham. 2003. Debating Ameri-
can Immigration, 1882–Present. Lanham, MD: Rowman & 
Littlefield. Two noted historians of immigration debate the 
American immigration experience.
Erler, Edward, and Margaret Stock. 2012. The Cost to Ameri-
cans and America of Ending Birthright Citizenship. Arlington, 
VA: National Foundation for American Policy. It is a criti-
cal examination of the philosophical, ideological, and legal 
aspects of the birthright citizenship issue.
Etzioni, Amitai, and Jason H. Marsh, eds. 2003. Rights v. Pub-
lic Safety after 9/11: America in the Age of Terrorism. Lanham, 
MD: Rowman & Littlefield. It provides a timely scholarly 
debate on the issues of civil rights, homeland defense, and 
public safety.
Faist, Thomas. 2000. The Volume and Dynamics of International 
Migration and Transnational Social Spaces. New York: Oxford 
University Press. This volume offers an innovative theoretical 
account of the causes, nature, and extent of the movement of 
international migrants between affluent and poorer countries 
and provides a conceptual framework for migration decision 
making and the dynamics of international movement of 
peoples.
Ferris, Elizabeth G., ed. 1985. Refugees and World Politics. 
New York: Praeger. A  thorough collection of essays on 
the refugee crisis up to the early 1980s, it is an important 

	
Resources	
289
source for world refugee numbers to that point in time, 
and most of the issues and many of the problems remain 
relevant today.
Fix, Michael, ed. 1991. The Paper Curtain: Employer Sanc-
tions Implementation, Impact, and Reform. Washington, DC: 
Urban Institute. An objective, scholarly examination of the 
employer sanctions program of IRCA, the problems involved 
in its implementation, why it largely failed to achieve its 
aims, and some suggested reform approaches.
Foner, Nancy, and George M. Frederickson. 2004. Not Just 
Black and White: Historical and Contemporary Perspectives on 
Immigration, Race, and Ethnicity in the United States. New 
York: Russell Sage. It is an examination of the complexity of 
racial and ethnic politics in America, and how that complex-
ity impacts immigration and immigration policy.
Foner, Nancy, Ruben Rumbant, and Steven J. Gold, eds. 2000. 
Immigration Research for a New Century: Multidisciplinary 
Perspectives. New York: Russell Sage. A thorough examina-
tion of current research on the post-1965 wave of immigrants 
presenting the work of a new generation of immigration 
scholars from the various social science disciplines.
Francis, Samuel T. 2001. America Extinguished: Mass Immigra-
tion and the Disintegration of American Culture. Monterey, 
VA: Americans for Immigration Control. A  collection of 
editorial essays by Samuel Francis of AIC, it presents all of 
AIC’s arguments and perspectives on the cultural wars, the 
dire affects, and reasons to oppose mass immigration, legal 
and illegal.
French, Laurence A. 2010. Running the Border Gauntlet: The 
Mexican Migrant Controversy. Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger 
Press. This book traces the long history of racial, political, 
religious, and class conflicts resulting from America’s conten-
tious immigration policies in a lucid narrative account acces-
sible to college students and the general public.

290	
Illegal Immigration
Gans, Judith, Elaine M. Replogie, and Daniel J. Tichenor. 
2012. Debates on U.S. Immigration. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage Publications. This is an issue-based solid reference 
guide that examines immigration policy in the United States 
and the impassioned debates about the scope and nature of 
restrictionist policy. It has an introductory essay and then 
uses a collection of point/counterpoint articles exploring the 
multiple sides of this complex issue.
Gerstle, Gary, and John Mollenkopf, eds. 2001. E Pluribus 
Unum? Contemporary and Historical Perspectives on Immi-
grant Political Incorporation. New York: Russell Sage. It is a 
path-breaking volume that brings together historians and 
social scientists exploring the dynamics of political incor-
poration (assimilation) of the 20th century’s two great 
immigration waves. From political machines to education, 
transnational loyalties, and racial exclusion, these essays pro-
vide insights into the way immigration has changed culture 
and politics in the United States.
Gjerde, Jon, ed. 1998. Major Problems in American Immigra-
tion and Ethnic History. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. A col-
lection of essays from leading scholars about a wide variety 
of problems emerging from large-scale immigration flows to 
the United States.
Glazer, Nathan, ed. 1985. Clamor at the Gates: The New Ameri-
can Immigration. San Francisco: ICS Press. One of the most 
noted scholars of immigration focuses on the “new” wave of 
post-1965 immigration and examines the demographics of 
the wave.
Hamermesh, Daniel S., and Frank Bean, eds. 1998. Help or 
Hindrance? The Economic Implications of Immigration for 
African Americans. New York: Russell Sage. The debate 
over how, and the degree to which, immigration adversely 
impacts African Americans is thoroughly examined in essays 
edited by two leading scholars/demographers of the U.S. 
immigration.

	
Resources	
291
Hammamoto, Darrell Y., and Rodolfo Torres, eds. 1997. New 
American Destinies: A  Reader in Contemporary Asian and 
Latino Immigration. New York: Routledge. A collection of 
scholarly essays focusing on the changed nature in the flow 
of immigrants since 1965 and the shift in that flow from 
Northwestern Europeans to Latin Americans and Asians.
Haugen, David M. 2009. Immigration. Detroit: Greenhaven 
Press. Using an opposing viewpoints approach, Haugen 
explores immigration through a wide range of views by 
respected experts in the pro-con format.
Hayes, Patrick, ed. 2012. The Making of Modern Immigra-
tion: An Encyclopedia of People and Ideas. Santa Barbara, CA: 
ABC-CLIO. It is a library reference volume that examines 
the legal immigration system to the United States.
Hero, Rodney, and Christina Wolbrecht, eds. 2005. The Poli-
tics of Democratic Inclusion. Philadelphia: Temple University 
Press. It is a collection of original essays from a variety of 
scholars on the subject of immigrant incorporation and what 
aids or hinders the process.
Hirschman, Charles, Joshua DeWind, and Philip Kasinitz, eds. 
1999. The Handbook of International Migration. New York: 
Russell Sage. An extensive collection of essays on the basics 
of international migration flows.
Huddle, Donald. 1993. The Costs of Immigration. Washington, 
DC: Carrying Capacity Network. Huddle’s study was among 
the first careful scholarly attempts to measure the impact 
of immigration using an economist’s cost-benefit analysis 
approach. Controversial as it was for those interested in mea-
suring immigration’s costs, it spurred a host of other studies.
Information Plus. 2006. Immigration and Illegal Aliens: Burdens 
or Blessings? Farmington Hills, MI: Thomson/Gale. The lat-
est in a series of brief but thorough monographs that exam-
ine the “illegal alien issue” from a variety of perspectives and 
present many graphs, figures, and tables of data that touch 
upon every aspect of the “illegal alien immigration” issue. 

292	
Illegal Immigration
Pros and cons of all sides of the issue and a solid historical 
perspective are included in every volume in the series.
Information Plus. 2014. American Immigration: An Encyclo-
pedia of Political, Social, and Cultural Changes. Farmington 
Hills, MI: Thomson/Gale. A library reference volume with 
narrative history, tables, figures, and analysis of immigration 
to the United States, focusing on current immigration issues, 
laws, and policies.
Jones-Correa, Michael, ed. 2001. Governing American Cities. 
New York: Russell Sage. Focusing on the newest wave of 
immigration, this volume looks at its impact on the nation’s 
major metropolitan areas. The volume provides what is 
clearly among the best analyses of how immigration has 
reshaped urban politics in the United States. It covers espe-
cially New York, Los Angeles, and Miami. It provides valu-
able insight into the new American urban melting pot by 
offering sophisticated theoretical perspectives on intergroup 
coalitions and conflicts. It provides rich details and analysis 
of class and generational dynamics as those forces influence 
the political behavior of diverse immigrant groups.
Kastoryano, Riva. 2000. Negotiating Identities: States and 
Immigrants in France and Germany. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press. Immigration is even more hotly debated in 
Europe than in the United States. This pivotal work of action 
and discourse analysis draws on extensive field interviews 
with politicians, immigrant leaders, and militants to analyze 
interactions between the state and immigrants in France and 
Germany.
Kirstein, Peter N. 1977. Anglo over Bracero: A History of the 
Mexican Worker in the United States from Roosevelt to Nixon. 
San Francisco: R. and E. Research Associates. It is a thor-
ough, historical examination of the Bracero Program.
Kiser, George C., and Martha W. Kiser. 1979. Mexican Workers 
in the United States. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico 

	
Resources	
293
Press. It is another thorough and scholarly historical analysis 
of the Bracero Program.
Kivisto, Peter, and Thomas Faist. 2010. Beyond a Border: The 
Causes and Consequences of Contemporary Immigration. Thou-
sand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. It is a comprehensive look 
at legal and illegal immigration to America with a focus on 
both push and pull factors.
Koehn, Peter. 1991. Refugees from Revolution: U.S. Policy and 
Third World Migration. Boulder, CO: Westview. An examina-
tion of how U.S. policy responds to refugee flows and immi-
gration waves induced by the political turmoil in “Third 
World” countries.
Krauss, Erich, and Alex Pacheco. 2004. On the Line: Inside the 
U.S. Border Patrol. New York: Citadel/Kensington. An “insid-
er’s” look, journalistic in style, at the Border Patrol, its dif-
ficult tasks, resource problems, successes, and shortcomings.
Kraut, Alan. 1994. Silent Travelers: Germs, Genes and the “Immi-
grant Menace.” Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University 
Press. An interesting examination of the problem of mass 
migration and disease spread, intentional or unintentional, 
from epidemics to pandemics.
Kretsedemas, Philip, and Ana Aparico, eds. 2004. Immigrants, 
Welfare Reform and the Poverty of Policy. Westport, CT: Praeger 
Press. A comprehensive, scholarly examination of the linkage 
between immigration and welfare reform, with a focus on 
the 1996 acts covering welfare reform, which denied access 
to welfare programs to illegal immigrants.
Kyle, David, and Rey Koslowski. 2001. Global Human Smug-
gling: Comparative Perspectives. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hop-
kins University Press. A  careful examination of human 
smuggling in historical and comparative perspectives, it 
examines the emergence of international law and of a global 
moral order of human rights while at the same time explor-
ing the economic and political facets of illegal trafficking in 

294	
Illegal Immigration
humans. It is a comprehensive examination of illegal immi-
gration and those who profit most from it.
Lamm, R. D., and G. Imhoff. 1985. The Immigration Time 
Bomb: The Fragmenting of America. New York: Truman 
Tally/E. P. Dutton. Published prior to the enactment of 
IRCA, this book marshals all the arguments and data to 
show the cost or detrimental effects of large-scale immigra-
tion, in particular, those used to promote policy reforms to 
“control” the illegal immigration flow. The arguments offered 
here continue to inform former governor Lamm’s positions 
against illegal immigration today.
LeMay, Michael. 1987. From Open Door to Dutch Door: An 
Analysis of U.S. Immigration Policy since 1820. New York: 
Praeger. A historical overview of immigration policy making 
since 1820, it presents the “immigration waves” and distin-
guishes four phases of immigration policy that dominated 
historical eras in reaction to preceding waves, employing a 
“door” analogy to characterize each phase or era of immigra-
tion policy.
LeMay, Michael. 1994. Anatomy of a Public Policy: The 
Reform of Contemporary American Immigration Law. West-
port, CT: Praeger. A detailed “case study” examination of 
the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 and 
the Immigration Act of 1990. It examines the political 
movement to enact IRCA and IMMACT of 1990, using 
roll-call analysis and interviews with key political actors to 
explain why the laws were passed and what key provisions 
each contained.
LeMay, Michael. 2004. U.S. Immigration: A Reference Hand-
book. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. It is a library reference 
volume examining legal immigration from 1965 to 2004 in 
the standard format of the Contemporary World Issues series 
of volumes.
LeMay, Michael, ed. 1989. The Gatekeepers: Comparative 
Immigration Policies. New York: Praeger. It is a collection of 

	
Resources	
295
six original essays, each examining the immigration policy 
and the reforms thereof of six leading immigration-receiving 
nations.
LeMay, Michael, ed. 2013. Transforming America: Perspectives 
on Immigration, 3  vol. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. 
A three-volume series of chapters by some 30 authors from 
various disciplinary perspectives, it covers immigration from 
1820 to 2012 in a thorough view of immigration to the 
United States in all its complexities.
LeMay, Michael, and Elliott Robert Barkan, eds. 1999. U.S. 
Immigration and Naturalization Laws and Issues: A Documen-
tary History. Westport, CT: Greenwood. This unique volume 
summarizes 150 documents covering all major laws and 
court cases concerning U.S. immigration and naturalization 
law from colonial times to 1996.
Light, Paul C. 2002. Homeland Security Will Be Hard to Man-
age. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. Written just 
after the enactment of the law establishing the new Depart-
ment of Homeland Security, this expert in bureaucratic 
management offers insights and accurate foresight as to the 
difficulties the new DHS will face as its managers attempt 
to merge the operations, procedures, and political/bureau-
cratic cultures of so many diverse agencies into the new 
mega-department.
Loescher, Gil, and Ann Dull Loescher. 1994. The Global Ref-
ugee Crisis. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. Another in a 
series of volumes on contemporary issues viewed in a global 
perspective, this volume thoroughly examines the current 
global refugee crisis in the “research handbook” format of 
the series.
Loucky, James, Jeanne M. Armstrong, and Larry J. Estrada, 
eds. 2006. Immigration in America Today: An Encyclopedia. 
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. This book offers an inter-
disciplinary overview of complex immigration-related issues 
with alphabetically arranged entries that define key terms 

296	
Illegal Immigration
and concepts, provide a historical background, and suggest 
future trends.
Lutton, Wayne, and John Tanton. 1994. The Immigration 
Invasion. Petoskey, MI: Social Contact. An “indictment” 
of immigration, discussing all of the problems that can be 
viewed as the cause and marshaling every conceivable argu-
ment against it.
Lynch, James P., and Rita J. Simon. 2003. Immigration the 
World Over: Statutes, Policies, and Practices. Lanham, MD: 
Rowman & Littlefield. It is a current and thorough, though 
necessarily somewhat brief, presentation of immigration pol-
icies and practices of the major immigration-receiving coun-
tries of the world in a comparative perspective.
Majaridge, Dale. 1996. The Coming White Minority: Califor-
nia’s Eruptions and America’s Future. New York: Random 
House. An argument for all of the ills that can (will) befall 
the United States as the rest of the nation experiences Cali-
fornia’s high level of immigration, both legal and illegal.
Martinez, Oscar J. 1994. Border People: Life and Society in U.S.-
Mexico Borderlands. Tucson: University of Arizona Press. 
This is a sociological examination of life in the borderlands. 
It shows how the flow of immigrants affects people living in 
and working across the Mexican-U.S. border in all aspects of 
their daily lives.
Massey, Douglas, Jorge Durand, and Nolan Malone. 2002. 
Beyond Smoke and Mirrors: Mexican Immigration in an Era 
of Economic Integration. New York: Russell Sage. The authors 
provide a fresh perspective of Mexican migration history by 
systematically tracing the predictable consequences of highly 
unsystematic policy regimes. They provide an incisive analy-
sis of the current policy dilemma by marshaling new and 
compelling evidence to expose the flagrant contradiction of 
allowing the free flow of goods and capital but not people, 
and they argue for much-needed policy reforms.

	
Resources	
297
Massey, Douglas, et al. 1987. Return to Aztlan: The Social Pro-
cess of International Migration from Western Mexico. Berke-
ley: University of California Press. It is a thorough and 
many-viewed examination of Mexican immigration—both 
legal and illegal—to the southwestern United States (the 
mythical Aztlan of the title).
Marshall, Ray. 2007. Immigrants for Shared Prosperity—A 
Framework for Comprehensive Reform. Washington, DC: 
Economic Policy Institute. Former U.S. secretary of labor 
proposes and explains what provisions need to be included 
in any comprehensive immigration reform package, and why 
comprehensive immigration reform is essential to the future 
of the United States and the vibrancy of its economy.
McCarthy, Kevin F., and George Vernez. 1997. Immigration in 
a Changing Economy: California’s Experience. Santa Monica, 
CA: Rand Corporation. Another in a series of volumes and 
studies that emerged from the massive Rand Corporation 
study of immigration policy post-IRCA, this volume is an 
authoritative case study of the impact of immigration on 
California’s economy and politics.
McDowell, Lorraine, and Paul T. Hill. 1990. Newcomers in 
America’s Schools. Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation. 
One of the volumes of careful research that the Rand Cor-
poration published on the impact of the new immigration 
flow, it focuses on the effects of large-scale legal and illegal 
immigration on California’s schools.
Merino, Noel. 2012. Illegal Immigration. Boston: Cengage/
Greenhaven. Merino presents a thorough discussion of ille-
gal immigration in a reference-volume format.
Miller, Debra. 2014. Immigration. Boston: Cengage/Green-
haven. This is an exhaustive examination of legal immigra-
tion in a library reference-volume format.
Morris, Milton. 1985. Immigration: The Beleaguered Bureaucracy. 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. Then a senior fellow 

298	
Illegal Immigration
at Brookings, author Morris addresses the concerns over con-
temporary immigration by focusing on the character and per-
formance of the INS and the State Department’s Bureau of 
Consular Affairs. His focus is on the problems resulting from 
serious shortcomings in administration: inadequate funding, 
unclear objectives, and faulty structures and procedures.
Motomura, Hiroshi. 2006. Americans in Waiting: The Lost Story 
of Immigration and Citizenship in the United States. New 
York: Oxford University Press. Professor Motomura provides 
an in-depth look at Chinese and Japanese Americans and 
their struggles to secure citizenship rights from a nation that 
had institutional racism infusing its immigration and natu-
ralization policy and law.
Motomura, Hiroshi. 2014. Immigration Outside the Law. New 
York: Oxford University Press. An immigration history scholar 
examines the complex issue of unauthorized immigration.
Muller, Thomas, and Thomas Espanshade. 1985. The Fourth 
Wave. Washington, DC: Urban Institute. This groundbreak-
ing book was among the first and most thoroughly analytical 
examinations of the post-1965 wave of immigrants to the 
United States. It contributed significantly to renewing the 
scholarly debate over large-scale immigration and its costs 
and benefits to the United States.
National Research Council. 1997. The New Americans: Eco-
nomic, Demographic, and Fiscal Effects of Immigration. Wash-
ington, DC: NRC/National Academy Press. Continuing to 
contribute to the now extensive literature examining the new 
(post-1965) wave of immigration and the degree to which 
the new immigrants are incorporating into U.S. society 
socially, politically and economically, it is in many ways The 
Fourth Wave circa 1997.
Navarro, Armando. 2005. American Political Experience in 
Occupied Aztlan. Lanham, MD: Alamira Press. A  critical 
look at the Hispanic/Latino, and especially Mexican immi-
grants’ struggle with American politics and their minority 
status as a result of racial attitudes.

	
Resources	
299
Nevins, Joseph. 2002. Operation Gatekeeper: The Rise of “Illegal 
Aliens” and the Making of the U.S.-Mexican Boundary. New 
York: Routledge. A comprehensive look at the illegal immi-
gration problem, flow, and resulting impact of the U.S.- 
Mexican border sector.
O’Hanlon, Michael E., et  al. 2002. Protecting the Ameri-
can Homeland: A  Preliminary Analysis. Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution. The authors offer a four-tier plan for 
efforts of the Bush administration and Congress. This book 
includes a rationale and recommendations on spending and 
projected costs to the private sector, and the restructuring of 
federal agencies associated with establishing a Department 
of Homeland Security. Its recommendations include the 
restructuring of the INS and the Border Patrol as well as visa 
and naturalization activities into the new DHS.
Papademetriou, Demetrios, Alexander Aleinikoff, and D. W. 
Meyers. 1999. Reorganizing the U.S. Immigration Function: 
Toward a New Framework for Accountability. Washington, 
DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. This vol-
ume presents the Carnegie Endowment “plan” for restructur-
ing the INS and reforming immigration policy. Many of its 
ideas and concerns are reflected in the new DHS approach. 
Its analysis presents a good picture of “what was wrong” with 
the INS and with U.S. immigration policy, justifying the 
concern that it “was broken and needed fixing” in such a 
way that a major reorganization was necessary rather than 
the incremental “tinkering” with reform that characterized 
efforts during the 1990s.
Papademetriou, Demetrios, and Mark Miller, eds. 1984. The 
Unavoidable Issue. Philadelphia: Institute for the Study of 
Human Issues. This volume is an impressive array of essays 
discussing all of the major issues of U.S. immigration policy 
and the need for reforms in policy; it is a particularly good 
review of the topic for the 1965 to 1980 period.
Passel, Jeffrey. 1994. Immigrants and Taxes: A  Reappraisal 
of Huddle’s “The Cost of Immigration.” Washington, DC: 

300	
Illegal Immigration
Urban Institute. A  major and important “reappraisal” of 
how to measure the costs of immigration, it rebuts Huddle’s 
approach and finds a considerable difference in such costs, 
essentially concluding that immigration is a positive benefit 
rather than a significant cost to the U.S. economy.
Passel, Jeffrey S. and Rebecca L. Clark. 1994. How Much Do 
Immigrants Really Cost? Washington, DC: Urban Institute. 
Another extensive “rebut” of Huddle’s analysis, it helped to 
fuel the academic debate over how to measure the costs and 
benefits of immigration, both legal and illegal, that raged 
during the 1990s as a result of the Huddle thesis.
Payan, Tony. 2006. The Three U.S.-Mexico Border Wars: Drugs, 
Immigration and Homeland Security. Westport, CT: Praeger 
Securities International. This book examines the post-9/11 
attack responses to the most affected area—the U.S.-Mexico 
border. It analyzes the comprehensive security strategy in place 
on the border and the effects of those three “wars” on drugs, 
immigration enforcement, and the war on terror.
Perea, Juan F. 1997. Immigrants Out! The New Nativism and 
the Anti-Immigrant Impulses in the United States. New York: 
New York University Press. A  collection of 18 original 
essays by leading immigration scholars, this volume uses 
interdisciplinary perspectives to examine the current surge 
in nativism in light of past waves. It examines the relation-
ship between the races and the perception of a national 
immigration crisis.
Portes, Alejandro, ed. 1996. The New Second Generation. 
New York: Russell Sage. It details the transformation of the 
postimmigrant generation during the current age of diversity 
in the United States.
Portes, Alejandro, ed. 1998. The Economic Sociology of Immi-
gration. New York: Russell Sage. It is a culminating volume 
presenting the new scholarship on the “incorporation” of 
the second-generation immigrants—politically, socially, and  
economically.

	
Resources	
301
Portes, Alejandro, and Ruben G. Rumbaut. 2001. Legacies: 
The Story of the Immigrant Second Generation. Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press; New York: Russell Sage. This 
study reports on a series of surveys of immigrant children 
and their parents conducted between 1992 and 1996 in 
Miami, Florida, and San Diego, California. It uses inter-
view data and school records to provide an overview of the 
“New Americans,” emphasizes segmented assimilation and 
its determinants, how to measure “making it” in the United 
States, immigrants’ outlooks on the United States, language 
and ethnic identities, the role of schools and education on 
the psychology of the second generation, and the causes and 
consequences of school achievement or failure.
Portes, Alejandro, and Ruben G. Rumbaut, eds. 2001. Eth-
nicities: Children of Immigrants in America. New York: Rus-
sell Sage. These two volumes present the findings of an 
extensive examination of the “political incorporation” of 
second-generation immigrants. Whether in the summary 
volume above or in this collection of essays, the authors detail 
that while assimilation was in their view in the past a relatively 
homogeneous linear process, now it is a segmented one.
Powell, John. 2005. Encyclopedia of North American Immigra-
tion. New York: Facts on File. This narrative history shows 
how, for good or bad, immigration has shaped and trans-
formed the nation. It covers the magnitude and diversity of 
migration to North America. It is a solid, one-volume ency-
clopedia with more than 300 A–Z entries, and an extensive 
bibliography of resources for further research.
Power, J. Gerard, and Teresa Byrd, eds. 1998. U.S. Mexico 
Border Health: Issues for Regional and Migrant Populations. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. The editors have 
compiled a wide range of studies involving health care and 
promotion on the U.S.-Mexico border.
Pozzetta, George, ed. 1991. Contemporary Immigration and 
American Society. New York: Garland. The volume is the last 

302	
Illegal Immigration
in a series of 20 relating to immigration history. It is somewhat 
spotty and varied in its quality and relevance to contemporary 
society. It covers many groups that one would expect to see: 
Filipinos, Mexicans, Koreans, Haitians, Hispanics, Cubans, 
and Vietnamese. Yet some that one might look for are puz-
zlingly absent: Cambodians, Laotians, Chinese, Indians, 
Canadians, and Russians. No attention is paid to the influx 
during the 1980s from Ireland or Eastern Europe. The collec-
tion contains 23 articles drawn from 17 journals that provide a 
useful cross-disciplinary perspective. By selecting sources only 
from previously published articles rather than original essays, 
the volume’s impact is limited in terms of contributing signifi-
cantly to the literature. Devoid of any post-IRCA perspective, 
it is limited too in its contribution toward new methodologies 
and interpretations relevant to contemporary U.S. society.
Reimers, David. 1985. Still the Golden Door: The Third World 
Comes to America, 2nd ed. New York: Columbia University 
Press. One of the foremost immigrant historians in the United 
States examines post-1965 and particularly post-1980s 
immigration, including the impact of IRCA (1986) and 
IMMACT (1990) and the unforeseen consequences of those 
laws. It assesses these laws as less restrictive in their impact 
than opponents of the laws suggest.
Russell, James C. 2004. Breach of Faith: American Churches and 
the Immigration Crisis. Raleigh, NC: Representative Govern-
ment Press. A polemical perspective on the role Christian 
churches play in the illegal immigration problem, it presents 
the view of the conservative right on the cultural wars engen-
dered by the process.
Salzman, H., et al. 2013. Guestworkers in the High-Skill U.S. 
Labor Market: An Analysis of Supply, Employment and Wage 
Trends. Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute. Econo-
mists use a rich cache of economic data in table and figures 
to examine the need for and impact of guest-worker pro-
grams like the STEM approach.

	
Resources	
303
Sergeant, Harriet. 2001. Immigration and Asylum in the U.K. 
London: Chameleon. This volume presents the results of 
a study of the Center for Policy Studies on the issues of 
immigration and asylum and how they impact the United 
Kingdom. It is a scholarly and objective examination of the 
issue.
Simcox, David. 1985. Measuring the Fallout: The Cost of the 
IRCA Amnesty after 10 Years. Washington, DC: Center for 
Immigration Studies. An extensive examination of the costs 
attributable to the legalization program of IRCA, it under-
scores the CIS’s calls for strictly limiting immigration and its 
opposition to another amnesty.
Simcox, David. 1997. U.S. Immigration in the 1980s: Reap-
praisal and Reform. Boulder, CO: Westview/Center for 
Immigration Studies. This collection of 16 original essays by 
outstanding immigration scholars from various fields sur-
veys current literature on immigration and its effects on the 
United States and on the problems or advantages that immi-
gration brings to a rapidly changing society. Its major topics 
include effects on U.S. workers, national unity, California 
as the nation’s immigrant laboratory, demographics of dis-
placement, and approaches to a more rational, enforceable 
immigration policy.
Smith, James P., and Barry Edmonston, eds. 1998. The New 
Americans: Studies on the Economic, Demographic, and Fis-
cal Effects of Immigration. Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press. It offers a comprehensive and objective anal-
ysis of the new immigration, both legal and illegal, and the 
broad-ranging effects of the issue.
Stedman, Stephen J., and Fred Tanner, eds. 2003. Refugee 
Manipulations: War, Politics and the Abuse of Human Suffer-
ing. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. Exam-
ines why and the ways in which armed groups manipulate 
refugees and how and why international actors assist in their 
manipulation.

304	
Illegal Immigration
Suarez-Orozco, Marcelo, ed. 1998. Crossings: Mexican Immi-
gration in Interdisciplinary Perspectives. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press. Scholars from numerous disciplines exam-
ine the multifaceted effects of Mexican immigrant labor, pre-
dominantly undocumented labor, on the United States and 
on the immigrants themselves.
Tomasi, Lydio, ed. In Defense of the Alien. New York: Center 
for Migration Studies. Annual. These volumes are a series 
providing the collected essays and papers presented at the 
Center for Migration Studies’ annual National Conference 
on Immigration Law held in Washington, D.C. Each vol-
ume presents essays from leading government officials, law-
yers, scholars, and immigration policy practitioners focused 
around the issues and topics discussed at the annual national 
convention.
Torr, James D. 2004. Homeland Security. San Diego: Green-
haven. It provides a highly critical but comprehensive 
examination of the homeland security issue, and its myriad 
ramifications. Torr is very skeptical as to the effectiveness of 
the “super-agency” approach to the massive new department, 
focusing on the largely unanticipated managerial problems 
of the new department.
Ueda, Reed. 1994. Postwar Immigrant America: A Social History. 
Boston: Bedford/St. Martin’s. Using an interdisciplinary focus 
and joining history and several social science perspectives, this 
volume probes the impact of arriving ethnic groups on the 
historical foundations of the United States, stressing how the 
new Asian and Hispanic immigrants revitalized political and 
civic institutions inherited from the Founders and reshaped 
the debate over how democracy could encompass ethnic 
groups with greater inclusiveness and egalitarianism. It uses 
demographic and quantitative analysis applied to the rise of 
worldwide immigration as well as sociology and demography 
to understand the development of group life. Political science 

	
Resources	
305
and law illuminate the relationship of immigration to U.S. 
government and its ethnic policies.
Warner, Judith A. 2008. Battleground Immigration, 2 vol. West-
port, CT: Greenwood Press. The political battles over legal 
and undocumented immigrants within U.S. borders have 
characterized much of American politics since 1965, This 
book examines the most critical issues surrounding immigra-
tion, including its effects on the economy, education, and 
employment. It assesses the viability of the foreign-born in 
the United States with an emphasis on post-9/11 security 
and border control issues.
Warner, Judith A. 2010. U.S. Border Security: A  Reference 
Handbook. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. Warner exam-
ines thoroughly the challenges facing U.S. Customs and 
Border Patrol over the 2,000-mile U.S.-Mexico border. It 
contrasts the border security issues pre- and post-9/11, the 
controversial topics of illegal immigration, counterterrorism, 
drugs and weapons trafficking, and human smuggling; their 
impact on border security; and the effects of the war on ter-
rorism on civil and human rights.
Wolbrecht, Christina, and Rodney E. Hero. 2005. The Poli-
tics of Democratic Inclusion. Philadelphia: Temple University 
Press. This is an innovative examination of the complexity 
of the incorporation process for immigrants, explaining the 
“inclusion” or “incorporation” approach to the issue instead 
of the linear “assimilation” approach.
Wolfe, Alan. 2002. One Nation, After All. New York: Penguin 
Putnam. A “tour” through what middle-class Americans 
think about God, country, family, racism, welfare, immigra-
tion, homosexuality, the Right, the Left, and each other.
Wood, Andrew G., ed. 2008. The Borderlands: An Encyclopedia 
of Culture and Politics on the U.S. Mexico Divide. Westport, 
CT: Greenwood Press. This volume presents a broad collec-
tion of essays from multidisciplinary backgrounds. It uses 

306	
Illegal Immigration
the encyclopedia approach to examine the complex issues 
around migration flows, legal and illegal, across the U.S.-
Mexico borders.
Yang, Philip O. 1995. Post-1965 Immigration to the United 
States: Structural Determinants. Westport, CT: Praeger. Yang 
examines why countries differ in the scale of legal permanent 
immigration in the period since 1965 by investigating the 
structural determinants of cross-national variation during 
this time. He seeks the integration and development of inter-
national migration theories. He discusses the policy implica-
tions of how the United States should regulate and control 
immigration.
Yans-McLaughlin, Virginia, ed. 1990. Immigration Reconsid-
ered: History, Sociology, and Politics. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press. A collection of 11 original essays by scholars 
presenting at a conference in New York City in 1986, this 
volume covers various topics: immigration patterns, ethnic-
ity and social structure, the study of new immigration, and 
new approaches to the study of immigration, and the politics 
of immigration policy and its reform.
Zhou, Min, and Carl Bankston III. 1999. Growing Up Amer-
ican: How Vietnamese Children Adapt to Life in the United 
States. New York: Russell Sage. This book examines the sin-
gle largest group of refugee children—the Vietnamese—as 
they experienced growing up in the United States. Chapters 
examine such topics as the scattering by the war, resettle-
ment, reconstruction of an ethnic community, social net-
works, language and adaptation, experiences in adaptation 
in U.S. schools, bicultural conflicts, gender role changes, and 
delinquency.
Zimmerman, Klaus F. 2002. European Migration: What Do We 
Know? New York: Oxford University Press. It is a thorough 
assessment of the current situation regarding migration in 
a comprehensive range of European countries. It includes 
chapters on the United States, Canada, and New Zealand for 

	
Resources	
307
comparative purposes. Each country “case study” is written 
by a local expert, and the overall editor is one of Europe’s 
leading scholars on the economics of immigration.
Zolberg, Aristide. 2008. A Nation by Design: Immigration Policy 
in the Fashioning of America. Cambridge, MA: Russell Sage 
Foundation at Harvard University Press. The late Harvard 
professor explores American immigration policy from the 
colonial period to the present, discussing how it has been 
used as a tool of nation building. It covers policy at the local 
and state levels and profiles the vacillating currents of opin-
ion on immigration throughout American history. It exam-
ines legal, illegal, and asylum-seeking immigration.
Zolberg, Aristide, Astri Suhrki, and Sergio Aguayo. 1989. 
Escape from Violence: Conflict and the Refugee Crisis in the 
Developing World. New York: Oxford University Press. It is a 
cogent treatment of the causes of refugee flows, emphasizing 
domestic and international causes and regional differentia-
tions around the globe. Case studies are rich in detail; analy-
sis is systematic and comprehensive.
Zucker, Norman, and Naomi Flink Zucker. 1987. The Guarded 
Gate: The Reality of American Refugee Policy. San Diego: Har-
court Brace, Jovanovich. It is a critical assessment of U.S. 
asylum policy, stressing the political elements of the asy-
lum debate. Emphasis is on U.S. government asylum policy 
rather than refugee policy broadly construed.
Zuniga, Victor, and Ruben Hernandez-Leon, eds. 2005. New 
Destinations: Mexican Immigration to the United States. New 
York: Russell Sage. An eclectic array of essays on the new 
Mexican immigration to the United States, it includes both 
legal and illegal immigration matters. It looks at several U.S. 
communities where they settle and how they are shaping and 
shaped by their new areas of settlement. It uses census data 
to discern the historical evolution of Mexican immigration to 
the United States, discussing the demographic, economic, and 
legal factors that led to recent moves to areas beyond where 

308	
Illegal Immigration
their predecessors had settled, concluding that undocumented 
aliens did a better job than did their documented peers in inte-
grating into the local culture. It looks at paternalism and xeno-
phobic aspects of local residents toward the new immigrants 
and the strong work ethic of the migrants, and provides hope-
ful examples of progress. It is the first scholarly assessment of 
the new settlements and experiences in the Midwest, North-
east, and the deep South, and of America’s largest immigrant 
group enriched by the perspectives from demographers, soci-
ologists, folklorists, anthropologists, and political scientists.
Leading Scholarly Journals
American Demographics
Published 10 times per year, this peer-reviewed journal is an 
outlet for multidisciplinary articles dealing with all topics 
related to demography as well as occasional articles and reflec-
tive essays on migration, legal and illegal immigration, and an 
annual resource guide.
American Journal of Sociology
A scholarly, peer-reviewed quarterly journal of sociology, with 
frequent articles concerning assimilation and integration, social 
trends, and policies regarding migration and legal and illegal immi-
gration, it also has book reviews on immigration-related topics.
Citizenship Studies
This quarterly journal publishes internationally recognized 
scholarly work on contemporary issues in citizenship, human 
rights, and democratic processes from an interdisciplinary per-
spective covering politics, sociology, history, and cultural studies.
Columbia Law Review
It is a law review published eight times per year and frequently 
has case reviews and analytical articles and original essays deal-
ing with immigration law matters.

	
Resources	
309
Demography
This peer-reviewed journal of the Population Association of 
America publishes scholarly research of interest to demogra-
phers from a multidisciplinary perspective, with emphasis on 
social sciences, geography, history, biology, statistics, busi-
ness, epidemiology, and public health. It publishes specialized 
research papers and historical and comparative studies.
Ethnic and Racial Studies
It is a bimonthly journal for the analysis of race, ethnicity, and 
nationalism in the present global environment. It is an inter-
disciplinary forum for research and theoretical analysis, using 
disciplines of sociology, social policy, anthropology, political 
science, economics, geography, international relations, history, 
social psychology, and cultural studies.
Ethnohistory
A quarterly publication of the Journal of the American Society 
for Ethnohistory, it contains articles of original research, com-
mentaries, review essays, and book reviews.
Ethnology
This international journal of culture and social anthropology pub-
lishes original research articles by scientists of any country regard-
ing cultural anthropology with substantive data. Topics of interest 
relate to ethnicity, social integration, and migration adaptation.
Foreign Affairs
This bimonthly magazine publishes articles and original essays 
on topics related to foreign policy, including policy related to 
both legal and illegal migration, by both scholars and practi-
tioners in the field. It regularly publishes related book reviews.
Georgetown Immigration Law Journal
This quarterly law review is the most specifically related 
law journal dealing with U.S. immigration law, its current 

310	
Illegal Immigration
developments, and reform-related matters concerning all three 
branches of the U.S. government, and frequently focusing on 
illegal immigration. It contains case reviews, articles, notes and 
commentaries, and workshop reports devoted to the topic.
Geographical Journal
This quarterly academic journal of the Royal Geographical 
Society publishes research reports and review articles of refer-
eed articles related to all subjects concerning geography, often 
dealing with international migration matters.
Geographical Review
The quarterly journal of the American Geographical Society, 
it publishes research on all topics related to geography: hence, 
occasional ones deal with legal and illegal migration and immi-
gration reform, and with the incorporation of immigrants. It 
also publishes related book reviews.
Harvard Law Review
This law review is published eight times per year. It contains original 
articles, case reviews, essays, commentaries, and book reviews occa-
sionally on topics related to U.S. immigration law and its reform.
Identities
Identities explores the relationship of racial, ethnic, and 
national identities and power hierarchies within national and 
global arenas. Its interdisciplinary focus uses social, political, 
and cultural analyses of the processes of domination, struggle, 
and resistance. It stresses class structures and gender relations 
integral to both maintaining and challenging subordination.
INS Reporter
It is a quarterly publication that provides brief surveys of recent 
developments in U.S. immigration law.

	
Resources	
311
INS Statistical Yearbook
It was an annual publication giving statistical data in text, 
graphic, and tabular form. The latest “official” numbers on 
U.S. immigration, the yearbook is now published by the DHS.
International Migration
This quarterly is an intergovernmental publication featuring 
documents, conference reports, and articles dealing with inter-
national migration topics.
International Migration Review
The leading quarterly journal in the field of migration, IMR 
contains current research articles, book reviews, documents, 
and bibliographies.
International Organizations
This journal is published quarterly by MIT Press for the World 
Peace Foundation. It contains articles on all aspects of world 
politics and international political economy.
International Review of the Red Cross
This journal, published six times annually, contains articles on 
international humanitarian law and policy matters.
International Social Sciences Journal
This quarterly journal is published by Blackwell Publishers for 
UNESCO. It regularly contains articles concerning interna-
tional migration and its impact on societies and social systems, 
and other topics related to UNESCO.
International Studies Quarterly
This is another scholarly quarterly journal published by Black-
well Publishers (as above).

312	
Illegal Immigration
International Studies Review
This quarterly journal is another published by Blackwell, with 
contact information as listed earlier. The journal is published 
for the International Studies Association. It contains original 
scholarly articles of research, review essays, book reviews, and 
an annual special issue on a theme.
Journal of American Studies
Published three times per year, this multidisciplinary, scholarly 
refereed journal is multinational with an emphasis on articles 
on politics, economics, and geography, and with book reviews 
that will often relate to immigration matters.
Journal of Economic History
This journal publishes original scholarship on the study of eco-
nomic aspects of the human past from a diversity of perspec-
tives, most notably history and economics.
Journal of Economic Issues
This is a scholarly economics journal covering all aspects of 
economic issues, with occasional original research on immigra-
tion and migration with a focus on economic impact, labor 
market issues, and so on. Each issue has book reviews of related 
matters as well.
Journal of Economic Perspectives
This journal of the American Economic Association publishes 
occasional symposium issues and, regularly, original scholarly 
articles, features, and economic analysis on a variety of public 
policy issues, including both legal and illegal immigration, and 
reviews of related books.
Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies
Published by the Sussex Center for Migration Research at the 
University of Sussex, the journal presents quality research on 

	
Resources	
313
all forms of migration and its consequences, with articles on 
ethnicity, ethnic relations and ethnic conflict, race and rac-
ism, multiculturalism and pluralism, nationalism and transna-
tionalism, citizenship and integration, identity and hybridity, 
globalization and cosmopolitanism, policy debates, and theo-
retical papers.
Journal of Intercultural Studies
This journal presents international research related to intercul-
tural studies across national and disciplinary boundaries. One 
issue per year is thematic. It examines common issues across 
a range of disciplinary perspectives. Peer-reviewed research, 
theoretical papers, and book reviews are included in each issue.
Journal of International Refugee Law
This quarterly publishes articles on refugee law and policy mat-
ters, including legislation, documentation, and abstracts of 
recent publications in the field.
Journal of Migration and Human Security
A publication of the Center for Migration Studies of New York, 
it is an online, peer-reviewed public policy academic journal 
focusing on the broad scope of social, political, and economic 
dimensions of human security. It publishes an annual, bound 
volume of its articles.
Migration News
This monthly newsletter, published by the University of Cali-
fornia Davis, concerns all manner of topics related to migra-
tion, especially how illegal immigration impacts U.S. society.
Migration World
This journal publishes articles and information about migra-
tion and refugee problems worldwide in a readable and acces-
sible way. It is a good source for school and college reports.

314	
Illegal Immigration
National Identities
This journal is published three times annually focusing on iden-
tity/ethnicity by examining how they are shaped and changed, 
and on the transmission/persistence of national identities.
Patterns of Prejudice
It is a journal providing a forum for exploring the historical 
roots and contemporary varieties of demonizations of “the 
other.” It probes language and construction of “race,” nation, 
color, and ethnicity as well as the linkages between these cate-
gories. The journal also discusses issues and policy agenda, such 
as asylum, illegal immigration, hate crimes, Holocaust denial, 
and citizenship.
Policy Studies Journal
This journal of the Policy Studies Organization is produced 
at Iowa State University, College of Education. It is published 
quarterly with articles related to all issues of public policy and 
has occasional symposium issues and regular book reviews.
Policy Studies Review
As Policy Studies Journal, this journal is also a product of the 
Policy Studies Organization.
Political Science Quarterly
This quarterly scholarly journal discusses public and interna-
tional affairs. It is nonpartisan, with scholarly reviewed articles 
devoted to the study and analysis of government, politics, and 
international affairs, with original articles and essays, review 
essays, and book reviews.
Race Ethnicity and Education
This interdisciplinary refereed journal publishes international 
scholarship, research, and debate on issues concerning the 

	
Resources	
315
dynamics of race, racism, and ethnicity in educational policy, 
theory, and practice, focusing on the interconnections between 
race, ethnicity, and multiple forms of oppression including 
class, gender, sexuality, and disability.
Refugee Reports
This is a monthly report of information and documents con-
cerning refugees and the legislation, policies, and programs 
affecting them. A year-end statistical issue is published every 
December.
Refugee Survey Quarterly
This quarterly lists abstracts of the many publications concern-
ing refugees, including a selection of “country reports” and one 
on human rights–related legal documents.
Social Identities
This interdisciplinary and international journal focuses on 
issues addressing social identities in the context of transform-
ing political economies and cultures of postmodern and post-
colonial conditions.
Social Science Quarterly
Published for the Southwestern Social Science Association by 
Blackwell, this interdisciplinary quarterly has articles of original 
research, review essays, book reviews, and occasional sympo-
sium issues and contains articles dealing with U.S. immigration 
and illegal immigration policy, and issues related to the incor-
poration of immigrants and their children into U.S. society.
State of the World Population
This is an annual publication that covers world population 
growth and problems resulting from it. It includes the latest in 
official statistics.

316	
Illegal Immigration
Reports and Government Documents
There are innumerable government reports and studies from a 
variety of agencies that emphasize immigration laws, immigra-
tion policies, and their impact. This section lists some exem-
plary sources.
Center for Immigration Studies (CIS). 2005. “Economy 
Slowed but Immigration Didn’t: The Foreign-Born 
Population, 2000–2004.” Washington, DC: CIS, A Steven 
Camaota study and analysis.
Congressional Budget Office. 2007. “The Impact of 
Unauthorized Immigrants on the Budgets of State and 
Local Governments. http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/
files/12–6-immigration.pdf.
Department of Homeland Security. 2011. Yearbook of 
Immigration Statistics, 2010. Washington, DC: Department 
of Homeland Security.
Department of Homeland Security. 2013. Characteristics 
of H-1B Specialty Occupation Workers, Fiscal Year 2012, 
Annual Report. Washington, DC: Department of 
Homeland Security.
Ewing, Walter A. 2005. “The Economics of Necessity.” 
Immigration Policy in Focus 4, no. 3 (May): 8. An American 
Immigration Law Foundation report, it can be found at 
http://www.ailf.org/ipc/economicsofnecessityprint.asp. 
Accessed on July 14, 2006.
General Accounting Office. 1990. “Immigration Reform: 
Employer Sanctions and the Question of Discrimination.” 
Report to Congress. Study measuring, and finding, the 
increase in discrimination as a result of IRCA.
General Accounting Office. 2004. Overstay Tracking: A Key 
Component of Homeland Security and a Layered Defense. 
GAO-04–82. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing 
Office.

	
Resources	
317
Immigration and Naturalization Service. 1992. An 
Immigrant Nation: United States Regulation of Immigration, 
1798–1991. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing 
Office. It is a summary report giving the broad outline of 
the history of immigration regulation through the 1990 
IMMACT.
Immigration and Naturalization Service. 1995. “Illegal Aliens: 
National Net Cost Estimates Vary Widely.” Washington, 
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. It is a summary of 
all the various studies that found pro and con measures of 
the net cost effect of immigration on the U.S. economy.
Immigration and Naturalization Service. 1997. “Illegal Aliens: 
Extent of Welfare Benefits Received on Behalf of U.S. 
Citizen Children.” Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office. It is GAO’s study measuring the extent of 
welfare given to the children of illegal aliens.
Immigration and Naturalization Service. 1998. “Illegal Aliens: 
Significant Obstacles to Reducing Unauthorized Alien 
Employment Exists.” Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office.
Immigration and Naturalization Service. 1999a. “Illegal 
Immigration: Status of Southwest Border Strategy 
Implementation.” Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office.
Immigration and Naturalization Service. 1999b. “Welfare 
Reform: Many States Continued Some Federal or 
State Benefits for Immigrants.” Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office.
Immigration and Naturalization Service. 1999c. “Welfare 
Reform: Public Assistance Benefits Provided to Recently 
Naturalized Citizens.” Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office.
Immigration and Naturalization Service. 2000a. “Alien 
Smuggling: Management and Operational Improvements 

318	
Illegal Immigration
Needed to Address Growing Problem.” Washington, DC: 
U.S. Government Printing Office. It is GAO’s report on 
alien smuggling with estimates of its extent and suggestions 
to curb the trend.
Immigration and Naturalization Service. 2000b. “H-1B 
Foreign Workers: Better Controls Needed to Help 
Employers and Protect Workers.” Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office.
Immigration and Naturalization Service. 2000c. “Illegal 
Aliens: Opportunities Exist to Improve the Expedited 
Removal Process.” Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office.
Immigration and Naturalization Service. 2004. “Overstay 
Tracking: A Key Component of Homeland Security and 
a Layered Defense.” GAO-04082. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office.
Lee, Margaret. 2006. “U.S. Citizenship of Persons Born 
in the United States of Alien Parents.” Congressional 
Service Research Report. http://www.ilw.com. Accessed on 
May 30, 2010.
Pew Hispanic Center. 2003. “Remittance Senders and 
Receivers: Tracking the Transnational Channels.” 
Washington, DC: Pew Hispanic Center.
Select Commission on Immigration and Refugee Policy 
(SCIRP). 1981. Final Report. Washington, DC. Final 
report of the SCIRP, which laid the groundwork for what 
became the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 
1986 (IRCA), with its employer sanctions and amnesty 
provisions as well as expanded seasonal agricultural workers 
provisions.
Stana, Richard M. 2003. “Homeland Security: Challenges 
to Implementing the Immigration Interior Enforcement 
Strategy.” GAO-03–660T. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office.

	
Resources	
319
Suro, Roberto, and Audrey Singer. 2002. “Latino Growth 
in Metropolitan America: Changing Patterns, New 
Locations.” Survey Series, Census 2000. Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution. http://www.brookings.edu/es/urban/
publications/surosingerexsum.htm.
Suro, Roberto, and Sonya Tafoya. 2004. “Dispersal and 
Concentration: Patterns of Latino Residential Settlement.” 
Washington, DC: Pew Hispanic Center.
United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS). 
2014. “Consideration of Deferred Action for Childhood 
Arrivals by Fiscal Year, Quarter, Intake Biometrics, and 
Case Studies, 2012–2014. USCIS Resources/Reports. 
http://www.uscis.gov/default/files/uscis/resources/reports.
UN High Commission for Refugees. 2006. “The U.N. 
Refugee Agency.” http://www.unhcr.org/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/
home. Accessed on February 9, 2006.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 2001. “The Foreign-Born 
Population in the United States, March 2000, Current 
Population Reports.” Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2000. 
“Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) 
Program: Third Annual Report to Congress.” Washington, 
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Justice. April 2002. “Follow-Up Report 
on INS Efforts to Improve the Control of Nonimmigrant 
Overstays.” Report No. 1–2002–006. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Justice. “Undocumented Aliens in the 
U.S.” http://www.usdoj.gov/graphics/aboutinst/statistics/
illegalalien/index.htm. Accessed on November 14, 2001.
U.S. Department of Labor. 1999. “International Migration 
to the United States, 1999.” Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office.

320	
Illegal Immigration
U.S. Department of State. 1999. “U.S. Refugee Admissions 
for Fiscal Year 2000.” Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office.
U.S. Department of State. 2000. “Proposed Refugee 
Admissions for Fiscal Year 2001: Report to Congress.” 
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Nonprint Resources
America 101. 2005. 86 minutes, color.
Fabia Films
Two Mexican brothers get smuggled over the border to try 
and find their “American dream.”
Angel Island: A Story of Chinese Immigration. 2002. 12 minutes, 
color.
Films for the Humanities and Sciences
From 1910 to 1943, Chinese immigrants passed through 
Angel Island in San Francisco Bay, sometimes called the 
Ellis Island of the West. They were legally discriminated 
against, and this program looks at how two women are 
raising funds and awareness to have the old immigration 
station restored. Slated for destruction, the station was 
spared in 1970 when a park ranger discovered, beneath 
layers of paint, poems written by anxious detainees over 
their fear of deportation.
Animas Perdidas (Lost Souls). 2010. 60 minutes, color.
ITVS/PBS
A documentary by Monica Navarro, it chronicles the 
emotional journey of her uncle, a U.S. military veteran 
deported to Mexico, and uncovers the secrets of her family’s 
past, when they had to start over to forge new lives in an 
unfamiliar “homeland.”
The Asianization of America. 2002. 26 minutes, color.
Films for the Humanities and Sciences

	
Resources	
321
This program examines the role of Asian Americans half a 
century after repeal of the Chinese Exclusion Act, seeking 
to determine what accounts for their success in academia 
and the extent to which they can, should, or want to blend 
into the American melting pot.
Backyard (El Traspatio). 2009. 122 minutes, color.
Tarazod films, Tardon/Berman Productions
A feature film starring Jimmy Smits, it tells the true story 
of the border town of Juarez, Mexico, where since the 
mid-1990s, thousands of women have gone missing or 
turned up as sun-burnt corpses in the Sonora Desert.
Beyond Borders: The Debate over Human Migration. 2007. 51 
minutes, color.
Brian Ging Films
The debate between Noam Chomsky and Jim Gilchrist 
presents both sides of the controversy over illegal 
immigration to the United States and what should be done 
about the problem.
Biomedical Weapons: A Modern Threat. 2003. 25 minutes, color.
Insight Media
This program defines biochemical weapons and discusses 
the manufacture of such weapons as anthrax and mustard 
gas. It provides simulations of biochemical attack and 
outlines their psychological affects. It explores the history 
of biochemical terrorism and addresses the likelihood of a 
terrorist attack.
Bioterrorism. 2001. 50 minutes, color.
Insight Media
The anthrax episode in the United States in the wake of 
9/11 raised awareness of the possibility of a wide-scale 
bioterrorism attack in the United States. In this program, 
officials from the departments of state and defense and 
leading bioterrorism experts including several veterans of 

322	
Illegal Immigration
the massive Soviet bioweapons program discuss the  
many obstacles standing in the way of a successful  
attack.
Borderline. 2012. 90 minutes, color.
Tall Tale Productions
This documentary explores the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks 
as experienced by ordinary people living and working along 
the U.S.-Canada border.
Caught in the Crossfire: Arab-Americans in Wartime. 2002. 54 
minutes, color.
First Run/Icarus Films
This film covers New York City’s Arab population caught in 
the cross fire of President Bush’s War on Terrorism, and 
the cold welcome it now experiences. CNN diplomatic 
correspondent for a leading independent Arab newspaper, 
Raghida Dergham, is featured, as are Khader El-Yateem, an 
Arab Christian, whose Arabic Lutheran Church serves as 
a haven for Brooklyn Arabs, Muslim and Christian alike; 
and Ahmed Nasser, a Yemen-born police officer stationed 
at Ground Zero after 9/11, who relates how Arab American 
calls for help when harassed were ignored in his precinct. 
Film shows how they are torn between their adopted 
country and their homelands as they wrestle with their 
place in wartime America.
Chasing the Sleeper Cell. 2003. 60 minutes, color.
Insight Media
This PBS program features a joint investigation by Frontline 
and the New York Times into an ongoing domestic terrorism 
case involving Al Qaeda operatives and the U.S. citizens 
they trained. It discusses FBI and CIA effectiveness in 
combating sleeper cells.
Conspiracy: The Anthrax Attacks. 2004. 50 minutes, color.
Insight Media

	
Resources	
323
This program looks at how, less than two weeks after 9/11, 
news outlets and prominent senators became targets of 
the first biowarfare attacks in U.S. history. It investigates 
mysteries surrounding the strain of anthrax used, which had 
been under the control of the U.S. biodefense industry.
Coyote. 2007. 94 minutes, color.
Side Street Productions
Filmed in Los Angeles, this documentary directed by Brian 
Petersen tells the tale of two young Americans who decide 
to begin smuggling immigrants into Arizona for profit. In 
Spanish and English.
Crossing Over. 2009. 113 minutes, color.
MGM/The Weinstein Company
An independent crime film drama, this feature film starring 
Harrison Ford, Ashley Judd, Ray Liotta, and Jim Sturgess 
is a multicharacter canvas showing how immigrants of 
different nationalities struggle to achieve legal status in Los 
Angeles.
Death on a Friendly Border. 2002. 26 minutes, color.
Filmmakers Library
The border between Tijuana and San Diego is the most 
militarized border between “friendly” countries anywhere. 
Since 1994, when the United States began Operation 
Gatekeeper, on average one person per day dies trying 
to cross. This film puts a face on that daily tragedy by 
following the story of a young woman who makes the 
perilous journey, with its hardships of heat, thirst, and 
abusive border guards.
The Double Life of Ernesto Gomez. 2001. 54 minutes, color.
Filmmakers Library
This film focuses on 15-year-old Ernesto Gomez, who has 
two identities, two families, and three nations: the United 
States, Mexico, and Puerto Rico. It follows his journey from 

324	
Illegal Immigration
Mexico to the United States to meet his Puerto Rican birth 
mother and to learn of his heritage. This award-winning 
film documents his struggle for identity.
The Dream Is Now. 2013. 31 minutes, color.
At http://www.thedreamisnow.org/
This video is a moving and thought-provoking look at 
the undocumented youth in America directed by Davis 
Guggenheim, the Academy-award-winning director of 
documentary films. It became a documentary important in 
the political and public opinion battles over the Dream Act 
and President Obama’s DACA executive action. It is both 
moving and thought provoking. This short video brings the 
pressing issue to the nation’s attention to debate, to discuss, 
and for viewers to decide for themselves.
Dying to Get In: Undocumented Immigration at the U.S.-Mexico 
Border. 2005. 40 minutes, color.
Films for the Humanities and Sciences
A documentary film by Christopher Deufert, directed by 
Brett Tolley, who imbedded himself with a group of 
Mexicans crossing the U.S.-Mexico border, it presents their 
story as they make the journey across the border.
The 800-Mile Wall. 2009. 90 minutes, color.
Jack Lorenz Productions/Gatekeepers Productions
An award-winning film by John Carlos Frey, it is a powerful, 
independent film about the border fence.
El Chogui: A Mexican Immigrant Story. 2002. 57 minutes, color.
Filmmakers Library
This film follows a young peasant, Louis Miquel, from 
Oaxaca, Mexico, as he tries to lift his family out of poverty 
by boxing. He immigrates to the United States, as did 
countless of his compatriots. The film follows his transition 
over six years, from his tension-filled, illegal border crossing 

	
Resources	
325
with his sisters, to later when he brings his four brothers to 
California.
English Only in America. 2002. 25 minutes, color.
Films for the Humanities and Sciences
When California passed its “English only” law, it set off a 
storm of legal and social debate that continues to rage. This 
film interviews persons pro and con the English-only policy 
from social, legal, and education perspectives.
Facing Up to Illegal Immigration. 2004. 23 minutes.
Films Media Group
Discussion of the issue of whether there is a realistic way to 
stop illegal immigrants at America’s borders. It grapples 
with the fact that the world’s only superpower cannot 
seem to control its borders and cannot seem to function 
without illegal immigrants. An ABC News special, it offers 
a balanced look at the illegal immigration situation in the 
United States, addressing issues such as the liability of 
porous borders in a time of terrorism, or the need—like it 
or not—for illegal aliens in the workforce and whether they 
really take jobs away from U.S. citizens or whether they are 
doing work that Americans themselves are unwilling to do.
From a Different Shore: The Japanese-American Experience. 
2002. 50 minutes, color.
Films for the Humanities and Sciences
Japanese Americans are often considered a “model minority.” 
This video explores their experiences from the first 
immigrants, the Issei, through their children, the Nissei, 
who endured confinement in camps during World War 
II, to their grandchildren, through three families whose 
members span all three generations.
From the Other Side. 2002. 99 minutes, color.
Icarus Films

326	
Illegal Immigration
With technology developed by the U.S. military, the 
INS has stemmed the flow of illegal immigrants in San 
Diego. But for the desperate, there are still the dangerous 
deserts of Arizona, where renowned filmmaker Chantel 
Akerman shifts her focus. It is a multiple-award-winning 
documentary film.
The Golden Cage: A Story of California’s Farmworkers. 1990. 29 
minutes, color.
Filmmakers Library
A modern “Grapes of Wrath,” this film offers a vivid and 
moving portrait of contemporary farmworkers using 
historical footage, interviews, newspaper clippings, and 
black-and-white stills. It traces the history of the United 
Farm Workers union from the 1960s to 1990, showing the 
tactics used by many companies to evade using union labor. 
It shows candid interviews with legal and illegal migrant 
workers, growers, doctors, and others.
Human Contraband: Selling the American Dream. 2002. 22 
minutes, color.
Films for the Humanities and Sciences
This ABC news program investigates the lucrative trade in 
smuggling into Mexico desperate human beings from all 
over the world, who view that country as the back door to 
the United States. INS officials discuss multilateral efforts 
to combat illegal entry to the United States.
Illegal Americans. 2002. 45 minutes, color.
Films for the Humanities and Sciences
This CBS news documentary looks at the hazardous enterprise 
of immigrants coming to the United States illegally, 
focusing on their plight. It examines their living conditions 
in detention centers, the growing strains they place on the 
U.S. cities. It looks at those who provide assistance persons 
who manage to evade capture, the sweatshops that, exploit 

	
Resources	
327
them, and the efforts of some who attempt to beat the 
system by using false IDs and marriages of convenience.
Immigrant Nation: The Battle for the Dream. 2010, 96 minutes, 
color.
A documentary from Esau Melendez, it won an award at the 
Oaxaca Film Fest.
The story of the modern immigrant rights movement and 
struggle seen through the eyes of a single mother, Elvira 
Arellano, who fought against her forced deportation and 
separation from her American-born child.
Immigration: Who Has Access to the American Dream? 2002. 28 
minutes, color.
Films for the Humanities and Sciences
Program reviews how new policy directives affect the survival 
of new immigrants to the United States, covering a variety 
of questions, such as how many immigrants should be 
allowed in; who, if anyone, should receive preferential 
treatment; and how illegal immigrants should be handled. 
It examines those issues from various perspectives: those 
seeking entry and organizations that assist them; an 
immigration judge; an immigrant from Kenya; and a 
Korean immigrant owner of a New York City deli.
Inside the Terror Network. 2001. 60 minutes, color.
Insight Media
This PBS video examines three of the 9/11 hijackers for 
insight into the making of a radical terrorist. It traces their 
movements in the days, months, and years leading up to 
the 9/11 attacks and shows how they slipped between the 
cracks of U.S. law enforcement.
Interpol Investigates: One-Way Ticket. 2004. 60 minutes, color.
Insight Media
This program examines illegal immigration issues, 
highlighting the case in which a boat carrying more than 

328	
Illegal Immigration
300 illegal Chinese immigrants ran aground in New 
York harbor. It shows how the case led domestic and 
international investigators to the gangs of Chinatown and 
on a seven-year hunt to find the leaders of the smuggling 
operation.
Legacy of Shame: Migrant Labor, an American Institution. 2002. 
52 minutes, color.
Films for the Humanities and Sciences
This video is a follow-up to the 1960 award-wining Harvest 
of Shame. It documents ongoing exploitation of America’s 
migrant labor by highlighting efforts made to protect 
them. It investigates pesticide risks, uneven enforcement 
of employment and immigration regulations, and peonage 
conditions. It covers efforts of rural legal services as 
advocates for this “silent-minority.” It is a CBS news 
documentary.
Legal Limbo: The War on Terrorism and the Judicial Process. 
2004. 23 minutes, color.
Films Media Group
It asks the question, does the war on terrorism require a 
fundamental shift in the U.S. judicial process? Highlighting 
two case studies, the program examines whether the judicial 
process was sidestepped by the Bush administration in the 
interest of combating terrorism. Cases examined are those 
of Zacharias Mousssauoui and his role in the attacks of 
9/11; and Jose Padilla, a U.S. citizen accused of plans to use 
a “dirty bomb.”
Liberty and Security in an Age of Terrorism. 2003. 23 minutes, 
color.
Films Media Group
This film grapples with the issues of balance between national 
security needs of the post-9/11 world and the basic civil 
liberty values central to our society. Using a hypothetical 

	
Resources	
329
scenario, a panel of persons confronts the issues and 
wrestles with the high-stakes questions in discussing 
the implications of the USA Patriot Act, surveillance of 
suspects, closed deportation hearings, demands for student 
information, and just what constitutes an unaligned 
combatant.
Laredoans Speak: Voices on Immigration. 2011. 75 minutes, 
color.
Border Town Pictures
Veteran actor Pepe Serna takes viewers through the issues 
involved in the debate over undocumented immigration 
through the eyes of citizens of Laredo, Texas. The film is 
directed by Victor Martinez.
The Line in the Sand. 2005. 100 minutes, color.
Sun Films, Inc.
A documentary film, it deals with the illegal immigration and 
security on the southern border of the United States and on 
the Minutemen Project.
Maid in America. 2005. 60 minutes, color.
PBS/ITVS
Three undocumented workers’ experiences are chronicled 
as they toil as cooks, housekeepers, and even surrogate 
mothers, often at the expense of their own families, as they 
attempt to nurture their American dreams.
A Nation of Immigrants: The Chinese-American Experience. 
2002. 20 minutes, color.
Films for the Humanities and Sciences
This video explores the plight of Chinese immigrants, 
including their hard work for pitifully low wages, racial 
discrimination, victimization in race riots, and so forth.
The Other Side of Immigration. 2010. 55 minutes, color.
Roy Germano Films, LLC

330	
Illegal Immigration
In English and Spanish, this documentary is based on 700 
interviews and is a thought-provoking and challenging 
film for audiences of all political and ideological sides of 
the illegal immigration debate. It puts real faces on illegal 
immigrants. It garnered a place on the American Library 
Association 2011 List of Notable videos for adults.
The Patriot Act under Fire. 2003. 23 minutes, color.
Films Media Group
For many, worrying about constitutional rights seems like 
an archaic luxury in an age of international terrorism. 
The need for tighter security made civil liberties seem 
less critical when the nation confronted such terrorism 
by passing urgent measures such as the USA Patriot Act, 
designed to defend the country. Two years after its passage, 
ABC News and Ted Koppel take a hard look at the law with 
representatives from the Justice Department, the ACLU, 
and others.
Precious Knowledge. 2011. 75 minutes, color.
Dos Vatos Productions, ITVS
Disenfranchised high school seniors become academic 
warriors and community leaders in Tucson, Arizona’s 
embattled ethnic studies classes while state lawmakers try to 
eliminate the program.
Sin Nombre (Without a Name). 2009. 96 minutes, color.
Creando Film, Focus Films Feature
This film won several awards at the 2009 Sundance Film 
festival. A Honduran teenager, Sayra, reunites with her 
father and tries to realize her dream of a life in the United 
States. Directed by Cary Toji Fukunaga, it is in Spanish 
with English subtitles.
The State of Arizona. 2014. 90 minutes, color.
PBS/ITVS, Latino Public Broadcasting Production
The turbulent battle over illegal immigration in Arizona that 
came to a head with passage of Arizona Senate bill 1070 

	
Resources	
331
frames this riveting documentary that tracks multiple 
perspectives as America eyes the results of its passage seen 
from all sides of the issue.
Stories from the Mines: How Immigrant Miners Changed Amer-
ica. 2002. 57 minutes, color.
Films for the Humanities and Sciences
America’s rise to superpower status was fueled to a great 
degree by the social and industrial impact of coal-mining 
in northeastern Pennsylvania. This meticulously researched 
program uses location footage, archival film, period photos, 
dramatizations, and academic commentary to examine U.S. 
labor. It vividly captures the agitation and the often-violent 
suppression that characterized the times and emphasizes 
the precedents, including child labor laws, and the right 
to collective bargaining, set against the stark backdrop of 
immigrant miners being exploited by industrialists.
The Terrorism Alert System. 2003. 23 minutes, color.
Insight Media
This video explains the now much maligned five-level 
terrorism alert system developed by the DHS. It provides 
recommendations to government and the private sector on 
responses to each level of risk.
They Come to America: The Cost of Amnesty. 2012. 99 minutes, 
color.
Corinth Films
A film by Dennis Lynch of FAIR, it depicts the human and 
financial costs of illegal immigration.
Those Who Remain. 2008. 96 minutes, color.
Sombre del Guyabo Productions
A documentary film directed by Carlos Hegerman, it tells 
an intimate and discerning tale depicting the impact of 
migration on families and communities left behind by loved 
ones who have traveled north to find work in the United 
States.

332	
Illegal Immigration
Ties that Bind: Immigration Stories. 2002. 58 minutes, color.
Films for Humanities and Sciences
This film examines the human drama behind the current 
immigration debate on both sides of the Texas/Mexico 
border while exploring the root causes of why Mexicans 
emigrate. Emphasis is on the role of transnational 
corporations and their social/economic impacts on both 
Mexicans and North Americans. It explores the increasingly 
restrictive nature of immigration policies, as well as the 
strong family values that immigrants bring with them and 
their positive impact on U.S. culture.
Trafficked: Children as Sexual Slaves. 2004. 52 minutes, color.
Filmmakers Library
The trafficking of women and children for the purpose of 
prostitution is a global problem. The United Nations 
estimates that more than 1 million children are forced into 
sexual slavery each year. This documentary follows Chris 
Payne, a former police officer turned private investigator, 
as he investigates this shocking crime. It focuses on the 
case of “Nikkie,” a young Thai girl found working in a 
brothel in Sydney who is hastily deported. Payne examines 
the circumstances that forced her into a brothel and what 
became of her after her deportation back to Thailand. His 
search leads him to Asia and the parents of another Thai 
“sex slave,” whose death in an immigration detention center 
made the headlines. A powerful documentary, it offers 
disturbing insight into the international sex trade.
The Undocumented. 2004. 90 minutes, color.
ITVS/Two Tone Production
Approximately 2,000 immigrants trying to cross the 
unforgiving Sonora Desert in search of a better life have 
perished trying to cross the U.S.-Mexico border. The film 
gives faces to some of the dead and follows their tragic, long 
journey home.

	
Resources	
333
Under the Same Moon. 2007. 106 minutes, color.
Creando Films
This documentary won a Sundance Film Award, Jury Prize in 
2007. Directed by Patricia Riggin, in Spanish and English, 
it follows a young Mexican boy who travels to the United 
States to find his mother after his grandmother passes away.
Wetback: The Undocumented Documentary. 2005. 96 minutes, 
color.
IMDb Productions
A Canadian documentary film, it chronicles the struggles and 
hardships of a handful of Mexicans trying to relocate to the 
United States.
When East Meets East. 2002. 53 minutes, color.
Films for Humanities and Sciences
This genre-breaking documentary explores the issues of ethnic 
and cultural identity through interviews with some of 
today’s most prominent Asian film figures.
With Us or against Us: Afghans in America. 2002. 27 minutes, 
color.
Filmmakers Library
This short documentary examines the experiences of Afghan 
immigrants in the United States and their plight facing 
discrimination and hysteria after the 9/11 attacks.


335
Precursor Legislation: Setting the Stage  
for Things to Come
1790  In one of its first official actions, the U.S. Congress 
establishes a uniform rule of naturalization that imposes a 
two-year residency requirement for aliens who are “free white 
persons of good moral character.”
1802  Congress revises the 1790 act to require a five-year resi-
dency requirement and that naturalizing citizens renounce al-
legiance and fidelity to foreign powers.
1819  Congress enacts law requiring shipmasters to deliver 
a manifest enumerating all aliens transported for immigration 
and requiring the secretary of state to inform Congress annu-
ally of the number of immigrants admitted. This act, for the 
first time, keeps count of the number of immigrants who enter 
“legally” for the purpose of permanent immigration. In short, 
it is the first official “immigration act.”
1848  Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo guarantees citizenship to 
Mexicans remaining in the territory ceded by Mexico to the 
United States. This action sets the first base for the flow of 
7	
Chronology
Community activists rally during an event on Deferred Action for Child-
hood Arrivals, DACA and Deferred Action for Parental Accountability, 
DAPA in downtown Los Angeles on February 17, 2015. The White House 
promised an appeal after a federal judge in Texas temporarily blocked Presi-
dent Barack Obama’s executive action on immigration and gave a coalition 
of 26 states time to pursue a lawsuit aiming to permanently stop the orders. 
(AP Photo/Nick Ut)

336	
Illegal Immigration
Mexicans to the United States and provides for a citizen base 
from Mexico into which future immigrants, both legal and un-
documented, can assimilate. It forges the first link into what 
develops as “chain migration” from Mexico and even Central 
America to the United States.
1855  Castle Garden becomes New York’s principal port of 
entry for legal immigration. Its volume of immigrants sets the 
stage for later development of “visa overstayers” who are able to 
remain because such extensive numbers overwhelm the ability 
of immigration authorities to keep accurate track of them.
1862  Congress enacts the Homestead Act, granting acres 
of free land to settlers who develop the land in frontier re-
gions and remain on it for five years, spurring heavy levels of 
immigration.
1868  The Fourteenth Amendment is ratified. It guarantees 
that all persons born or naturalized in the United States and 
subject to its jurisdiction are citizens and states that no state 
may abridge their rights without due process or deny them 
equal protection under the law. The amendment ensures cit-
izenship rights of the former slaves and thereby changes the 
“free white persons” phrase of citizenship to include blacks. It 
further establishes the supremacy of federal law over actions by 
state governments in matters pertaining to citizenship, natural-
ization, and immigration.
1870  Congress enacts a law granting citizenship to persons 
of African descent.
1882  Congress passes the Chinese Exclusion Act, barring 
the immigration of Chinese laborers for 10 years and denying 
Chinese eligibility for naturalization. The act is reenacted and 
extended in 1888, 1892, and 1904. Its harsh provisions induce 
many Chinese immigrants to get around the law by using falsi-
fied documents—such as “paper sons and daughters.” This sets 
a precedent for using phony documents by illegal aliens that 
persists to the present day.

	
Chronology	
337
1885  Congress passes an act making it unlawful for labor-
ers to immigrate to the United States under contract with a 
U.S. employer who in any manner prepays passage to bring the 
laborer to the country. In some ways it serves as the precursor 
to employers who hire illegal aliens using fake documents: the 
employer simply does not verify the accuracy of the documents, 
in some cases knowing or suspecting that they are illegal.
1886  Yick Wo v. Hopkins overturns a San Francisco munici-
pal ordinance against Chinese laundry workers as discrimina-
tory and unconstitutional on the grounds that the Fourteenth 
Amendment prohibits state and local governments from de-
priving any person (even a noncitizen) of life, liberty, or prop-
erty without due process.
1888  Congress expands the Chinese Exclusion Act by re-
scinding reentry permits for Chinese laborers and thus prohib-
iting their return (also known as the Scott Act).
1889  In the case of Chae Chan Ping v. United States, the Su-
preme Court upholds the right of Congress to repeal the certif-
icate of reentry as contained in the 1888 act, thereby excluding 
ex post facto certain Chinese immigrants who had previously 
entered legally.
1891  Congress expands the classes of individuals excluded 
from admission, forbids the soliciting of immigrants, and cre-
ates the position of superintendent of immigration.
1892  Ellis Island is opened as the nation’s leading port of 
entry. It becomes the source of many visa overstayers from Eu-
ropean countries.
1894  Congress extends the Chinese Exclusion Act and es-
tablishes the Bureau of Immigration within the Treasury 
Department, the first of several such home departments to im-
migration services.
1897  A federal district court decides the case In re Ro-
driquez. This west-Texas case affirms the citizenship rights of 
Mexicans based on the 1848 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo 

338	
Illegal Immigration
and notwithstanding that such persons may not be considered 
“white.”
1898  In the case of Wong Kim Ark v. United States, the Su-
preme Court rules that a native-born son of Asian descent is 
indeed a citizen of the United States despite the fact that his 
parents may have been resident aliens ineligible for citizenship.
1903  Congress enacts a law making immigration the respon-
sibility of the Department of Commerce and Labor.
1906  The Basic Naturalization Law codifies a uniform law 
for naturalization. With some amendments and supplements, 
it forms the basic naturalization law thereafter.
1907  Congress adds important regulations about issuing 
passports and the expatriation and marriage of U.S. women 
to foreigners. It continues to stir controversy until Section 3 of 
the act is repealed in 1922. President Theodore Roosevelt is-
sues an executive order, known as the Gentleman’s Agreement, 
by which Japan agrees to restrict emigration of laborers from 
Japan and Korea (which was then under Japanese jurisdiction). 
Picture brides, however, are permitted to emigrate. Congress 
passes the White-Slave Traffic Act forbidding importation of 
any woman or girl for the purpose of prostitution or similar 
immoral purposes.
1911  The Dillingham Commission issues its report, whose 
recommendations form the basis for the quota acts of the 
1920s.
1915  The Americanization/100 Percentism campaign begins 
and is supported by both government and private enterprise. 
These social movements represent the first attempt at “forced 
assimilation” encouraging the adoption of the English language 
and social customs. After World War I, its perceived failure 
will contribute to the disillusionment that set the stage for the 
quota acts of the 1920s.
1917  The United States enters World War I in April. Con-
gress enacts an immigration act that includes a literacy test and 
bars all immigration from a specified area known thereafter as 

	
Chronology	
339
the Asian barred zone. The Departments of State and of Labor 
issue a joint order requiring passports of all aliens seeking to 
enter the United States and requiring that the would-be en-
trants be issued visas by U.S. consular officers in their country 
of origin rather than seeking permission to enter the United 
States only when arriving at the port of entry. Puerto Ricans are 
granted U.S. citizenship.
1918  Congress gives the president sweeping powers to disal-
low the entrance or the departure of aliens during time of war. 
Similar presidential declarations are used in virtually all periods 
of war thereafter.
1919  Congress enacts a law granting honorably discharged 
Native Americans citizenship for their service during World 
War I. In the summer, the Red Scare following the Bolshevik 
revolution in Russia leads to the summary deportation of cer-
tain specified “radical” aliens deemed thereby to be a threat to 
U.S. security. It serves as a precursor to the USA Patriot Act in 
that respect.
1921  Congress passes the first Quota Act, in which im-
migration from a particular country is set at 3 percent of the 
foreign-born population from that country based on the 1910 
census.
1922  Congress passes the Cable Act, stating that the right 
of any woman to become a naturalized citizen shall not be 
abridged because of her sex or because she is a married woman 
unless she is wed to an alien ineligible for citizenship. This lat-
ter provision is later repealed.
1923  The U.S. Supreme Court rules in United States v. Bha-
gat Singh Thind that “white person” means those persons who 
appear and would commonly be viewed as white. Thus, East 
Asian Indians, although Caucasians, are not “white” and are 
therefore ineligible for citizenship through naturalization.
1924  Congress enacts the Immigration Act, known as the 
Johnson-Reed Act, setting the national-origin quota for a par-
ticular country at 2  percent of the foreign-born population 

340	
Illegal Immigration
from that country as of the census of 1890. This new system 
drastically shifts the sources of immigration from South, Cen-
tral, and Eastern Europe to Northwestern Europe. The act bars 
the admission of most Asians, who are thereby classified as 
“aliens ineligible for citizenship.” Congress passes an act grant-
ing citizenship to those Native Americans who had not previ-
ously received it by allotments under the 1887 Dawes Act or by 
military service during World War I.
1925  Congress establishes the Border Patrol, charged with 
policing the U.S. borders against illegal or undocumented 
entrants. It is also charged with finding and deporting illegal 
aliens from the interior who had managed to elude apprehen-
sion at the border.
1929  President Herbert Hoover proclaims new and per-
manent quotas in which national-origin quotas for European 
immigrants are based on the proportion of those nationali-
ties in the total population as determined by the 1920 census. 
The total number of such to be admitted is fixed at just over 
150,000.
1929–1939  U.S. immigration levels slow dramatically in re-
sponse to the worldwide Great Depression.
1940  Congress passes the Registration Law, which requires 
noncitizens to register their addresses every year. The process 
remains in effect until 1980. Millions of such forms are back-
logged and “lost” in INS warehouses. The failure of this pro-
gram contributes to the calls during the 1980s to crack down 
on illegal immigration and visa overstayers through enhanced 
capability of the INS, which is never achieved.
1941  President Franklin D. Roosevelt issues a proclamation 
to control persons entering or leaving the United States based 
on the first War Powers Act.
1942  Agreement entered with Mexico to allow migrant 
farmworkers to enter as temporary labor to satisfy wartime 
labor shortages in agriculture.

	
Chronology	
341
  President issues Executive Order 9066, leading to the evac-
uation, relocation, and internment of Japanese and Japanese 
Americans into relocation camps.
1943  The Supreme Court rules, in Hirabayashi v. United 
States, that the executive orders for curfews and evacuation 
programs were constitutional based upon “military necessity.”
1944  The Supreme Court decides Korematsu v. United States,  
again affirming the constitutionality of the executive orders 
excluding Japanese Americans from remaining in certain  
“excluded zones.”
  The Court also rules, in Ex Parte Mitsuye Endo, that the  
internment program was an unconstitutional violation of the 
habeas corpus rights of U.S. citizens—namely, the Nisei.
1949  Congress passes the Agricultural Act with provision 
to recruit temporary farmworkers from Mexico—the Bracero 
Program.
1956  President Eisenhower establishes a “parole” system for 
Hungarian freedom fighters. Two years later, Congress endorses 
the procedures to an act to admit Hungarian refugees.
1959  Congress amends the Immigration and Nationality 
Act of 1952 to provide for unmarried sons and daughters of 
U.S. citizens to enter as “nonquota” immigrants.
1960  Congress enacts a program to assist resettlement of 
refugees from communist countries who have been paroled by 
the attorney general (mostly Cubans).
  President John F. Kennedy is elected.
1963  President Kennedy is assassinated.
1964  Bracero Program ends.
The Revolving-Door Era, 1965–2000
1965  Congress passes the Immigration and Nationality 
Act. It amends the 1954 act by ending the quota system and 

342	
Illegal Immigration
establishing a preference system emphasizing family reunifica-
tion and meeting certain skill goals, standardizing admission 
procedures, and setting per-country limits of 20,000 for East-
ern Hemisphere nations, with a total of 170,000. The first ceil-
ing on Western Hemisphere immigration is set at 120,000.
1966  Congress amends the 1965 act to adjust Cuban Refu-
gee status. This sets up the distinction between refugees based 
on anticommunist U.S. foreign policy goals and those based on 
economic refugee status.
1967  UN Convention and Protocol on Refugees; 130 na-
tions sign the protocol accords. Refugees entering under its 
provisions (such as Cuban refugees) get resettlement assistance, 
whereas those entering based on economic grounds (Haitian 
refugees) are excluded.
1968  Bilingual Education Act is passed.
  President Johnson issues a proclamation on the UN Proto-
cols on the Status of Refugees, essentially endorsing the U.S. 
commitment to the multinational protocols.
1972  The House passes, but the Senate kills, a bill that 
would have made it illegal to knowingly hire an illegal alien. 
It becomes the first of many attempts prior to 1986 to impose 
what becomes known as “employer sanctions” for hiring illegal 
aliens.
  Haitian boat influx of illegal aliens begins arriving on the 
East Coast, mostly in Florida. Haitian detention camps are set 
up in Miami.
  France implements its regularization program.
1975  The fall of Saigon, then Vietnam along with Cambo-
dia and Laos, precipitates a massive flight of refugees to the 
United States from the Indochina region. Vietnamese, Cambo-
dians, and Laotians are classified as refugees from communist 
countries and are thereby assisted in resettlement and aided 
by “assimilation assistance” programs, many conducted by 
church-based organizations that assist immigrants.

	
Chronology	
343
  President Carter establishes and Congress funds the Indo-
chinese Refugee Resettlement Program.
  Soviet Jews begin fleeing in large numbers. Civil war in El 
Salvador leads to beginning of their refugee movement. Hai-
tians continue arriving in large numbers.
1976  Congress amends the 1965 act by extending the 
per-country limits of visa applicants on a first-come, first-served 
basis to Western Hemisphere nations as regulated by the pref-
erence system.
  The U.S. Supreme Court rules, in Matthews v. Diaz, that an 
alien has no right to Social Security or Medicare benefits.
  The Ford administration establishes a cabinet-level commit-
tee to study immigration options.
1978  President Carter and the Congress set up the Select 
Commission on Immigration and Refugee Policy (SCIRP).
1979  SCIRP begins its work.
  Vietnamese and Southeast Asian boat people influx.
1980  Congress passes the Refugee Act to systematize refugee 
policy. It incorporates the UN definition of refugee, accept-
ing 50,000 persons annually who have a “well-founded fear” of 
persecution based on race, religion, nationality, or membership 
in a social or political movement. Provides for admission of 
5,000 “asylum seekers.”
1981  Economic recession begins.
  March 1: The SCIRP issues its Final Report, recommending 
many changes in policy that form the basis of IRCA and other 
subsequent reform acts, several of which underlie proposed re-
forms even after 2001.
  President Reagan creates Task Force on Immigration and 
Refugee Policy, which reports in July.
  France implements its second regularization (amnesty) program.
1982  Federal district judge rules the lockup of Haitians un-
constitutional, ordering release of 1,900 detainees.

344	
Illegal Immigration
  Major bill to amend the Immigration and Nationality Act is 
introduced into House.
1983  Immigration reform bill is reintroduced into Congress.
  The Supreme Court rules, in INS v. Chadha et al., that the 
use of the legislative veto to overturn certain INS deportation 
proceedings, rules, and regulations by the House of Represen-
tatives was unconstitutional.
  France implements its third regularization program.
1984  Immigration reform bill passes in different versions in 
both chambers, dies in conference.
1985  Sen. Alan Simpson (R-WY) reintroduces what be-
comes known as the Simpson/Mazzoli/Rodino bill.
1986  The Supreme Court rules in Jean v. Nelson on INS de-
nial of parole to undocumented aliens. Congress enacts IRCA’s 
employer sanctions/legalization approach granting amnesty to 
about 1.5 million illegal aliens and more than 1 million special 
agricultural workers.
1987  In INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, by a vote of 6 to 3, the Su-
preme Court rules that the government must relax its stan-
dards for deciding whether aliens who insist that they would 
be persecuted if they returned to their homelands are eligible 
for asylum.
1988  The Senate passes, but the House kills, the Kennedy- 
Simpson bill in what becomes the 1990 act.
  U.S.-Canada Free Trade Implementation Act is signed.
  Congress amends the 1965 Immigration Act regarding H-1 
category use by nurses.
1989  Conference for Central American Refugee is held.
1990  Congress passes a major reform of the laws concerning 
legal immigration, setting new ceilings for worldwide immigra-
tion, redefining the preference system for family reunification 
and employment, and setting up a new category of preference 
called “the diversity immigrants.” It enacts special provisions 
regarding Central American refugees, Filipino veterans, and 

	
Chronology	
345
persons seeking to leave Hong Kong. Significant changes were 
included with respect to naturalization procedures.
1993  Congress ratifies the North American Free Trade Agree-
ment (NAFTA).
  Donald Huddle issues his report, “The Cost of Immigra-
tion,” setting off the decades-long debate over the relative costs 
and benefits of immigration and illegal immigration.
1994  California passes Proposition 187, the “Save Our State” 
initiative.
  Congress enacts the Violent Crime Control and Law En-
forcement Act, the “Smith Act,” giving the attorney general 
more authority to issue the “S Visas.”
  Congress passes the Violence against Women Act with pro-
vision to grant special status through cancellation of removal 
and self-petitioning provisions.
1995  Federal district court for California rules, in LULAC 
et al. v. Wilson et al., that many of Proposition 187’s provisions 
are unconstitutional.
  The General Accounting Office issues its first major and 
comprehensive report on the costs of illegal aliens to govern-
ments and to the overall economy.
  A Human Rights Watch report is highly critical of the INS 
and alleged abuses.
1996  June: The Board of Immigration Appeals (in re: Fauz-
iya Kasinga, A73479695) grants the first woman asylum on the 
basis of gender persecution (female genital mutilation).
  Congress enacts Personal Responsibility and Work Opportu-
nity Act (welfare reform), with numerous immigration-related 
provisions. Congress essentially enacts aspects of Proposition 
187 regarding welfare and other public benefits that had been 
overturned.
  Congress passes the Illegal Immigration Reform and 
Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA), the 60-plus 
immigration-related provisions of the Omnibus Spending Bill. 

346	
Illegal Immigration
It removes other welfare and economic benefits to illegal aliens 
and to some legal resident aliens.
  The Anti-terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 
1996 is passed. Among its provisions, it gives INS inspectors 
the power to make “on-the-spot credible fear” determinations 
involving asylum. It takes effect on April 1, 1997, as part of 
IIRIRA reforms beginning then.
  The Central American Regional Conference on Migration is 
held in Puebla, Mexico.
  Border Patrol makes a record 1.6 million apprehensions at 
the borders nationwide.
  Congress authorizes the addition of 1,000 new Border Pa-
trol agents annually.
1997  The Jordan Commission on Immigration Reform, set 
up by the 1996 law, recommends restructuring of the INS in 
its final report.
  The “Expedited Enforcement Rules” of the IIRIRA of 1996 
take effect at U.S. land borders, international airports, and sea-
ports to issue and enforce expulsion orders. Some 4,500 INS 
officers are added at 300 ports of entry.
  The General Accounting Office issues its Report on the Fis-
cal Impact of Newest Americans.
1998  President Clinton sends another immigration bill to 
Congress seeking, in part, a restructuring of the INS. It dies in 
committee when the Judiciary Committee begins hearings on 
impeachment.
  The Agriculture Job Opportunity Benefits and Security Act 
establishes a pilot program for 20,000 to 25,000 farmworkers.
  The Social Security Board of Trustees Report is issued, docu-
menting positive effects of immigration on the status of the 
Social Security fund but also on the dire, long-term crisis in the 
Social Security account as the U.S. population ages and fewer 
active workers support ever-growing numbers of retirees.

	
Chronology	
347
  Congress passes the American Competitiveness and Work-
force Improvement Act, which expands the H-1B category to 
the computer industry.
  California voters approve its Proposition 227, which ends 
bilingual education programs in state schools. The Children of 
Immigrants Longitudinal Study is issued.
  France implements its latest regularization program.
1999  The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace 
presents its International Migration Policy Program.
  Twenty-one nongovernmental organizations concerned with 
immigration call for INS restructuring, separation of enforce-
ment from visa and naturalization functions, and the sending 
of some functions to the DOL and HHS. INS provides Border 
Patrol/adjudication.
  In INS v. Aguirre-Aguirre (67 U.S.L.W. 4270), a unanimous 
Supreme Court rules that aliens who have committed serious 
nonpolitical crimes in their home countries are ineligible to 
seek asylum in the United States regardless of the risk of perse-
cution when returned to their countries.
  Rep. Christopher Smith (R-NJ) introduces the Trafficking 
Victims Protection Act of 1999.
  With a restored economy, President Clinton’s administration 
restores some of the benefits stripped away from legal aliens by 
the 1996 acts.
  November 22, 1999: Elian Gonzalez is rescued off the Flor-
ida coast.
  UNHCR issues guidelines related to Detention of Asylum 
Seekers in Geneva, Italy.
  Trafficking Victims Protection Act is passed.
2000  Negotiations regarding the Elian Gonzalez case begin.
  April: Attorney General Reno approves a Justice Depart-
ment “raid” on the Miami home to “return Elian Gonzalez” to 
his father in Cuba.

348	
Illegal Immigration
  May: Sen. Sam Brownback (R-KS) introduces a bill to es-
tablish “T-Visa.”
  June 1: In Gonzales v. Reno, the 11th circuit court rules that 
only the father of Elian Gonzalez can speak for the boy.
The Storm-Door Era: 2001–?
2001  September 11: Terrorists attack the World Trade Cen-
ter’s Towers in New York and the Pentagon in Washington, 
D.C. Immediate calls for a crackdown on terrorists begin.
  October 24: Congress passes the USA Patriot Act, granting 
sweeping new powers to the attorney general, the FBI, and the 
Department of Justice regarding immigrants and the author-
ity to detain “enemy combatants” involved in or suspected of 
terrorism.
  American Competitiveness in 21st Century Act is approved.
  “DREAM Act” bill introduced for first time. Reintroduced 
annually thereafter.
2002  The INS issues notice to several of the (now dead) hi-
jackers that they are given permission to enroll in U.S. flight 
training programs. Immediate calls for restructuring of INS to 
remove Border Patrol functions result.
  November: Congress establishes a cabinet-level Department 
of Homeland Security. The attorney general is granted sweep-
ing new powers for expedited removal. INS is extensively re-
structured into the new department. As of March 2003, the 
INS is abolished; the undersecretary for Border and Transpor-
tation Security begins oversight of Immigration Enforcement 
and Citizenship and Immigration Services.
  The United Nations issues its Protocols on Human Traffick-
ing and Immigrant Smuggling in Polermo, Italy. The protocols 
are signed by 141 countries.
2003  January: The Terrorist Threat Integration Center is 
created.

	
Chronology	
349
2004  The 9/11 Commission issues its report detailing the 
intelligence failures contributing to the success of the terrorist 
cells and their attacks.
  Congress passes the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Pre-
vention Act. It establishes the director of National Intelligence 
position. President Bush appoints John Negroponte, ambas-
sador to Iraq, as the first DNI.
  National Counterterrorism Center is created, largely housed 
and staffed in the CIA.
  Unauthorized immigrants within the United States reach an 
estimated record of 11 million. The ICE reports 1.1 million 
apprehensions at the nation’s borders.
2005  The House passes the Border Protection, Anti-terrorism 
and Illegal Immigration Control Act, also known as the REAL 
ID Act.
  The state of Virginia passes a law prohibiting unauthorized 
immigrants from receiving state or local public benefits.
  New Mexico passes a law extending state tuition to unau-
thorized immigrants.
  Arizona enacts a measure preventing cities from constructing 
day labor centers if such centers serve unauthorized immigrants.
  Nine states pass anti–human trafficking laws.
  Nine states pass laws banning the issuing of driver’s licenses 
(identification) to unauthorized immigrants.
  Three states pass laws mandating state and local law enforce-
ment agencies to enforce federal immigration laws against un-
authorized immigrants.
  The governors of Arizona and New Mexico issue “state of 
emergency” declarations because of the extreme adverse im-
pacts of illegal immigration on their respective states.
  The AIC launches a state-by-state campaign aimed at enact-
ing state laws against illegal immigration.
  The European Union ministers approve the use of biometric 
cards for immigration to EU countries.

350	
Illegal Immigration
  The Netherlands enacts stricter anti–illegal immigration 
measures.
  Hong Kong imposes the temperature screening of all incom-
ing travelers.
  England’s High Court approves several measures announced 
by the government designed to “crack down” on illegal immi-
grants and ease procedures to deport them.
  Japan begins fingerprinting all incoming immigrants.
  France expels thousands of illegal immigrants.
  Russia imposes fines for hiring illegal immigrants.
2006  Poland increases its border patrol by 50 percent.
  Congress extends the USA Patriot Act. In March it renews 
the Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appro-
priate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act 
of 2001 (the USA Patriot Act).
  Congress passes Secure Fence Act and President Bush signs 
it into law. The act authorizes construction of a 700-mile bol-
lard type fence along southwestern border.
  Advocacy group, Border Action Network, established.
  State of Colorado holds special session to pass measure impos-
ing fines on businesses that employ unauthorized immigrants.
2008  President Obama’s administration begins a surge in use 
of expedited removals to deport unauthorized immigrants.
2009  President Obama uses executive action to mitigate cer-
tain aspects of IIRIRA.
2010  State of Arizona enacts law mandating state and local 
police to demand anyone suspected of being illegal to show 
documents to prove their legal status.
  In Arizona v. U.S. (132 S.Ct.2492), the Supreme Court 
rules Arizona law unconstitutional.
  In Congress, Democrats introduce an “earned legalization” 
measure. Republicans block the measure.

	
Chronology	
351
2012  President Obama issues executive action order, DACA, 
granting temporary, conditional legal status to “Dreamer” 
children.
2013  Senate passes S.744, a comprehensive immigration 
reform measure in bipartisan vote. Measure is blocked in the 
House of Representatives and dies.
  Sen. David Vitter (R-LA) and Rep. Steve King (R-IA) intro-
duce bill to end birthright citizenship to persons born in the 
United States of parents who are in illegal status.
2014  President Obama issues executive order, DAPA, grant-
ing temporary, conditional legal residency to unauthorized im-
migrant parents of U.S. citizens and legal permanent resident 
aliens.
  Surge of arrivals of children unaccompanied by adults from 
El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras. President Obama 
grants “Temporary Protected Status” to about 5,000 such chil-
dren for whom it is deemed too unsafe to return to country of 
origin.
2015  House Republicans, Homeland Security Committee, 
introduce the Secure Our Borders First Act of 2015.
  February  17: U.S. District Judge, Texas, Andrew Hanen, 
places injunction on Obama administration’s implementation 
of executive actions of DAPA.
References
AFL-CIO, Department of Professional Employees. 2013. 
“Guest Worker Programs and the STEM Workforce.” 
http://www.dpeaaflcio.org/guest-worker-programs-an
d-the-science-technology-workforce. Accessed on 
February 20, 2015.
“Anti-Terror Law Passes Senate, Goes to House.” USA Today, 
March 3, 2006: A-1.

352	
Illegal Immigration
Bean, Frank, George Vernez, and Charles B. Keely. 1989. 
Opening and Closing the Doors. Santa Monica, CA: Rand 
Corporation; Washington, DC: Urban Institute.
Center for Immigration Studies. 2012. http://www.cis.org/
amnesty-and-the-employment-picture-for-less-educated.
Chiswick, Barry R., ed. 1988. The Gateway: U.S. Immigration 
Issues and Policies. Washington, DC: American Enterprise 
Institute.
Department of Homeland Security. 2002. “HR 5005: To 
Establish the Department of Homeland Security, and for 
Other Purposes.” http://www.dhs/hr5005.html. Accessed 
on April 20, 2003.
Department of Homeland Security. 2013. Characteristics of 
H-1B Specialty Occupation Workers: 2012 Annual Report. 
Washington, DC: Department of Homeland Security.
Department of Justice. 2002. “Follow-Up Report on 
INS Efforts to Improve the Control of Nonimmigrant 
Overstays.” Report No. 1–2002–006. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Government Printing Office.
Department of Justice. 2001. “Undocumented Aliens in 
the U.S.” Available at http://www.doj.gov/graphics/
Aboutins/statistics/illegalalien/index.htm. Accessed on 
November 14, 2001.
Erler, Edward and Margaret Stock. 2012. The Cost to 
Americans and America of Ending Birthright Citizenship. 
Washington, DC: National Foundation for American 
Policy.
Fix, Michael, ed. 1991. The Paper Curtain: Employer Sanctions’ 
Implementation, Impact, and Reform. Washington, DC: 
Urban Institute.
General Accounting Office. 1995. Illegal Aliens: National Cost 
Estimates Vary Widely. Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office.

	
Chronology	
353
General Accounting Office. 1998. Illegal Aliens: Significant 
Obstacles to Reducing Unauthorized Alien Employment Exist. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
General Accounting Office. 1999. Illegal Immigration: Status 
of Southwest Border Strategy Implementation. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
General Accounting Office. 2000. Illegal Aliens:  
Opportunities Exist to Improve Expedited Removal  
Process. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing 
Office.
General Accounting Office. 2002. Alien Smuggling: 
Management and Operational Improvement Needed 
to Address Growing Problem. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office.
General Accounting Office. 2004. Overstay Tracking: A Key 
Component of Homeland Security and a Layered Defense. 
GAO-04–82, May. Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office.
Glazer, Nathan, ed. 1985. Clamor at the Gates: The New 
American Immigration. San Francisco: ICS.
Guest Worker Alliance. http://www.imigration.about.com/
od/Browse-Topics/what-is-a-guest-worker-program.htm. 
Accessed on February 20, 2015.
Hayes, Patrick, ed. 2012. The Making of Modern Immigration: 
An Encyclopedia of People and Ideas. Santa Barbara, CA: 
ABC-CLIO.
Heritage Foundation. 2014. “The Dream Act in the NDAA:  
Wrong for National and Homeland Security.” http://www 
.heritage.org/research/reports/2014/the-Dream-Act- 
in-the-NDAA. Accessed on February 20, 2015.
Hirschman, Charles, Philip Kasinitz, and Joshua DeWind, 
eds. 1999. The Handbook of International Migration: The 
American Experience. New York: Russell Sage.

354	
Illegal Immigration
“House Passes Patriot Act.” San Bernardino Sun, 
March 8, 2006: A-3. http://www.politics.com/2013/
immigration-bill-2013-senate-pass. www.commondreams.
org/ . . . /federal-judge-texas-places-injunction-obama-
immigration. Accessed on February 24, 2015.
Information Plus. 2006. Immigration and Illegal Aliens: 
Burden or Blessing? Farmington Hills, MI: Thomson/Gale.
Kivisto, Peter and Thomas Faist. 2010. Beyond a Border: The 
Causes and Consequences of Contemporary Immigration. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
LeMay, Michael. 1987. From Open Door to Dutch Door: An 
Analysis of U.S. Immigration Policy since 1820. New York: 
Praeger.
LeMay, Michael. 1989. The Gatekeepers: Comparative 
Immigration Policies. New York: Praeger.
LeMay, Michael. 2004. U.S. Immigration: A Reference 
Handbook. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
LeMay, Michael, ed. 2013. Transforming America: Perspectives 
on Immigration, Vol. 3, Immigration and Superpower Status, 
1945 to Present. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
LeMay, Michael, and Elliott Robert Barkan. 1999. 
U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Law and Issues: 
A Documentary History. Westport, CT: Greenwood.
Marshall, Ray. 2009. Immigration for Shared Prosperity—A 
Framework for Comprehensive Reform. Washington, DC: 
Economic Policy Institute.
Massey, Douglas S., et al. 1987. Return to Aztlan: The Social 
Process of International Migration from Western Mexico. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Massey, Douglas S., Jorge Durand, and Nolan J. Malone. 
2002. Beyond Smoke and Mirrors: Immigration Policy in an 
Era of Free Trade. New York: Russell Sage.
Merino, Noel. 2012. Illegal Immigration. Boston: Cengage/
Greenhaven Press.

	
Chronology	
355
National Conference of State Legislatures. 2014. 
“Undocumented Student Tuition: State Action.” Denver, 
National Conference of State Legislatures.
National Law Center. 2014. “Deferred Action for Parents of 
Americans and Lawful Permanent Residents.” http://www.
nlc.org/dapa&daca.html.
Nevins, Joseph. 2002. Operation Gatekeeper: The Rise of the 
Illegal Aliens and the Making of the U.S.-Mexico Boundary. 
New York: Routledge.
Papademetriou, Demetrios, and Mark Miller, eds. 1984. The 
Unavoidable Issue. Philadelphia: Institute for the Study of 
Human Issues.
Preston, Julia. 2014. “Ailing Cities Extend Hand to 
Immigrants, National Desk,” New York Times, October 7: 
A-18.
Select Commission on Immigration and Refugee Policy. 
1981. Final Report. Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office.
Salzman, H. et al. 2013. Guestworkers in the High Skill U.S. 
Labor Market: An Analysis of Supply, Employment, and Wage 
Trends. Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute.
Stana, Richard M. 2003. Homeland Security: Challenges to 
Implementing the Immigration Interior Enforcement Strategy. 
GAO-03–660T. Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office.
Suro, Roberto. 2015. “California Dreaming: The New 
Dynamism in Immigration Federalism and Opportunities 
for Inclusion on a Variegated Landscape.” Journal of 
Migration and Human Security 3, no. 1: 1–25.
Tomas Rivera Policy Institute. 2014. “New Laws Extend 
Privileges Regardless of Status.” Los Angeles, CA: Tomas 
Rivera Policy Institute, University of Southern California.
U.S. Congress. Senate. Uniting and Strengthening America 
by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and 

356	
Illegal Immigration
Obstruct Terrorism (USA PATRIOT ACT) Act of 2001. HR 
3162. 107th Cong., 1st sess. http://www.epic.org/privacy/
terrorism/hr3162.html. Accessed on April 20, 2003.
Zuniga, Victor, and Ruben Hernandez-Leon, eds. 2005. New 
Destinations: Mexican Immigration to the United States. New 
York: Russell Sage.

357
Adjustment to Immigrant Status   a procedure whereby a 
nonimmigrant may apply for a change of status to lawful per-
manent resident if an immigrant visa is available for his or her 
country. The alien is counted as an immigrant as of the date of 
adjustment.
Alien   a person who is not a citizen or national of a given 
nation-state.
Amicus Curiae   a “friend of the court” legal brief submitted 
by a state or an interest group that is not a party to a case but 
that has an interest in the outcome of the case, in which it ar-
gues its legal position on the case.
Amnesty   is the legal pardoning of a person who entered the 
country illegally or is otherwise in nonlegal status and thereby 
changing his/her status to legal resident alien.
Asylee   a person in the United States who is unable or un-
willing to return to his/her country of origin because of perse-
cution or fear of persecution. The person is eligible to become 
a permanent resident after one year of continuous residence in 
the United States.
Birthright Citizenship   means that any person born within 
the territory of the United States is a U.S. citizen. It is guar-
anteed by the Fourteenth Amendment: “all persons born or 
naturalized in the United States and subject to the jurisdiction 
thereof, are citizens of the United States.”
Glossary

358	
Glossary
Border Card   a card allowing a person living within a certain 
zone of the United States border to legally cross back and forth 
for employment purposes without a passport or visa.
Border Jumper   is a slang expression indicating a person 
who crosses the U.S. border without documentation, such as a 
visa or border card.
Border Patrol   the law enforcement arm of the Department 
of Homeland Security.
Bracero Program   a temporary farmworker program that al-
lowed immigrant farmworkers to come to the United States 
for up to nine months annually to work in agriculture or the 
railroads. The Bracero Program lasted from 1942 to 1964.
Certiorari   a writ issued by the U.S. Supreme Court to send 
up for its review upon appeal the records of a lower court case.
Chain Migration   friends and relatives of immigrants drawn 
to specific locations by their compatriots already living in the 
United States.
Civil Law   regulates the relations between or among persons 
and corporations and the government, as distinct from crimi-
nal law, the offense against which is usually considered a misde-
meanor punished by fines rather than incarceration.
Criminal Law   regulates the relation between persons and the 
state, offenses against which may be misdemeanors or felonies 
and are punished by fines and incarceration of determined length.
Debarkation   leaving a ship or airplane to enter the United 
States.
Deportation   a legal process by which a nation sends indi-
viduals back to their country of origin after refusing them legal 
residence.
Diversity Immigrants   a special category of immigrants es-
tablished by the 1990 IMMACT to allow a certain number of 
visas to be issued to immigrants from countries that previously 
had low admission numbers.

	
Glossary	
359
DREAM Act   an acronym for Development, Relief, and Edu-
cation for Alien Minors. The proposed law, if enacted, would grant 
relief from deportation to certain specified alien minors brought 
to the United States as children who meet a number of specified 
conditions and allow them a path to eventual citizenship.
Due Process of Law   the constitutional limitation on gov-
ernmental behavior to deal with an individual according to 
prescribed rules and procedures.
Earned Legalization   a proposal to allow unauthorized im-
migrants to change their status to that of legal permanent resi-
dents by paying fines, and satisfying stipulated conditions akin 
to those who came as authorized permanent resident aliens.
Emigrant   an individual who voluntarily leaves his/her coun-
try of birth for permanent resettlement elsewhere.
Emigration   the act of leaving one’s place of origin or birth 
for permanent resettlement.
Employer Sanctions   a restrictive device of IRCA, it imposes 
penalties (fines or imprisonment or both) for knowingly hiring 
an illegal immigrant.
Equal Protection of the Law   the constitutionally guaran-
teed right that all persons be treated the same before the law.
EWIs   entered without inspection—another term for un-
documented or illegal aliens, those who came without proper 
documentation or visa.
Excluded Categories   a listing in immigration law of those 
persons denied entrance to the United States for stated reasons, 
for the purpose of permanent residence.
Exclusion   the denial of legal entrance to a sovereign territory.
Executive Action   is an order by the U.S. president or a state 
governor that stipulates certain changes in the implementation 
of policy prescribed by law.
Exempt   an individual or class or category of individuals to 
whom a certain provision of the law does not apply.

360	
Glossary
Expedited Removal   is a stipulation in law changing the 
procedures by which persons in the United States without legal 
status may be deported with fewer judicial process hurdles to 
do so.
Expulsion   the decision of a sovereign nation to legally com-
pel an individual to permanently leave its territory.
Felony vs. Misdemeanor   distinctions in criminal law stipu-
lating the severity of the breach of law and imposing certain 
lengths of incarceration or amounts of fines in punishment for 
breaking the criminal law.
Gang of Eight   groups of four Democrats and four Repub-
licans in the U.S. House of Representatives and in the U.S. 
Senate who worked together informally to fashion a proposal 
for comprehensive immigration reform.
Gateway States   the top seven or so immigrant-receiving 
states to which immigrants first migrate before moving on to 
settle in other states.
Green Card   a document issued by the DHS (previously by 
INS) that certifies an individual as a legal immigrant entitled to 
work in the United States.
Guest-Worker Program   a program enabling the legal 
importation of workers for temporary labor in specified 
occupations.
H-1B Visa   a category of temporary visa issued to a nonim-
migrant allowing employers who will employ guest-workers 
temporarily in a specialty occupation of field, for a stipulated 
period of time. 
Illegal Aliens   individuals who are in a territory without 
documentation permitting permanent residence.
Immediate Relatives   in recent immigration law, spouses, 
minor children, parents (of a citizen or a resident alien over 
21 years of age), and brothers or sisters of a U.S. citizen or 
permanent resident alien.
Immigrant   an alien admitted to the United States as a law-
ful permanent resident.

	
Glossary	
361
Intermestic Policy   blends inexorably laws or procedures of 
both national and international considerations.
Investor Immigrant   an individual permitted to immigrate 
based upon a promise to invest $1 million in an urban area or 
$500,000 in a rural area to create at least 10 new jobs.
Legalized Alien   an alien lawfully admitted for temporary 
or permanent residence under the Immigration Act of 1965 or 
under the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986.
Literacy Test   a device imposed upon immigrants by the 
1917 Immigration Act to restrict immigration to persons able 
to read and write.
L-Visa   is one of two types of visa issued for persons em-
ployed at a managerial or executive level and is issued for a 
specified time of up to three years and renewable for a maxi-
mum of seven years. L-1A visas are for intracompany transfer-
ees who have specialized knowledge in the field; L-2 visas are 
issued to spouses of L-1 visas.
Mortgaging   the legal device to “borrow” against future fis-
cal year immigration quotas to allow entrance of immigrants, 
for refugee or humanitarian purposes, after the fiscal quota for 
their nation of origin had been filled. First used by President 
Dwight D. Eisenhower.
National Sovereignty   the traditional understanding of sov-
ereignty as the right of a nation-state to control territory under 
its jurisdiction and to control entrance into that territory or to 
expel individuals not granted legal residency.
Naturalization   the legal act of making an individual a citi-
zen who was not born a citizen.
Net EWIs   estimates the total number from each country 
who entered without inspection and established residency in 
the United States, a large majority of whom are from Mexico.
NGOs   nongovernmental organizations. The term is used to 
refer to organizations involved in immigration matters, usu-
ally advocacy or immigrant assistance, that are not government 
agencies.

362	
Glossary
Nonimmigrant   an alien seeking temporary entry into the 
United States for a specific purpose other than permanent 
settlement—such as a foreign government official, tourist, stu-
dent, temporary worker, or cultural exchange visitor.
Nonpreference   a category of immigrant visa apart from 
family- and employment-based preferences that was available 
primarily between 1966 and 1978, but eliminated by the Im-
migration Act of 1990 (IMMACT).
Nonquota Immigrant   a person allowed entrance for a spe-
cific reason who is not charged against a nation’s annual quota.
Optional Practical Training (OPT)   offers practical experi-
ence via temporary employment to F-1 student visa holders for 
up to 12 months; students working in STEM fields are eligible 
for a 17-month extension at the end of one year, with the op-
tion of applying for an H-1B visa.
Overstayer   an individual who enters the United States on a 
temporary visa who then stays beyond the time specified in the 
visa at which he/she is to voluntarily depart.
Parolee   an alien, appearing to be inadmissible to the in-
specting officer, allowed entry to the United States under hu-
manitarian reasons when the alien’s entry is determined to be 
for significant public benefit. Used by President Dwight D. 
Eisenhower and numerous presidents subsequently.
Passport   a legal identification document issued by a sover-
eign nation-state attesting to the nationality of an individual 
for international travel purposes.
Permanent Resident   a noncitizen who is allowed to live 
permanently in the United States and who can travel in and 
out of the country without a visa and can work without restric-
tion. This person is also allowed to accumulate time toward 
becoming a naturalized citizen.
Preference System   a device used in immigration law to es-
tablish rules and procedures to determine the order in which 
annual limits of immigration visas were to be issued, estab-
lished by the Immigration Act of 1965.

	
Glossary	
363
Preferences   were specified categories of individuals to be 
awarded visas for permanent immigration.
Protocol   an international agreement governing the under-
standing and procedures that member states who are parties to 
a treaty agree upon for a given purpose, as in the UN protocols 
regarding the status and treatment of refugees.
Pull Factors   aspects of the receiving nation that draw im-
migrants for resettlement.
Push Factors   events that compel large numbers of persons 
to emigrate.
Quota Immigrant   an individual seeking entrance to the 
United States or coming under the system that fixed an annual 
number of visas awarded to a person from a particular nation 
or territory. Governed by immigration law from 1921 to 1965.
Racial Profiling   a pattern of behavior of police officers 
based on racial appearance.
Refugee-Parolee   a qualified applicant for conditional entry 
between 1970 and 1980 whose application for admission 
could not be approved because of an inadequate number of 
seventh-preference visas. The applicant was paroled into the 
United States under the parole authority granted to the attor-
ney general of the United States.
Restrictionism   a social movement of the late 19th and early 
20th centuries that favored and advocated outright banning or 
severe limits to immigration.
Sojourner   an immigrant who comes to the United States 
intending to stay only temporarily.
Special Agricultural Worker   aliens who performed labor in 
perishable agricultural crop commodities for a specified period 
of time and were admitted for temporary and then permanent 
residence under the Immigration and Control Act of 1986.
STEM Workforce   persons employed in specified fields for 
a special category of guest-worker—an acronym meaning sci-
ence, technology, engineering, and mathematics.

364	
Glossary
Trafficking   the transportation of persons for illegal purposes 
involving sexual or labor exploitation of the individual.
Transit Alien   an alien in immediate and continuous tran-
sit through the United States, with or without a visa. Transit 
aliens are principally aliens and their family serving at the UN 
headquarters and foreign government officials and their family 
members.
Unauthorized Alien   an individual who is in a territory 
without documentation—an illegal immigrant.
Unauthorized Immigrants   those who come undocumented 
or break or overstay the conditions of their visa and become 
illegal immigrants without the status of permanent resident 
aliens.
Undocumented Alien   an individual in a sovereign terri-
tory without legal authorization to be there—an illegal alien 
or immigrant.
Undocumented Immigrants   individuals who enter the 
United States without inspection or proper documentation al-
lowing them to enter and to reside in the United States and to 
legally work while doing so.
Unfunded Mandates   requirements placed by the federal 
government upon state or local government without offsetting 
funding for their implementation.
Visa   a legal document issued by a consular or similar state 
department official allowing a person to travel to the United 
States for either permanent or temporary reasons—such as im-
migrant, student, tourist, government representative, business, 
or cultural exchange.
Withdrawal   an alien’s voluntary removal of an application 
for admission in lieu of an exclusion hearing before an immi-
gration judge.
Xenophobia   an unfounded fear of foreigners.

365
adjustment to immigrant  
status, 357
Affordable Care Act, 73
Agricultural Act of 1949, 7
airline companies, border 
management and, 
59 – 60
alien, defined, 357
alien smuggling, 240 – 241
American Assembly, 206–207
American Bar Association, 
182–183
American Border Patrol, 50
American Civil Liberties 
Union, 183
American Competitiveness 
and Workforce Improve-
ment Act of 1998, 67
American Conservative 
Union, 183 – 184
American Farm Bureau  
Federation, 13
American Federation of 
Labor-Congress of  
Industrial Organizations 
(AFL-CIO), 13
American Immigration  
Control Foundation, 
184
American Immigration Law 
Foundation, 184
American Immigration  
Lawyers Association, 
185
American Library  
Association, 185
American Patrol, 206
American Refugee Committee 
International Head- 
quarters USA, 185
Americanization, 53 – 54,  
55
Americans against Illegal  
Immigration, 185–186
Americans for Immigration 
Control (AIC), 51
Americans for Legal  
Immigration, 186
amicus curiae, 357
amnesty, defined, 357
amnesty immigration reform, 
42 – 52
Index

366	
Index
analyses concerning, 
47 – 49
Democratic/Republican 
legislators and, 43 – 44
Gallup public opinion 
polls, 42 – 43
interest groups supporting, 
44
opponents of, 44 – 45
proponents of, 44
Real ID Act, 45 – 46
Secure Fence Act, 46 – 48
vigilante group patrols 
and, 49 – 51
antiterrorism, border security 
and, 23 – 27
Arizona v. United States, 33
Ashcroft, John, 23
asylee, 357
authorized immigrants, 3
Beck, Roy, 138
Bell, Griffin, 14
Bell Policy Center, 207 
Bennet, Michael, 138 – 139
Berman, Howard, 18
birthright citizenship, 
110 – 114
defined, 357 – 358
Bishop, Sandford D., 139
Black, Diane, 139
Boehner, John, 33, 76, 140
Border Action Network, 50, 
186
border card, 358
border control crisis, 12 – 23
Border Patrol and, 19
Carter administration and, 
14
House/Senate judiciary 
subcommittees on, 
16 – 17
IRCA and, 18 – 19
Kennedy-Rodino-Eilberg 
bill and, 13
management and, 57 – 63
overview of, 12 – 13
Proposition 187 and, 
20 – 21
Reagan administration 
and, 15 – 19
SCIRP recommendations 
and, 14 – 15
solutions to, 60 – 61
state governments and, 20
border controls, 238 – 239
border jumper, 358
Border Patrol, 19, 59, 70, 71
defined, 358
border security, antiterrorism 
and, 23 – 27
Borjas, George, 65
Bracero Program, 6 – 8, 66
defined, 358
Brewer, Janet, 33, 140
Brookings Institution,  
Center on Urban and 
Metropolitan Policy,  
207–208
Brown, Jerry, 140 – 141

	
Index	
367
Bureau of Immigration  
Enforcement, 70
Bureau of Immigration  
Services, 70
Bush, George Walker, 25, 
141 – 142
Business Roundtable, 186
California Coalition for  
Immigration Reform, 
186
California Dream Network, 
32
Camarota, Steven, 47
Card, Andrew, Jr., 24
Carnegie Endowment for  
International Peace, 70
Carper, Thomas, 142
Carrying Capacity Network, 
64
Carter, James Earl, Jr., 
142 – 143
Castillo, Leonel J., 14
Catholic Charities USA,  
187
Cato Institute, 72, 208
Center for American  
Progress, 187
Center for Democracy and 
Technology, 187 
Center for Equal Opportunity, 
208
Center for Human Rights 
and Constitutional Law, 
187–188
Center for Immigration 
Studies, 9, 47, 209
Center for Migration Studies, 
209 
Center for the Applied  
Study of Prejudice and 
Ethnoviolence, 188
Center for the Study of Hate 
Crimes and Extremism, 
188
Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC), 
24
Central American Resource 
Center, 188 – 189
certiorari, 358
chain migration, 7, 358
Chavez, Linda, 143 – 144
Cheney, Dick, 25
Children of Immigrant  
Longitudinal Study 
(CILS), 55 – 56
Church World Service, 189
civil law, 8, 358
Clark, Karen K., 99 – 104
Clinton, William Jefferson, 
21, 144
Coalition for Humane  
Immigrant Rights of 
Los Angeles, 32, 189
Cohen, J. Richard, 144 – 145
Colorado Alliance for  
Immigration Reform, 
189 – 190
Colorado Minutemen, 50

368	
Index
Commission on Immigration 
Reform (CIR), 69
Congressional Hispanic  
Caucus, 17
Conyers, John, Jr., 145
cooperative federalism, 
30 – 31
Cornyn, John, 145 – 146
cost, of illegal immigration, 
63 – 65
coyote, 48
criminal law, 358
Cuomo, Andrew, 146
Daniels, Mitchell, Jr., 24
data on illegal immigration, 
219 – 226
Gallup poll, “Do You 
Think Immigration 
Is a Good Thing or a 
Bad Thing for the U.S. 
Today?,” 223
Gallup poll, “Should  
Immigration Be Kept 
at Its Present Level, In-
creased, or Decreased?,” 
223 – 224
Gallup poll, “What Should 
Be the Main Focus of 
U.S. Government in 
Dealing with Illegal  
Immigration?,” 224
legal/illegal immigration 
trends over time, com-
parison of, 219 – 220
removal trends, 
2011 – 2013, 222
unaccompanied alien  
children encoun-
tered, by fiscal year, 
2009 – 2014, 222
unauthorized immigrants 
in U.S. labor force, 
1952 – 2012, 221 – 222
unauthorized Mexican-
born immigrant popu-
lation compared to all 
unauthorized immi-
grants, 1996 – 2013, 221
U.S. Customs and  
Border Patrol, sector 
map, 225f
U.S. Department of 
Homeland Security or-
ganizational chart, 226f
debarkation, 358
Deferred Action for Child-
hood Arrivals (DACA), 
33, 75, 277 – 278
Deferred Action for Parents 
of Americans and  
Lawful Permanent  
Residents (DAPA),  
33, 75, 277
Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS), 27 – 34, 
48
divisions of, 58
Dream Act, 32 – 33
establishment of, 70 – 71

	
Index	
369
Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement, 28 – 29
Intelligence Reform and 
Terrorism Prevention 
Act of 2004, 31
NSEERS, 27 – 28
Operation Tarmac, 29 – 30
Real ID Act of 2003, 
30 – 31
Secure Fence Act, 31
Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS) Act, 
247 – 249
border and transportation 
security, 247 – 248
immigration and national-
ity functions, 248 – 249
Department of Justice 
(DOJ), 25
Department of Labor, 48, 67, 
177
deportation, 241 – 243,  
358
detention, 241 – 243
Detention and Deportation 
program, 70
Development, Relief, and 
Education for Alien  
Minors. See Dream Act
Director of National  
Intelligence (DNI), 61
establishment of, 255 – 256
diversity immigrants, 
344 – 345, 358 – 359
document fraud, 240 – 241
domestic advocacy agencies/
organizations, 182 – 207
Donohue, Thomas J., 147
Dream Act, 32 – 33, 74, 75, 
249 – 252, 359
described, 249
proponents/critics of, 249
state versions of, 249 – 250
variations of, in Congress, 
250 – 252
The Dream Is Now, 190
Drug Enforcement Agency 
on Operation Alliance, 
19
due process of law, 359
Durbin, Richard, 147
earned legalization, defined, 
359
earned legalization immigra-
tion reform, 42 – 52
analyses concerning, 
47 – 49
Democratic/Republican 
legislators and, 43 – 44
Gallup public opinion 
polls, 42 – 43
interest groups supporting, 
44
opponents of, 44 – 45
proponents of, 44
Real ID Act, 45 – 46
Secure Fence Act, 46 – 48
vigilante group patrols 
and, 49 – 51

370	
Index
Eastland, James, 13
Eilberg, Joshua, 13
emigrant, 359
emigration, 359
employee verification, 
243 – 244
employer sanctions, 13 – 15, 
16, 62 – 63, 233, 359
entered without inspection 
(EWIs), 359
Episcopal Migration  
Ministries, 190–191
equal protection of the law, 
359
essays. See illegal immigration 
essays
Essential Worker Immigration 
Coalition, 191
Establishment Republican 
legislators, 43
Ethiopian Community De-
velopment Council,  
191 
Ewing, Walter, 65
EWIs (entered without  
inspection), 359
Examining the Adequacy 
and Enforcement of 
U.S. Immigration Laws 
(Vaughan), 95 – 99
excluded categories, 359
exclusion, 360
executive action, 359
exempt, 360
expedited removal, 360
expulsion, 360
Farm Labor Alliance, 17
Federal Immigration  
Reform and Enforce-
ment Coalition, 192
Federation for American  
Immigration Reform,  
192
Feinstein, Dianne, 147 – 148
felony vs. misdemeanor, 360
Fish, Hamilton, Jr., 17
Flake, Jeff, 148
Fortress America, 23, 24
Free Congress Foundation, 
192–193
Freedom Works, 193
Gallup poll
“Do You Think Immigra-
tion Is a Good Thing or 
a Bad Thing for the U.S. 
Today?,” 223
“Should Immigration 
Be Kept at Its Present 
Level, Increased, or De-
creased?,” 223 – 224
“What Should Be the  
Main Focus of U.S.  
Government in Dealing 
with Illegal Immigra-
tion?,” 224
Gang of Eight, 33, 360
gateway states, 8, 360
General Accounting Office 
(GAO), 28 – 29, 64
Gheen, William, 148–149
Gilchrist, Jim, 149

	
Index	
371
Goldsborough, Robert, 149
Gonzales, Alberto, 24
Goodlatte, Bob, 149–150
government reports and  
studies, 316 – 320
Gowdy, Trey, 150
Graham, Lindsey, 150
Grassley, Charles, 151
green card, 51, 360
guest-workers, 13, 66 – 69, 
360
Guitierrez, Luis, 151
Hanen, Andrew, 75, 
151 – 152
Hatch, Orrin, 152
Hebrew Immigrant Aid  
Society, 193 
Heritage Foundation, 45, 
194
Hinojosa, Ruben, 152
Homeland Security Act,  
27
H-1B visas, 66 – 69, 360
Huddle, Donald, 64, 
152 – 153
Human Rights Watch, 59, 
180 – 181, 194
Humane Borders, 48, 194
illegal aliens, 4, 360
illegal immigrants, 3
methods of becoming, 4
illegal immigration
border control crisis and, 
12 – 23
border security/antiterror-
ism and, 23 – 27
changes in legal immigra-
tion and, 10 – 12
cost of, 63 – 65
data on (See data on illegal 
immigration)
Department of Homeland 
Security and, 27 – 34
economic-wage structure 
and, 7 – 8
essays (See illegal  
immigration essays)
legislative actions (See  
illegal immigration 
legislative actions, 
1981 – 2013)
overview of, 3 – 6
problems leading to, 6 – 10
reform (See illegal  
immigration reform)
illegal immigration essays, 
91 – 133
Examining the Adequacy 
and Enforcement of 
U.S. Immigration Laws 
(Vaughan), 95 – 99
On Hospitality to  
the Stranger: Some 
Moral Implications of  
Immigration Reform 
(Ramos), 91 – 95
Mitigating Federal  
Immigration Law:  
Inclusion at the Local 
Level (Suro), 116 – 121

372	
Index
Obama’s “Executive  
Action” on Immigration 
and Judicial Review  
(Mariam), 122 – 127
In Opposition to Birth-
right Citizenship  
(Warner), 105 – 110
Resolving the Issue of 
Illegal Immigration- 
A Question of Balance 
(Krahl), 127 – 134
Should the United States 
Enact Tougher Laws to 
Stem Illegal Immigra-
tion? (Clark), 99 – 105
In Support of Maintaining 
Birthright Citizenship 
(Warner), 110 – 116
illegal immigration  
legislative actions, 
1981 – 2013, 227 – 278
Deferred Action for  
Childhood Arrivals, 
277 – 278
Deferred Action for  
Parents of Americans  
and Lawful Permanent 
Residents, 277
Department of Homeland 
Security Act, 247 – 249
Director of National  
Intelligence, 255 – 256
Dream Act, 249 – 252
Immigration Reform and 
Control Act of 1986, 
229 – 236
National Security  
Intelligence Reform  
Act of 2004, 255
omnibus spending bill,  
illegal immigration  
provisions of,  
238 – 245
Public Law 108 – 458, “The 
Intelligence Reform and 
Terrorism Prevention 
Act of 2004,” 252 – 255
Real ID Act, 256 – 263
Secure Fence Act, 
263 – 267
Select Commission on  
Immigration and Refu-
gee Policy recommenda-
tions, 227 – 229
Senate immigration  
reform bill, S. 744, 
271 – 277
Strengthen and Fortify  
Enforcement Act, 
267 – 271
USA Patriot Act of 2001, 
246
welfare reform act,  
immigration provisions 
of, 237 – 238
illegal immigration reform
amnesty or earned 
legalization and, 42 – 52
border control manage-
ment and, 57 – 63
cost of illegal immigration 
and, 63 – 65

	
Index	
373
guest-workers and, 66 – 69
immigrant children and,  
incorporation of, 52 – 57
overview of, 41 – 42
policy issues and, 72 – 75
restructuring of INS and, 
69 – 71
solutions for, 75 – 76
Illegal Immigration  
Reform and Immigrant 
Responsibility Act of 
1996 (IIRIRA), 56, 59
immediate relatives, 360
immigrant, defined, 361
immigrant children,  
immigration reform  
and illegal, 52 – 57
immigrant status, adjustment 
to, 357
Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE), 
28 – 29
Immigration and Naturaliza-
tion Act of 1965, 6, 7, 
10, 13, 25
Immigration and Naturaliza-
tion Service (INS), 11, 
23, 27
restructuring into DHS, 
69 – 71
Immigration and Naturaliza-
tion Service Data Man-
agement Improvement 
Act, 22
Immigration History Research 
Center, 209–210
immigration laws, summaries 
of. See illegal immigra-
tion legislative actions, 
1981 – 2013
Immigration Reform and 
Control Act of 1986 
(IRCA), 8, 18 – 19, 49, 
229 – 236
Title I, control of illegal  
immigration, 229 – 234
Title II, legalization, 
234 – 236
Title III, Temporary  
Agricultural Labor,  
236
immigration research  
centers and think tanks, 
206 – 213
I-9 forms, 29
In Opposition to Birthright 
Citizenship (Warner), 
105 – 110
In Support of Maintaining 
Birthright Citizenship 
(Warner), 110 – 116
Inspections program, 70
Intelligence Czar, 61
Intelligence program, 70
Intelligence Reform and  
Terrorism Prevention 
Act of 2004, 31, 61, 
252 – 255
overview of, 252
Title V, border protection, 
immigration, and visa 
matters, 252 – 253

374	
Index
Title VI, terrorism protec-
tion, 254
Title VII, implementation 
of 9/11 commission  
recommendations, 
254 – 255
Title VIII, Department  
of Homeland Security 
matters, 255
intermestic policy, 379
International Committee of 
the Red Cross, 181
International Garment  
Workers Union, 13
International Immigrants 
Foundation, 181
International Migration  
Policy Program, 70
international organizations, 
180 – 182
international terrorism, 62
Investigations program, 70
investor immigrant, 361
Jimenez, Cristina, 153
Johnson, Jeh, 153 – 154
Johnson, Ron, 154
Jordan Commission, 69 – 70
Kennedy, Edward, 13, 14
Kerwin, Don M., Jr., 
154 – 155
King, Peter, 155 
King, Steve, 74
Klobuchar, Amy, 155–156
Krahl, David E., 127 – 133
Krikorian, Mark, 156
Kyl, Jon, 156 – 157

LaRaza, 44
League of United Latin 
American Citizens 
(LULAC), 20, 44, 196
Leahy, Patrick, 157
legal immigrants, 3
legal immigration, changes 
in, 10 – 12
illegal immigrant estimates 
and, 12
Immigration and Natural-
ization Service and, 11
seven-category preference 
system, 10
legalized alien, 236, 361
Lieberman, Joseph I., 24, 
157 – 158
literacy test, 361
Lofgren, Zoe, 158
Lungren, Dan, 18
Lutheran Immigration 
and Refugee Service, 
195 – 196
L-visa, 67, 68, 361
Major Cities Chiefs of Police 
Association, 196
Manhattan Institute, 210
Mariam, Alemayehu G., 
122 – 125
Marshall, F. Ray, 14

	
Index	
375
Mazzoli, Romano, 16 – 17
McCain, John, 159
McCarran-Walter Act, 8
McCaskill, Claire, 159 – 160
McCaul, Michael, 160
McConnell, Mitch, 160–161
Menendez, Robert, 161
Mexican American Legal  
Defense Fund, 196 
Mexicano Estudiente 
Chicano de Aztlan 
(MECHA), 44
Migration Policy Institute, 
210 
Miller, Candice, 161 – 162
Minuteman Colorado, 197
Minuteman Project, 50
Minutemen, 45, 196
Mitigating Federal Immigra-
tion Law: Inclusion at 
the Local Level (Suro), 
116 – 121
Moore, Steven, 65
mortgaging, defined, 361
Mothers against Illegal 
Aliens, 197
multinational organizations, 
5
Murguia, Janet, 162
Napolitano, Janet, 50 – 51
National Association for the 
Advancement of Col-
ored People (NAACP), 
13, 197
National Conference of 
Catholic Bishops,  
Migration and Refugee 
Services, Office of  
Migration Policy and 
Public Affairs, 197
National Council of Agricul-
tural Employers, 13
National Council of La Raza, 
197–198
National Federation of  
Independent Business, 
198
national government  
agencies and organiza-
tions, 173 – 180
National Guestworker  
Alliance, 67
National Immigration 
Forum, 198–199, 
210–211
National Immigration Law 
Center, 199 
National League of Cities, 
199–200
National Network for  
Immigrant and Refugee 
Rights, 200, 211
National Organization for 
European American 
Rights, 200 
National Research Council, 65
National Security Entry-Exit 
Registration System 
(NSEERS), 27 – 28

376	
Index
National Security Intelligence 
Reform Act of 2004, 255
national sovereignty, 62, 361
naturalization, 361
net EWIs, 361
New York Association 
for New Americans, 
200–201
NGOs (nongovernmental 
organizations), 138, 
182 – 206, 361 – 362
No More Deaths, 48, 201
nongovernmental organiza-
tions (NGOs), 138, 
182 – 206, 361 – 362
nonimmigrant, 362
nonpreference category, 362
nonprint resources, 320 – 333
nonquota immigrant, 341, 
362
NSEERS. See National  
Security Entry-Exit 
Registration System 
(NSEERS)
NumbersUSA, 201–202
Obama, Barack, 72 – 73, 75
Obama’s “Executive Action” 
on Immigration and  
Judicial Review  
(Mariam), 122 – 127
Office of Homeland Security, 
24
Office of Migration and 
Refugee Services, U.S. 
Conference of Catholic 
Bishops, 202 
Official English laws, 55
omnibus spending bill, illegal 
immigration provisions 
of, 238 – 245
alien smuggling, 240 – 241
border controls, 238 – 239
detention and deportation, 
241 – 243
document fraud, 240 – 241
employee verification, 
243 – 244
public benefits, 244 – 245
On Hospitality to the 
Stranger: Some Moral 
Implications of Im-
migration Reform 
(Ramos), 91 – 95
O’Neill, Tip, 17
Operation Tarmac, 29 – 30
Optional Practical Training 
(OPT), 67, 362
overstayer, 4, 21, 97, 362
Panetta, Leon, 18
Papademetriou, Demetrios, 
162 – 163
parolee, 362
Passel, Jeffrey S., 64, 163–164
passport, 362
Patriot Act. See Uniting and 
Strengthening America 
by Providing Appropri-
ate Tools Required to  

	
Index	
377
Intercept and Obstruct 
Terrorism Act (USA  
Patriot Act)
Pelosi, Nancy,  164
permanent resident, 75, 277, 
362
permanent resident aliens, 3
Perry, Rick, 164
Pew Hispanic Research Cen-
ter, 12, 21 – 22, 47, 72, 
211 
precursor legislation, 
335 – 341
preference system, 8, 10, 
362 – 363
preferences, 363
Prejudice Institute, 211
print resources, 282 – 308
Proposition 187, 20 – 21
protocol, 363
public benefits, 244 – 245
Public Law 108 – 458, “The 
Intelligence Reform and 
Terrorism Prevention 
Act of 2004,” 252 – 255
overview of, 252
Title V, border protection, 
immigration, and visa 
matters, 252 – 253
Title VI, terrorism protec-
tion, 254
Title VII, implementa-
tion of 9/11 commis-
sion recommendations, 
254 – 255
Title VIII, Department 
of Homeland Security 
matters, 255
public policy
defined, 219
issues, illegal immigration 
and, 72 – 75
Public Policy Institute of 
California, 211–212
pull factors, 4 – 5, 363
push factors, 4, 9, 363
quota immigrant, 363
racial profiling, 25, 363
Ramos, Canon Pablo,  
91 – 95
Ranch Rescue, 50
RAND Corporation, 212 
Real ID Act, 30 – 31, 45 – 46, 
256 – 263
refugee-parolee, 363
Reich, Robert, 66
Reid, Harry, 32, 74, 165
removal process, critics  
of, 57
Resolving the Issue of  
Illegal Immigration- 
A Question of Balance 
(Krahl), 127 – 134
constitutional consider-
ations, 129 – 130
federal strategies for illegal 
immigration control, 
130 – 132

378	
Index
geographic/demographic 
considerations, 
128 – 129
illegal immigration as  
contemporary social 
issue, 127 – 128
restrictionism, 363
revolving-door era, 
1965 – 2000, 341 – 348
Reyes, Silvestre, 70
Richardson, Bill, 50
Ridge, Tom, 24
Rights for All People, 203
Rodino, Peter, 13, 17 – 18
Rogers, Mike, 70
Roybal, Edward, 17
Rubio, Marco, 165
scholarly journals,  
308 – 315
Schumer, Charles E., 18, 33, 
165 – 166
Secure Fence Act, 31, 46 – 48, 
263 – 267
Select Commission on  
Immigration and  
Refugee Policy (SCIRP), 
9, 11, 14 – 15
recommendations, 
227 – 229
Senate immigration reform 
bill, S. 744, 271 – 277
Sensenbrenner, James, 45, 
166 – 167
Sessions, Jeff, 167
Sharry, Frank, 167 – 168
Should the United States 
Enact Tougher Laws to 
Stem Illegal Immigra-
tion? (Clark), 99 – 105
Simpson, Alan, 16, 17 – 18
Smith, Christopher H., 168
Smith, Lamar S., 70, 
168 – 169
Smith, William French, 
15 – 16
The Social Contract Press, 
203
Social Security Trust Fund 
Board of Trustees Re-
port, 65
sojourner, 11, 363
Southern Poverty Law  
Center, 203
sovereignty, definition of, 62
special agricultural worker, 
363
The Stein Report, 203
STEM program, 66, 67, 68
STEM workforce, 364
storm-door era, 2001–?, 23, 
348 – 351
Strengthen and Fortify  
Enforcement Act (SAFE 
act), 267 – 271
aid to ICE officers, 270
immigration law by states 
and localities, 267 – 268, 
271
national security, 268

	
Index	
379
overview of, 267
removal of criminal aliens, 
269
visa security, 270
Suro, Roberto, 116 – 119, 
169 – 170
Tanton, John H., 170
Task Force on Immigration 
and Refugee Policy, 
15 – 17
Tea Party Republicans, 43
Temporary Protected Status, 
75
Terrorist Threat Integration 
Center, 61
Texas Proviso, 8, 13
Thompson, Bennie,  
170 – 171
Thornberry, Mac, 24
Tolerance.org, 212
Tolstoy Foundation, 
203 – 204
Tomasi, Lydio F., 171
trafficking, 262 – 263, 364
transit alien, 364
unauthorized alien, 364
unauthorized immigrants, 3, 
364
methods of becoming, 4
unauthorized immigration. 
See illegal immigration
undocumented alien,  
defined, 364
undocumented immigrants, 
defined, 3 – 4, 364
unfunded mandates, 364
UNICEF, 5
United Farm Workers,  
44
United Nations, 5
UN Department of Humani-
tarian Affairs, 182
UN High Commissioner for 
Refugees, 182
United We Dream, 32,  
204
Uniting and Strengthening 
America by Provid-
ing Appropriate Tools 
Required to Intercept 
and Obstruct Terrorism 
Act (USA Patriot Act), 
24 – 27, 246
Urban Institute, 64, 213
U.S. Census Bureau, 174
U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 
189, 205–206
U.S. Commission on Civil 
Rights, 174
U.S. Commission on  
Immigration Reform, 
174 – 175
U.S. Committee for  
Refugees, 206
U.S. Customs and Border  
Patrol sector map, 225f
U.S. Department of Agricul-
ture, 175

380	
Index
U.S. Department of Educa-
tion, 175 – 176
U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services, 
176
U.S. Department of Home-
land Security, 176
organizational chart,  
226f
U.S. Department of Housing 
and Urban Develop-
ment, 177
U.S. Department of Labor, 
48, 67, 177
U.S. Department of State, 
68, 177 – 178
U.S. Equal Employment  
Opportunity Commis-
sion, 178
U.S. Government Account-
ability Office, 178
U.S. House Committee on 
the Judiciary, 179
U.S. Senate Committee on 
the Judiciary, 179
U.S. Social Security Adminis-
tration, 179 – 180
USA Patriot Act. See Unit-
ing and Strengthening 
America by Providing 
Appropriate Tools  
Required to Intercept 
and Obstruct Terrorism 
Act (USA Patriot Act)
Vaughan, Jessica, 95 – 98
V-DARE, 206
Vernez, Georges, 171 – 172
visa, defined, 364
visa-overstayer, 4
Vitter, David, 74, 172
Voices of Citizens Together/
American Patrol, 206
Warner, Judith Ann, 
105 – 109, 110 – 114
Web sites, 214 – 216
welfare reform act, im-
migration provisions, 
237 – 238
wetbacks, 4
withdrawal, 364
World Bank, 5
World Health Organization, 
5
Wyden, Ron, 173
xenophobia, 364

About the Author
Michael C. LeMay is professor emeritus from California State 
University, San Bernardino, where he served as Director of the 
National Security Studies program, an interdisciplinary mas-
ter’s degree program, and as chair of the Department of Politi-
cal Science and assistant dean for student affairs of the College 
of Social and Behavioral Sciences. He has frequently written 
and presented papers at professional conferences on the topic 
of immigration. He has also written numerous journal articles, 
book chapters, published essays, and book reviews. He is pub-
lished in The International Migration Review, In Defense of the 
Alien, Journal of American Ethnic History, Southeastern Politi-
cal Science Review, Teaching Political Science, and the National 
Civic Review. He is author of a dozen academic volumes deal-
ing with immigration history and policy. His prior books on 
the subject are: Doctors at the Borders: Immigration and the Rise 
of Public Health (2015: Praeger); series editor and contribut-
ing author of the three-volume series, Transforming America: 
Perspectives on Immigration (2013: ABC-CLIO); Illegal Immi-
gration: A  Reference Handbook, 1st ed. (2007: ABC-CLIO); 
Guarding the Gates: Immigration and National Security (2006: 
Praeger Security International); U.S. Immigration: A Reference 
Handbook (2004: ABC-CLIO); U.S. Immigration and Natu-
ralization Laws and Issues: A Documentary History, edited with 
Elliott Barkan (1999: Greenwood); Anatomy of a Public Policy: 
The Reform of Contemporary Immigration Law (1994: Praeger); 
381

382	
About the Author
The Gatekeepers: Comparative Immigration Policy (1989: Prae-
ger); From Open Door to Dutch Door: An Analysis of U.S. Immi-
gration Policy Since 1820 (1987: Praeger); and The Struggle for 
Influence (1985: University Press of America). Professor LeMay 
has written two textbooks that have considerable material 
related to these topics: Public Administration: Clashing Values in 
the Administration of Public Policy, 2nd ed. (2006: Wadsworth); 
and The Perennial Struggle: Race, Ethnicity and Minority Group 
Relations in the United States, 3rd ed. (2009: Prentice-Hall). He 
frequently lecturers on topics related to immigration history 
and policy.

