ILLICIT TRAFFICKING
A Reference Handbook

Other Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Antisemitism, Jerome A. Chanes
Civil Liberties in America, Samuel Walker
Counterterrorism, Graeme C. S. Steven and Rohan Gunaratna
Cybercrime, Bernadette H. Schell and Clemens Martin
Defendant Rights, Hamid R. Kusha
Drug Use, Richard Isralowitz
Global Aids Crisis, Richard G. Marlink and Alison G. Kotin
Healthcare Reform in America, Jennie Jacobs Kronenfeld and
Michael R. Kronenfeld
Media and American Courts, S. L. Alexander
Nation-Building, Cynthia A. Watson
Profiling and Criminal Justice in America, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
USA Patriot Act, Howard Ball
Voting in America, Robert E. DiClerico
World Poverty, Geoffrey Gilbert

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.

ILLICIT TRAFFICKING
A Reference Handbook
Robert J. Kelly
Jess Maghan
Joseph D. Serio
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California • Denver, Colorado • Oxford, England

Copyright 2005 by Robert J. Kelly, Jess Maghan, and Joseph D. Serio
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, except for
the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior permission in
writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Kelly, Robert J.
Illicit trafficking : a reference handbook / Robert J. Kelly, Jess Maghan,
Joseph D. Serio.
p. cm.—(ABC-CLIO’s contemporary world issues series)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-57607-915-5 (hardback : alk. paper)
ISBN 1-57607-916-3 (ebook)
1. Transnational crime.  2. Smuggling.  3. Illegal arms transfers.  4. Drug
traffic.  5. Money laundering.   I. Maghan, Jess, 1936–  II. Serio, Joseph,
1964–   III. Title.  IV. Series: Contemporary world issues.
HV6252.K45  2005
364.1'35—dc22
2005013790
09
08
07
06
05
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Manufactured in the United States of America


Contents
Preface, xi
1
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History, 1
What Is Illicit Trafficking? 2
What Are the Roles of Organized Crime and
Transnational Crime in Illicit Trafficking?  4
Does Immigration Foster Illicit Trafficking? 5
What Is the Relationship of the Volume of Illicit
Trafficking to Globalization? 7
What Is the Relationship of the Growth of Global
Finance to Illicit Trafficking? 7
How Do Worldwide Communication Technologies
Affect Illicit Trafficking? 8
What Are the Defining Characteristics of Transnational
Crime Groups? 8
What Are the Relationships among Governments, Social
Structure, and Organized Crime? 11
Do Ethnic Conflicts and State Dissolution Facilitate Illicit
Trafficking? 13
Do Political Instability and Military Conflict Contribute
to Criminal Activities? 14
What Are the Trends among Transnational Crime
Groups? 15
Can Law Enforcement Operate Effectively in a Global
Environment? 17
Western Europe, 18
Eastern and Central Europe, 20
Russia, the Balkans, and the Newly Independent
States, 21
vii

South Asia, Southeast Asia, and China, 23
Japan, 25
South America and Central America: Colombia
and Mexico, 26
United States, 27
How Are Transnational Organized Crime and Illicit
Trafficking Related? 37
Summary, 38
How Can States Deter and Contain Illicit
Trafficking? 39
2
Problems, Controversies and Solutions, 47
Transnational Crime Survey, 47
Money Laundering: Structure and Characteristics, 48
Types of Money Laundering, 53
Controls and Law Enforcement Responses to Money
Laundering, 54
Drug Trafficking, 54
Drug-Trafficking Impacts on Nation-State Stability, 56
Economic and Social Consequences of Illicit
Trafficking, 56
Illicit Drug Production, 57
Drug-Trafficking Networks, 57
Drug Market Structure and the Trafficking Industry, 58
Smuggling Nuclear Materials and Arms, 62
Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD), 63
Nuclear Theft and Smuggling: The Threat, 64
The Impact of Change, 65
Biological and Chemical Weapons, 66
Law Enforcement and Control Efforts, 69
Illicit Arms Trafficking, 70
Dynamics of Arms Trafficking: The Cold War, 71
Arms Trafficking in the Post–Cold War Era, 73
Weapons “Supermarkets” and Conflict Zones, 73
The Machinery of Arms Smuggling, 75
The Gray Arms Market, 76
Trafficking in Precious Stones, 78
Trafficking in Human Body Parts, 78
The Illicit Trade in Art and Cultural Objects, 82
Theft of Intellectual Property, 83
Organized Crime and IPR Crimes, 84
Alien Smuggling: Trafficking in Human Beings, 84
viii
Contents

Female Migrants, 86
General Observations: Looking Ahead, 89
3
Chronology, 99
4
Biographical Sketches, 109
Monzar Al Kassar, 109
Osama bin Laden, 110
Victor Bout, 112
Alphonse Capone, 114
Pablo Emilio Gaviria Escobar, 117
Helmer Herrera-Buitrago, 121
Abdul Qadeer Khan, 122
Khun Sa, 123
Carlos Lehder-Rivas, 124
“Little Pete,” 125
Charles “Lucky” Luciano, 127
Leonid Minin, 129
Manuel Antonio Noriega, 130
Jorge Luis Vasquez Ochoa, 133
Benny Ong, 135
Salvatore Riina, 136
Tijuana Cartel, 139
5
Statistics and Reference Documents, 141
Trafficking in Human Beings, 141
Characteristics of Traffickers and Their Victims, 142
International Organization for Migration, 146
Coalition against Trafficking in Women, 147
U.S. Department of State, 151
United Nations, 155
Narcotics Trafficking, 158
Bureau for International Narcotics and Law
Enforcement Affairs, 158
Office of National Drug Control Policy, 159
Characteristics of Traffickers, 160
United Nations, 162
Trafficking in Small Arms and Light Weapons, 163
Office of Weapons Removal and Abatement, 164
United Nations, 167
UN Institute for Disarmament Research, 168
Small Arms Survey, 169
Contents
ix

Trafficking in Nuclear Materials, 170
International Atomic Energy Agency, 170
The Center for International Security and
Cooperation, 172
Nuclear Threat Initiatives, 174
6
Agencies and Organizations, 177
7
Print and Nonprint Resources, 191
Print Resources, 191
Books and Articles, 191
Periodicals and Publications, 218
Bibliographies, 222
Nonprint Resources, 224
Videos, 224
8
Summary, 233
Illicit Traficking—Trends and Issues, 233
Post-Perestroika and the Rise of the Oligarchs:
Examples of State Decay and Illicit Traficking
Opportunities, 236
Index, 243
About the Authors, 259
x
Contents

Preface
O
n September 11, 2001, at approximately 8:46 A.M., a hijacked
Boeing 767, United Airlines Flight 11, exploded into the
North Tower of the World Trade Center. At 8:58 A.M., United
Flight 175 was diverted from its course to Los Angeles and di-
rected to New York City; at 9:03 A.M. it exploded into the South
Tower of the World Trade Center. By 10:30 A.M. lower Manhattan
was submerged in ash and debris. Earlier, at 9:38 A.M., as the
great towers of the World Trade Center tottered on the brink of
collapse, yet another jumbo jet, American Airlines Flight 77, hi-
jacked from Dulles International Airport in Washington, D.C.,
slammed into the northwest side of the Pentagon. All the pas-
sengers (fifty-eight), two pilots, and four flight attendants were
killed, including 199 Pentagon employees dead or missing. The
stark awareness of a terrorist attack became total reality as a
fourth plane, United Flight 93, was diverted from its objective of
crashing the United States Capitol or the White House (National
Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States 2003)
by the heroism of passenger Todd Beamer and his fellow pas-
sengers in a fierce resistance to their hijackers, causing United
Flight 93 to veer off-course and crash in an empty field near
Shanksville, Pennsylvania, twenty minutes flying time from
Washington, D.C.
The United States, a nation grievously shocked by the ter-
rorist attacks of 9/11—as the calamitous event has become
known—immediately focused on Afghanistan and destroying its
radical Islamist Taliban regime, which had harbored the al-
Qaeda leadership. The nationalities of the 9/11 hijackers were
varied: twelve Saudis, one Egyptian, one United Arab Emirate,
one Lebanese, and four of unknown nationalities. The ensuing
xi

hunt for the elusive prime perpetrator of this terrorist attack,
Osama bin Laden, and his extremist al-Qaeda terrorist network
continues aggressively.
The struggle against terror has profoundly transformed the
world in many ways, especially in terms of power alignments, in-
ternational and diplomatic relationships, and treaty arrange-
ments. The effects of these newly fashioned political strategies,
agreements, and confrontations on illicit trafficking and transna-
tional crime remain to be seen. Afghanistan and regions of north-
ern Pakistan had been deeply immersed in the production and
distribution of opium, the basic building block of heroin. Will the
intervention in Afghanistan and the assertion of military author-
ity in Pakistan against the power and influence of radical funda-
mentalist and jihad terrorists change the equation of illicit drug
and arms trafficking in Southwest Asia and across Western Eu-
rope and the United States?
On September 11, 2001, war was declared against the United
States not by another nation but rather a nonstate criminal organ-
ization, a terrorist group dedicated to the destruction of American
influence in the Muslim world. The war against terrorism is
global and strikingly unconventional; it is a struggle in which the
safety and security of the American homeland is at stake. The war
against terror is rapidly evolving into a total war with a com-
plexity of ancillary intrigues, corruption, and illicit trafficking.
It took only nineteen individual terrorists on September 11,
2001, to perpetrate this massive attack on New York City and
Washington, D.C.; one could speculate that it would take far
fewer fanatics, each with a suitcase containing a nuclear weapon,
to cripple the nation (and the world). To say that it is highly im-
probable is to beg the question of just how probable was it that four
hijacked airplanes could be turned into kamikaze-guided missiles
killing thousands of innocent civilians and disrupting the econ-
omy of the most powerful nation in the world?
Will transnational crime accelerate in the new terrorist war
environment? Or will it diminish and transform itself into a new
and sophisticated network of illicit trafficking in order to survive
the exigency of stepped-up surveillance, police action, and secu-
rity measures? A positive outcome of the antiterrorism campaign
is the concomitant enhancement of anticrime controls and con-
stricting of illicit trafficking. On the other hand, the effect of this
“new face of war,” where governments are unhinged, toppled,
xii
Preface

and threatened, may weaken capacities to enforce the law and
contain trafficking. What will unfold depends on complex factors.
The structure(s) of illicit trafficking, operative cases, and potential
areas of growth or decline constitute the scope in this book.
Illicit trafficking refers to behavior that facilitates the illegal
entry of persons or prohibited products into a territory. Such be-
havior, typically involving transactions that violate laws and
statutes, is deemed criminal. Trafficking organizations are made
up of not only rigid, hierarchical, corporate-type Cosa Nostra
crime families, but also small, flexible criminal groups specifically
structured to carry out its tasks, such as a “Snakehead” (Chinese
alien smuggling group), which may include agent/recruiters in
the home country, document and transport specialists, host-coun-
try handlers who arrange housing, and job placements. In con-
trast, a weapons-trafficking organization is likely to be more tech-
nically sophisticated requiring experts in freight management
documents packaging and weapons assessment. A drug-traffick-
ing group may vary widely depending on the levels of its opera-
tional parameters and its horizontal and vertical organizational
integration.
The challenges posed by illicit trafficking are formidable. Na-
tions and international organizations have made some progress,
however, in developing methods and procedures to combat the
individuals and criminal enterprises engaged in these activities.
This volume offers a picture of these efforts. It is organized to pro-
vide information on the kinds of trafficking that have emerged in
terms of illegal markets and their operations, and how govern-
ments, organizations, and interest groups have developed vari-
ous initiatives to control and contain trafficking.
This book seeks to explain the rise and increase in illicit traf-
ficking, its operations and markets, and the various ways in
which trafficking is organized. It also provides reference to and
offers analyses of specific criminal trafficking activities such as
the smuggling in women and children, and the markets in light
weapons and nuclear materials. The book also examines the po-
litical, juridical, and law enforcement responses to these crimes,
with attention to the approach of Interpol, the United Nations’
Office of Crime Prevention and Drug Control, and various na-
tional strategies such as those developed by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI) and the U.S. Department of Justice and the
growing number of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs).
Preface
xiii

The book also examines the requirements for a more coordi-
nated and comprehensive antitrafficking strategy worldwide. A
key component is the United Nations Convention Against Transna-
tional Organized Crime. While describing the progress made by
the international community, the book also highlights difficulties
that must be confronted concerning the enduring challenges in
the future.
Illicit trafficking problems derive from numerous sources:
they are in part the unintended consequences of decades of sus-
tained and deliberate Western policies aimed at opening eco-
nomic/business markets, encouraging open, democratic soci-
eties, and spreading sophisticated modern technologies in
commerce, trade, economics, and high finance. The very success
of such endeavors created the infrastructure that makes traffick-
ing possible and profitable.
As will be seen, trafficking problems are difficult to solve and
to control for several reasons. First, they are crimes that cross bor-
ders, their nature precludes unilateral solutions. Second, illicit
trafficking requires the cooperation of a greater number of agen-
cies and official institutional processes. Third, they often occur
within the economic and social spheres of states where corruption
thrives and autocracy rules.
Chapter 1 presents a historical outline, focusing on the con-
ditions that promote these problems. The circumstances and set-
tings that give rise to illicit trafficking are explored.
Chapter 2 examines illicit trafficking as a contemporary phe-
nomenon. It looks at the root causes of the most prominent types
of trafficking. Two key questions round out the discussion: What
are the best methods of coping with the problem, and what pro-
posals and recommendations for controlling and containing the
problem have been implemented? The chapter concludes with a
consideration of the effects of this criminal activity on local com-
munities and government institutions.
Chapter 3 presents a chronology of key events since 1945,
which marks the end of World War II and the beginning of the
Cold War. The issues suggested here concern how the political
and economic relationships involved in trafficking have extended
into the twenty-first century.
Chapter 4 offers a succinct montage of the major criminals in-
volved in trafficking, including profiles of their respective crimi-
nal careers in illicit trafficking.
xiv
Preface

Chapter 5 focuses on four types of trafficking: trafficking in
human beings, narcotics, small arms and light weapons, and nu-
clear materials. Using the web site addresses provided, the reader
may access vast numbers of documents of all types.
Chapter 6 provides information about intergovernmental or-
ganizations (IGOs) and NGOs that advocate and lobby govern-
ment over trafficking issues and monitor state and international
initiatives to control illicit trafficking. Many IGOs fall under the
umbrella of the United Nations system; other bodies have come
into existence as a result of treaty commitments and through the
sponsorship of regional organizations.
Chapter 7 lists books, articles, films, and other media prod-
ucts along with official reports from international and national or-
ganizations regarding illicit trafficking. The bibliographic review
also includes Internet and web sites that offer more informational
links across a broad spectrum of source materials.
Chapter 8 offers an analysis and overview of the new-gener-
ation illicit crime patterns, including new integrative mechanisms
that cross public/private sector boundaries as witnessed in the
tsunami catastrophe of December 2004 in Asia. By systematizing
interagency and public/private sector contacts, it is proposed
that trafficking problems may be more effectively deterred.
Our special thanks to Mildred Vasan who stimulated interest
in the project and to Alicia Merritt of ABC-CLIO whose determi-
nation and enthusiasm carried the project forward. The keen as-
sistance of Criminal Justice student research associates, Brett Finn
and Amanda Farrell, in cataloging current professional resources
in the Illicit Trafficking field greatly enriched the content and
scope of this book.
Reference
National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United States. 2003.
The 9/11 Commission Report. Authorized Edition. New York: W. W. Norton.
Preface
xv


1
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief
History
W
hat is globalization? What are its impacts on nations and
peoples worldwide? With the end of the Cold War, pro-
found economic and political changes liberated masses of
people and at the same time created new conditions and
prospects for crime. Modern illicit trafficking is an outcome of a
general socioeconomic phenomenon known as globalization,
which may be roughly defined as the emergence of a variety of
systems or activities of economic and commercial production,
trade, and services that are worldwide rather than national or
regional in scope and that are generally not controllable by
nation-states alone.
The basic processes of globalization involve mergers of in-
dustrial companies and business, investment of capital in foreign
countries, purchase of existing assets, and construction of new
production facilities. As a result of major improvements in com-
munication technology and engineering and scientific develop-
ments in the basic industrial production of goods and services,
these processes have accelerated massively during the past
twenty-five years. The growth of transnational economic activity
marked by the steady dispersal of production elements (where,
for example, the parts of an American automobile are manufac-
tured in thirty countries and then assembled in the United States)
has nearly obliterated the traditional understanding of trade and
commerce.
1

The multinational corporations (MNCs) are, collectively, the
brains and muscle of this new system. The political and social im-
pacts of this revolution are only now being felt across the world
economies. Globalization has had tidal effects on national
economies, transportation, and the information industry. It has
also changed the way people around the world see themselves,
identify their interests, and stake out their futures. As noted, the
process has been fueled primarily by technological innovations
that continually reshape the world. It is also supported by an ide-
ology, a set of ideas and beliefs that have been labeled market fun-
damentalism. This ideology states primarily that economic mar-
kets are supreme and that the common interest is best served by
allowing markets to develop unconstrained and unfettered by so-
cial/political interventions that otherwise would seek to control
them and inhibit their capacity to generate wealth.
In everyday life globalization often translates into significant
changes in jobs, income, benefits, educational needs, family struc-
ture, lifestyle, and the like. Globalization has altered the occupa-
tional system and job security, and it has created radically new
forms of work. However, other consequences of globalization in-
clude new and heightened forms of crime, violence, and social and
ethnic xenophobia, which have worked to disrupt and sometimes
entirely erode traditional patterns of family and community.
With the unfolding of this process, new categories of winners
and losers have emerged. New ideologies, political movements,
and criminal organizations have arisen to address the psycholog-
ical and economic needs of those who have been dislocated by the
global economic revolution. Our focus in this volume is on the
criminal activity that is developing as a response to globalization.
What Is Illicit Trafficking?
Illicit trafficking is not a new form of crime that emerged with
the end of the Cold War; it is as old as human civilization itself.
However, the challenge illicit trafficking has posed with the col-
lapse of the Soviet Empire in 1991, coupled with the spectacular
technological advances in information and computer science
today, has been both dramatic and unexpected and has trans-
formed world markets. Cybertechnologies in manufacturing and
commercial trade have swept across the world, revolutionized
business activities, and accelerated the uprooting of political sys-
2
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

tems such as the communist bloc within the Warsaw Pact. At the
same time, as we have said, these computer and information
technology developments in world commerce and trade have
also created new criminal opportunities. Modern criminals are
exploiting the globalization of trade and finance and the ma-
chinery of economic technology that drives it. New technological
and economic developments have helped produce new mecha-
nisms for trafficking contraband, conducting illicit trade, laun-
dering money, and engaging in large-scale economic crimes
(Soros 1998; Salzman 2001).
Traditional organized crime groups have also greatly bene-
fited from these developments. More importantly, the sheer
pace of globalization and technological advancements has en-
abled modern criminal organizations to penetrate legitimate
business that once appeared to be immune to criminal abuse
and exploration (Kelly 2001). These trends are jeopardizing vital
U.S. interests, threatening Americans’ very business and finan-
cial institutions.
There are good reasons for defining organized crime clearly
and comprehensively, since so much illicit trafficking involves or-
ganized criminal groups of varying size, structure, sophistication,
and operational perimeters. From the law enforcement stand-
point, an authoritative definition enables government to effec-
tively measure the extent of such crime and to determine how re-
sources may be allocated in attacking it. If it cannot be defined, it
cannot be measured, and if it cannot be measured it is difficult to
assess the effectiveness of anticrime control efforts. The problem
encountered in defining organized crime stems not from the
word “crime” but from the word “organized.” Beyond the sensa-
tional examples of the Cosa Nostra, no standard consensus has
been reached as to when a criminal group is “organized” or how
well organized it may be. Moreover, because organized crime has
become so interwoven into American politics and economic life,
not everyone agrees about the seriousness of particular manifes-
tations of it. A variety of activities that are defined officially as or-
ganized crime—extortion, sports betting, loan sharking, labor
racketeering, for example—are not universally viewed as equally
criminal or socially harmful. Credible threats of violence and the
capacity to enforce these threats, coupled with the ability to neu-
tralize law enforcement, are among the defining features of or-
ganized criminal groups that distinguish them from ordinary
street gangs and criminal entrepreneurs. 
Illicit Trafficking
3

What Are the Roles of Organized Crime
and Transnational Crime in Illicit
Trafficking?
Organized crime may be defined as continuing criminal conspir-
acy that derives profits from illegal activities and goods that the
public demands. The existence and structure of criminal groups
are sustained through the use of violence, corruption of police
and public officials, intimidation, credible threats, and control of
particular illicit markets in drugs, gambling, loan sharking, and
extortion. One of the most dangerous developments in organized
crime at the end of the twentieth century was the trend toward
the formation and consolidation of transnational organized crime
groups. These groups collaborate and cooperate in ways that fa-
cilitate the delivery of illicit goods and services on a vast interna-
tional scale (Mueller 2001).
The transnational style of many modern crime organizations
does not appear to have resulted from a conscious master plan
concocted by some arch criminals. Rather, it emanates from the
organizational flexibility of some group to respond to nuances
within the complex economic environment. Many crime syndi-
cates are suited for the cyber age: namely, they have informal or-
ganizations, and they are sensitive to changes in their surround-
ings, alert to opportunities and threats from law enforcement or
from competing criminal organizations. Law enforcement (first-
responder) agencies are also rooted in local conditions and there-
fore are not able to aggressively attend to local corruption and so-
phisticated illegal markets. In addition, regional political and
economic organizations such as the European Union (EU), which
promote the free flow of people and goods, simultaneously
weaken national borders, thereby creating a serious dilemma.
The very factors that promote economic prosperity contribute to
the growth of transnational organized crime and illicit trafficking.
Free trade, the movement of capital production capacities, and
skilled labor, the availability of cheap labor along with wholesale
and retail markets for consumer goods, also facilitate illicit trade
and transnational organized crime. Russian, Polish, Italian,
British, Chinese, Mexican, and Corsican syndicates, among nu-
merous others, have responded to the new emergent reality. It is
not the Mafia and Triads (secret societies of a criminal character,
4
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

which flourish among overseas Chinese) that have created these
opportunities; rather, it is the nation-states and MNCs that sup-
port unconstrained trade conditions, which are then exploited for
criminal gain. In this regard, ethnic communities can be under-
stood as potential resources for transnational criminal enterprises
(Kelly and Cook 1998). They provide recruitment opportunities,
as well as cover and support for criminal operations, and they
serve as a pool of criminal activists prepared to engage in traf-
ficking activities.
Many immigrants in economically depressed ghettos are
often tempted to participate in criminal enterprises. Unfortu-
nately, even casual participation in criminal gang activities can
sometimes yield greater rewards than can be obtained through le-
gitimate work (Kelly, Chin, and Fagan 2000).
Does Immigration Foster
Illicit Trafficking?
Demographic studies indicate that migration processes driven
by the push and pull factors of economic necessity will continue
to affect millions of people and change the ethnic and social
composition of many nations. It is estimated that between 1991
and 2025 the global workforce will increase by 1.5 billion
people, of whom 1.4 billion will be in the developing world
eager to find survival opportunities (Falchi 1995). The potential
for increased migration by desperate people is enormous, carry-
ing important implications for transnational criminal trafficking
activities.
While most migrants are law-abiding people, among them
are members of criminal organizations who bring their skill,
knowledge, affiliations, and contacts with them to their new habi-
tats. Ethnic enclaves in the United States, for example, harbor sig-
nificant criminal elements (Chin and Kelly 1997). This comes as
no surprise, for, historically, when criminal organizations come
under pressure in their homelands from either law enforcement
or internal wars, their response is to emigrate to areas with lower
risks and more favorable conditions for crime. The Sicilian Dias-
pora of the 1960s and 1970s in places as diverse as Australia,
Venezuela, and Germany is a good example. Another example is
the Cuntera crime family in Venezuela, which has become a key
Illicit Trafficking
5

link between Italian organized crime and cocaine supplies from
Latin America (Jamieson 1995).
Greater international mobility has expanded the capacities
of criminal organizations and has enabled their members to
elude national criminal jurisdictions where they might be high-
priority targets. The increase in business and leisure travel, as
well as the acceleration in migration, is frustrating governments’
ability to monitor and control ingress and egress from the na-
tional territories.
The dissolution of national barriers that occurred following
the collapse of the Soviet Empire also helped intensify alien
smuggling (Kelly and Rieber 2001). Moreover, changes in immi-
gration policy, especially in the West, have led to the increasingly
diversified nationality of illegal immigrants as well as a contin-
ued growth in their number. The result has been the extension
and intensification of alien trafficking groups.
Air transport affords unprecedented opportunities for those
seeking to enter developed nations. The technology also facili-
tates the commission of smuggling crimes and acts of terror as the
events of 9/11, which killed approximately 3,000 people and
brought down the Twin Towers, powerful symbols of American
economic power, so dramatically illustrate.
The ethnic communities newly formed since 1965, together
with more traditional enclaves reinvigorated with new arrivals,
have created new Diasporas that provide a useful bridge for
newcomers to their new culture. But they also serve more sinis-
ter purposes: the ethnic communities as an enclave, barrio, or
ghetto can afford a cover for potential recruits and linkages that
facilitate crime activities. Because immigrant communities are
not easily penetrated by law enforcement, they often provide a
built-in security against the American Cosa Nostra—specifically
the Mafia in America or the “Syndicate” (which the underworld
refers to as Cosa Nostra) and the Mafia, as constituting the global
crime family originating in Sicily—but are far less effective when
targeted against the criminal networks established by the Chi-
nese and Russians. These newer groups employ a range of ob-
scure dialects unfamiliar to law enforcement, thereby confound-
ing attempts at electronic eavesdropping. Moreover, it is difficult
to identify and recruit informers in immigrant communities be-
cause these new immigrants are reluctant to make contact, let
alone cooperate with law enforcement.
6
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

What Is the Relationship of the Volume
of Illicit Trafficking to Globalization?
Globalization has meant the vast growth of international trade.
Lowering tariffs coupled with free trade arrangements and the
gradual integration of the former Soviet bloc nations into the
worldwide trading system led to huge increases in trade in the
1990s (Clark 1996). The growth in air, sea, rail, and truck traffic is
projected to remain constant throughout the first decade of the
twenty-first century. The favorable economic conditions also pro-
vide an environment conducive to transnational crime. The
growth of global trade brings many important benefits for crimi-
nal groups. The opportunities to embed illicit goods in licit com-
merce are multiplying; the increased volume of trade is reducing
the risks of detection and exposure of illicit goods; the random in-
spection of shipping containers, as well as the increased freight,
translates into comparatively few containers being inspected;
and, most ominously, opportunities for smuggling weapons of
mass destruction (WMD) into the United States and other West-
ern societies are increasing exponentially. In short, as we posited
at the beginning of this chapter, the growth of legitimate com-
merce and trade worldwide has been accompanied by an expan-
sion of illicit trade and trafficking. Like a smuggler’s paradise, the
global commerce system offers so many opportunities for rapid
growth that law enforcement agencies cannot keep pace.
What Is the Relationship of the Growth
of Global Finance to Illicit Trafficking?
The new financial infrastructure in the geopolitical environment
consists of a finance system that links nation-states, huge banks,
and their correspondents (affiliates and subsidiaries) with bro-
kerage houses, stock markets, and investment and currency port-
folios in a system that operates twenty-four hours a day. The fi-
nance system has many points of access and makes it possible to
trade anonymously, to move money easily and rapidly, as well as
to obscure the origin and ownership of money profiteering, hence
blurring the distinction between “dirty” and “clean” money. The
Illicit Trafficking
7

mobility of capital parallels that of the transnational criminals
themselves and could not be better suited to the activities of
transnational organized crime. Huge sums of money move
through the mega-system of global finances and its offshore arch-
ipelagos of banks, insurance firms, and credit houses, making il-
licit monies enormously difficult to identify, track, and control.
The finance network means that profits from illicit trafficking
can be repatriated to criminal groups and networks with little dif-
ficulty. Much of what is known as “money laundering” is not about
disguising or cleaning money earned from criminal activities as it
is about recirculating it from the host state to the home state of the
criminal organization where it can be used with impunity. Put dif-
ferently, drug money earned and then deposited in New York State
banks can be wired back through a set of portfolios and company
accounts to, say, Burma or Afghanistan where opium poppies are
cultivated, harvested, and manufactured chemically into heroin.
How Do Worldwide Communication
Technologies Affect Illicit Trafficking?
The growth of information technology and the sophisticated
means of transmitting data provide greater opportunities for in-
tellectual property and data theft. Tampering with computer data
files via “hacking” has had major repercussions, disrupting air
traffic control systems, impairing automated computer-controlled
ware and energy supply systems, and affecting pharmaceutical
and food production processes. Interference with financial trans-
actions in banks and stock markets is a serious issue, perhaps con-
stituting novel opportunities for extortion. For example, criminal
groups could threaten computer systems in an attempt to extort
payments from firms willing to pay in order to keep operating in
a very competitive business environment.
What Are the Defining Characteristics of
Transnational Crime Groups?
The dominant image of organized crime in the United States has
been that of the Mafia clans and crime families that constitute the
8
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

operational units of the American version of the Mafia, which is
known as the Cosa Nostra. The Cosa Nostra in the United States
is structurally different than its Italian cousin. The Cosa Nostra
has a Commission, an executive body of crime bosses who over-
see interfamily affairs and resolve family disputes that cannot be
resolved locally. It also advises and consents to new leadership in
the crime families when top positions are open or vacated by
death or imprisonment of Mafiosi (Kelly 1990). The Mafia, Italy’s
most infamous criminal organization, and other groups, includ-
ing the Neapolitan Camorra, emerged at various times in Italian
history in response to foreign and indigenous political oppression
and economic exploitation. The Mafia, in particular, survived and
strengthened its grip over segments of the peasantry in the rural
areas and over the working-class poor in the impoverished urban
ghettos by acting as protectors of the poor and their interests
while ruthlessly exploiting and terrorizing them at home and
abroad in the Italian immigrant enclaves (Kelly 2002). 
Over time, the culture of mutual protection embedded in a
shadowy, informal system of power degenerated into a parasitic
system of extortion. Selling protection as a commodity in an en-
vironment filled with criminogenic assets spread easily and
widely. Control over illicit markets hastened the degeneracy of
the Mafia into a purely criminal enterprise. Drugs especially, and
the struggles they engendered, left carnage in the streets, and ul-
timately the Mafia as an organization of gratuitous violence was
left in tatters.
The breakup of the Mafia in America began with an aggres-
sive law enforcement campaign in the mid-1970s and culminated
with the “Commission” and the “Pizza Connection” prosecutions
(See Chapter 3, year 1987, Pizza Connection), which put the major
Mafia bosses behind bars for life. In Italy, the anti-Mafia cam-
paign gathered momentum after the brutal murders of the coura-
geous magistrates Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsellino in 1992.
The crackdown led to the arrest of Toto Riina, the Corleonesi boss.
Peniti (informers) became numerous, especially when confessions
meant lighter sentences. But cynicism has reappeared as it begins
to dawn on the authorities that the detailed testimony of self-de-
scribed turncoats might in itself be another curtain pulled over
the truth. Nonetheless, there are now nearly 2,000 peniti under
government protection (Kelly 1994). The Mafia and its sinister
cousins in different lands are redefining their structures and
goals. The new markets for exploitation lie in the global
Illicit Trafficking
9

economies that operate across national boundaries involving traf-
ficking in drugs, weapons, aliens, and money laundering (Arlac-
chi 1985). Since the 1993 arrest of Riina and his heir, Giovanni Br-
usca, by the year 2000 important Mafia chiefs like Bernardo
Provenzano have become fugitives in hiding. It is likely that the
Mafia will respond to government pressures and public educa-
tion by shrinking its involvement in exposed criminal projects
and by making organizational and operational adjustments, in-
cluding restructuring itself into smaller compartmental-type cells
with tightened security (Maloney and Kelly 2000).
Although the Mafia model of a hierarchical power structure
with specialized roles and responsibilities has been challenged, it
is still considered a threat in the U.S. law enforcement circles.
The reality of the situation generally refers to criminal organiza-
tions that are more loosely organized. The former Soviet bloc of
countries has many well-organized gangs that variously operate
on their own initiative, act together in partnerships, or some-
times against one another. Consequently, organized crime in
these settings is best understood as a diffuse and changing net-
work of individuals and groups (Holyst 1998). This may be a
more relevant and accurate description of contemporary organ-
ized crime in many regions of the world than the Cosa
Nostra–type crime family with its hierarchical structure. Actu-
ally, family and kinship ties are often an important component of
criminal affiliation networks (Lupsha 1986). The ties binding
criminal organizations are also based on more extensive social
mechanisms such as shared ethnicity or common experience
(e.g., prisoners doing time or street gang membership) or even,
in the Chinese case, on the notion of guanxi or reciprocal obliga-
tion that can span generations and continents (Chin, Kelly, and
Fagan 1994). These bonds and collaborative mechanisms create a
basis for trust and make it difficult for law enforcement to pene-
trate or infiltrate the criminal organizations.
Network organizations tend to be fluid, highly adaptable,
and resistant to disruption. They possess resilience that other
groups may lack. It is an ideal type of structure for maintaining or-
ganizational integrity; networks are characterized by redundancy,
which means that linkages can be maintained through a variety of
different connections. If connections are broken or infiltrated, they
can be replaced so that the criminal organization can effectively re-
constitute itself. In the event that the core—the leadership and
power base of a crime network—is penetrated by law enforcement
10
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

through undercover work or the cultivation of informants, it can
still be insulated through the imposition of safeguards and cau-
tious restrictions on access to the leadership (Williams 1999).
These flexible organizations are streamlined and possess only the
skills, membership, and resources that they need to sustain them-
selves and support their criminal projects. As such, these organi-
zations tend to extend their influence into the legitimate sectors of
the economy and government through coercion and corruption.
What Are the Relationships among
Governments, Social Structure, and
Organized Crime?
Government weakened by coercion and corruption is susceptible
to organized crime. For example, Colombia, rife with corruption
and violence, has become the corporate headquarters of the
worldwide cocaine trade (Lee and Thoumi 1997). These condi-
tions facilitated opportunities to create large criminal organiza-
tions that in effect became a “state within a state” with enough
power to confront, if not compel, the subservience of a civil soci-
ety’s government (Fuentes and Kelly 1999). A classic example of
the inherent threat a weak state creates to public order and stabil-
ity by the very fact of its inability to provide safety and security
would be Italy in the nineteenth century. In the power vacuums
of Sicily and southern Italy, where police and security forces were
virtually nonexistent or incompetent, the Mafia rose to fill the
power gap. Just as the Mafia fashioned its own authority by of-
fering protection and security to people in return for money, au-
thority, and property (Gambetta 1993), so criminal organizations
today continue to flourish where authority has been eroded and
the state is weak.
A crucial factor in the rise of organized crime, drug traffick-
ing, and other types of illicit trafficking in many Eastern Euro-
pean countries is the nascent stage of centralized democratic gov-
ernment and institutions. A weak state means a vulnerable
infrastructure, ineffective law enforcement, hyperinflation and
unemployment, a narrow tax base, poor transportation infra-
structure, and limited communications. These trends also mean
that there are no social safety nets to protect the public against
crime and exploitation. The weakened state, as we have already
Illicit Trafficking
11

suggested, therefore becomes an attractive environment in which
to settle and operate a criminal organization. This development
has been most alarming in Russia where the regulatory system
operations and frameworks all but collapsed with the disintegra-
tion of the Soviet Union and the transitioning into capitalism and
privatization in 1991 (Kelly, Ryan, and Schatzberg 2002). During
this period, Russia produced a public culture in which “every-
thing was for sale.”
Even when a nation is able to take effective action against or-
ganized crime, a government may choose to tolerate some level of
criminal activities either because it recognizes that crime is some-
times beneficial to the state (through export earnings, as in
Colombia, Mexico, Pakistan, and Russia) or because important
segments of its population benefit from crime (e.g., localized mul-
tiplier effects in the Colombian and Sicilian economies with all
that available cash). 
Organized crime groups that operate beyond the domestic
frontiers can often represent themselves as humanitarians. For ex-
ample, the infamous and powerful Japanese Yakuza (the Japanese
Cosa Nostra) distributed food parcels and afforded other types of
aid and assistance to victims of the Kobe earthquakes in 1999.
And acting like a modern-day Robin Hood, Pablo Escobar, the
top cocaine boss in the Medellín Colombian drug cartel, provided
housing programs to eradicate the slums of Colombia’s cities in
late 1988 to 1989. Criminal organizations, including the American
crime syndicates during Prohibition, have often portrayed them-
selves as positive forces in society. As Al Capone often exclaimed,
he gave the public what it wanted; in his view, he was just a busi-
nessman. Capone opened soup kitchens and handed out money
to desolate people living in the streets; his self-image was that of
a public benefactor, not a dangerous crime boss (Kelly 2002b).
Creating sympathy for criminal organizations is part of a strategy
calculated to nullify law enforcement activities. As history has
demonstrated, an alienated population whose needs are not met
by a state that criminalizes certain goods and services in demand
(e.g., alcohol, sex) is likely to provide an economic base of support
for organized criminals. When, however, crime groups like the Si-
cilian Mafia or the Colombian drug cartels embark on violent
campaigns against the state and harm the public, government
and individual tolerance declines rapidly.
Corruption is another tool through which crime organiza-
tions can disarm the state. The extensive penetration of criminal
12
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

corruption activities into the state immunizes criminals from law
enforcement. When the corruption is deep and persistent, a vir-
tual partnership develops between criminal organizations and
government officials that embrace one another in a symbiotic re-
lationship (Kelly 1979; 1986). Criminal groups located in a state
whose government is weakened by corruption tend to possess a
secure safety net in which to operate. In the corrupt state, such as
Italy before the anti-Mafia reforms of the 1990s, many segments
of the government may be engaged in collusive relationship, such
that key government figures become partners with gangsters in a
variety of criminal enterprises. Such was the case with the Mafia.
Borders and locations are important for criminal organiza-
tions because they represent different levels of risks and demar-
cate different markets. Crime organizations are more likely to de-
velop in home bases where the risks are low and where they may
act as sanctuaries and safe havens. From these cocoons, criminals
can engage in illicit activities and enterprises with impunity. And
as long as the main bases of criminal organizations remain out of
reach, state actions in host states against local subsidiaries or
branches of the major organization will not have a decisive anti-
crime impact. The Sicilian Mafia, operating drug-trafficking rings
in the United States, Venezuela, and Brazil, was not completely de-
stroyed by the “Pizza Connection” drug cases against its groups in
the United States (Alexander 1998). Russia, Nigeria, and the Cen-
tral Asian republics that were part of the former Soviet Union are
examples of safe havens for organized crime groups.
Do Ethnic Conflicts and State Dissolution
Facilitate Illicit Trafficking?
Toward the end of the twentieth century when the Soviet Union
collapsed and the Cold War that had shaped the world’s politics
since 1945 ended, some nations simply disintegrated into warring
factions. Ironically, these tendencies toward fragmentation are
part of the globalization trends that are enveloping the world. For
some, the collapse of nations in Africa, Central Asia, and Central
Europe represent the “retribalization” of societies that offers new
opportunities and environments for criminal organizations. State
crises involving ethnic conflicts offer numerous opportunities for
trafficking in arms. An important feature of the war in the former
Illicit Trafficking
13

Yugoslavia in Serbia, Bosnia, Croatia, and Kosovo involved deals
characterized by arms for drugs as ethnic groups figured out
ways of acquiring the resources for armed struggle. Linkages be-
tween warring parties (as in Chechnya, Russia) and criminal or-
ganizations appear to be mutually beneficial (Barber 1995). In
some cases, the dangerous liaison is broken, and the purely crim-
inal organization is cut out as the nationalist/ethnic guerrilla in-
surgents engage in criminal activities of their own—where the
terrorist fighters turn into felons (Kelly and Schatzberg 1995).
Criminal endeavors provide a financial substitute that enables
them to sustain their political struggle as occurred with the Bol-
sheviks in Czarist Russia and the Vietnamese Vietminh in the af-
termath of the French colonial occupation (Kelly 1973).
Do Political Instability and Military
Conflict Contribute to Criminal Activities?
Political instability and military conflict pose both problems and
opportunities. Criminal organizations flourish in conditions of
war and unrest, as is clear from recent evidence of large-scale
opium production in war-torn Afghanistan. It is therefore diffi-
cult to avoid the conclusion that whatever posture they assume—
either as guerrillas turning into criminals or as members of mafias
with an alliance of crime and revolution—creates mutual re-
sources of monies and weapons to the war machines of terror,
counterterror, revolution, and counterrevolution. The links be-
tween crime and terrorist insurrections masquerading as revolu-
tions appear to be growing stronger and also perpetrate conflicts
that encourage terrorism and make peace more elusive. In addi-
tion, the perpetuation of the crime and political conflict nexus
may bring about hybrid organizations that are part criminal and
part terrorist. Thus, ethnic conflict such as the Bosnian war be-
tween Christians and Muslims may have dangerous ramifica-
tions for crime and terrorist activities long after the fighting sub-
sides. First, incentives may develop that will promote criminal
activity earmarked to support political struggles. Second, ethnic,
social, and religious conflicts can create and then perpetuate ha-
treds that transcend national boundaries and the immediate lo-
cale of the conflict. The Turkish/Armenian animosities, for exam-
ple, continue nearly a century after the expulsion of the Armenian
14
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

masses from Eastern Anatolia and Thrace during World War I by
the Turks. Soon after these Armenian clearances, hundreds of
thousands of Muslim refugees, many of them Kurds, came flood-
ing in from Russian Transcaucasia. The forced migrations and
concomitant immigration continue to manifest virulent ethnic an-
imosity. Third, criminal groups can provide cadres of specialists
in violence that can be directed against governments or used by
crime organizations. Fourth, as states react to the transformations
of their cultures, institutions, population composition, and eco-
nomic systems, some will succeed and grow, whereas others who
confront opportunistic criminal groups will succumb to crime
and corruption.
What Are the Trends among
Transnational Crime Groups?
Safe havens, diversity of groups and products, consolidation, cor-
ruption, coopted political power, the infiltration of legitimate
businesses, the formation of strategic criminal alliances, and
criminal cooperation—all are trends worth watching as the global
economies expand and grow beyond the boundaries of national
sovereignties. The problem of safe haven countries that tolerate
or welcome criminal organizations will continue and grow as
long as huge amounts of criminal capital are available. Criminal
sanctuaries are likely to increase among poor countries where
drug money substitutes for foreign direct investments. Coupled
with the spread of safe havens is the increasing diversity of crim-
inal organizations. Not only are new groups spawned as lucrative
criminal opportunities occur, but successful crime groups tend to
spread out involving themselves in new enterprises. This often
stimulates criminal opportunities in other ethnic groups poised to
exploit whatever opportunities beckon them. When the Colom-
bian cocaine cartels sought to export and wholesale cocaine in the
United States, without becoming involved in the high-risk street
distribution retail side of the business, they cultivated partner-
ships with the Crips and Bloods (Los Angeles street gangs) on the
West Coast and the Dominicans in the Northeast of the United
States (Klein, Maxson, and Cunningham 1989). The illicit traffic
might also include legal products (e.g., cigarettes and legal phar-
maceuticals sold more cheaply outside the United States) where
Illicit Trafficking
15

the price and tax differential across borders make smuggling very
attractive. Illicit traffic in goods that are prohibited but for which
there is a demand (chlorofluorocarbons gases), goods for which
demand greatly exceeds supply (human organs for transplant
surgery), and goods that promise high levels of profit (precious
objects d’art, components for nuclear weapons) are likely to pro-
mote more criminal activities. Transnational crime groups en-
gaged in trafficking of illicit goods use couriers (so-called mules),
or low-level gang members who do not fit law enforcement pro-
files and are likely to be out of the range of experience of domes-
tic law enforcement. Attempting to deal with unknown criminals,
organizations, and illicit goods adds considerably to the enforce-
ment work and assessments concerning the scope of the problem
of trafficking (Lee and Thoumi 2003).
Evidence suggests that in the post–Cold War environment
since 1989, while crime organizations appear to be proliferating,
the types of crime and crime organizations have consolidated and
blurred. For instance, in Russia, organized crime and white-collar
crime are increasingly indistinguishable, especially in schemes of
financial fraud. In the United States, Russian criminal groups
have been very successful in Medicare/Medicaid fraud in Cali-
fornia and in running petroleum tax evasion schemes in New
York and New Jersey (Handelman 1995).
Another disturbing development concerns the arrogance of
crime groups that dare to move from the subordination and co-
optation of political elites to the direct control of political power.
The Mafia in Sicily attempted just that a decade ago: to openly
control politics through violence against political leaders and
government officials (Maloney and Kelly 2000). In Bolivia in the
1980s, drug traffickers actually seized government power for a
short period (Lee 1998). The use of “outlaw states” such as
Afghanistan under the joint influence and control of the Taliban—
a fundamentalist Islamic sect that took power in 1992—and al-
Qaeda—a terrorist organization involved in opium trafficking—
poses significant problems. In addition to seizing political power,
criminal groups are more likely to go beyond infiltration to con-
trol of legitimate business (Kelly 1999). Nearly fifty years ago in
the United States, certain sectors of the economy—indeed, whole
industries such as construction in New York City and skilled
trade occupations (teamsters, dock workers, coal miners)—were
under the control of crime families and syndicates (Block 1983;
1991). In the former Soviet Union, there are signs that the Russian
16
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

mafia and other regional crime syndicates are taking control of
large sectors of the economy, including the banking industry
(Shelley 1995). This affords advantages to criminal groups be-
cause owning or controlling a bank means that money laundering
can proceed with few obstacles and loans can be made to firms
prepared to kick back or do business with mafia-endorsed busi-
ness. Furthermore, through control of a pivotal financial mecha-
nism such as a bank or credit house, strategic alliance among
criminal organizations is more likely to occur. This happened in
the United States when the Italian crime families formed La Cosa
Nostra and also when the Sicilian Mafia coalesced around a Com-
mission governing the numerous independent cosche (groups)
(Servadio 1976). The efforts of law enforcement to cooperate have
served as both a primary threat and an incentive for criminal or-
ganizations to cooperate. Just as alliances and mergers are more
frequent in the legitimate business world, they are likely to be
more common among transnational criminal organizations. Sim-
ilarly, like legitimate business firms, criminal organizations will
include in their division of labor specialists in money laundering,
security, and transport; chemists to regulate the quality and vol-
ume of drug products; and so on. In short, as is true of legitimate
businesses, criminal firms are interested in creating a hospitable
operational environment, which means one in which law en-
forcement has been sufficiently corrupted to have its anticrime
control measures neutralized. Another important element in
criminal defenses are measures that rely on good counterintelli-
gence which through infiltration of government and law enforce-
ment agencies will reveal law enforcement’s next moves.
Can Law Enforcement Operate Effectively
in a Global Environment?
Illicit trafficking has benefited from the end of the Cold War and
the globalization of business and travel. International crime
groups—as with noncriminal entities—have unprecedented free-
dom of movement, making it easier for them to cross borders and
to expand the range and scope of their operations. As a result, vir-
tually every region or country in the world has seen an increase
in illicit trafficking—as either a source or transit market zone for
illegal contraband or products; as a venue for money laundering
Illicit Trafficking
17

and illicit financial transactions; or as a base of operations for
criminal organizations with global networks. Many regions and
countries serve all three functions for criminal enterprises.
Besides making the security and law enforcement chal-
lenges for the United States more complex domestically, the
spread of illicit trafficking activities threatens vital U.S. interests
abroad. Four key questions and issues need to be addressed in
order to fully grasp the forces that pose threats to American citi-
zens and U.S. commercial, economic, and security interests. First,
what are the dynamic forces regionally and in nations/states that
promote illicit trafficking activities? Second, how do criminal
groups take advantage of these economic and political changes
that function as catalysts for crime? Third, what are the impacts
of criminal activity, and the corruption related to it, on national
and regional political and economic stability? Fourth and finally,
what are the main criminal activities and scope of operations of
major trafficking organizations in different regions and countries
worldwide? 
Western Europe
Like the United States, Western European states are lucrative tar-
gets and attractive operating environments for traffickers because
of their wealth, communications, and transport infrastructure.
Western European populations are desirable venues for drug
marketing, as well as other contraband and illicit services. More-
over, the size, density, and availability of commercial and banking
services in Western Europe’s cities and their interconnectedness
make them valuable to illicit financial transactions that include
money laundering.
The market reforms enacted by the EU permit unfettered
movement of goods, services, labor, and capital throughout most
of Western Europe. The EU’s sophisticated structure facilitating
international trade attracts a huge volume of people and goods
passing through airports and seaports. Traffickers and interna-
tional criminals take advantage of this structure in order to move
drugs, arms, illegal aliens, and other contraband to all regions of
the world. Because of their sophisticated economies and financial
systems, criminals also use Western European countries as a
venue for money laundering and other illicit financial transac-
tions. Indeed, even its enemies—terrorist groups and rogue
states—use Western European commercial and financial centers
18
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

in efforts to evade international embargoes or to acquire pro-
scribed technologies and materials needed for chemical and nu-
clear weapons of mass destruction. In the aftermath of September
11, most Western European governments have changed or are
changing their domestic laws to conform to Financial Action Task
Force on Money Laundering (FATF) anti–money laundering stan-
dards. Despite these improved enforcement mechanisms, West-
ern Europe remains a primary locale for money laundering. Eu-
ropean states provide numerous alternative channels to place and
to legitimize proceeds generated in illicit trafficking enterprise.
EU members face yet other threats from international drug
traffickers and from illegal immigrants, many of who wind up
employed by ethnic-based crime groups to make their liveli-
hood. West European drug markets are close to rivaling those of
the United States in both size and profitability. According to Eu-
ropean law enforcement information, Turkish and Albanian
criminal groups have dominated the wholesale distribution of
Southwest Asian heroin in most of the EU countries. In addition,
South American drug traffickers have been developing a grow-
ing cocaine market in Western Europe since the early 1980s
(Fuentes and Kelly 1999). The deep-water ports of Rotterdam
and Amsterdam in the Netherlands are primary entry points for
drug trafficking in northeastern Europe, as demonstrated by
analysis of drug seizure data and law enforcement information
(Chang 1999). In particular, cocaine seizures in Europe reported
by Interpol more than tripled in the 1990s, from 14.3 metric tons
in 1990 to about 44 metric tons in 1999 (National Security Coun-
cil 1998). EU countries are a primary destination for illegal im-
migrants, including women and children smuggled into the
Continent for prostitution and pornography businesses con-
trolled by organized crime.
Traditional and more modern forms of transnational organ-
ized crime flourish in the poorer Mediterranean region where,
compared to northern Europe, stagnant economic conditions and
high unemployment rates are widespread and help to promote
organized criminal activities. Many ethnic-based crime groups
have also established footholds in expatriate enclaves in most EU
countries (Arlacchi 2001). Cultural and linguistic ties between
Spain/Portugal and South American drug traffickers have been
exploited to stimulate the demand for cocaine in the profitable
markets of Europe. The ethnic enclaves serve as bases for organ-
ized crime where, for instance, criminal networks and cells with
Illicit Trafficking
19

ties in Turkey, Iran, the Balkan countries, and North Africa have
taken root. Crime groups are largely involved in contraband
smuggling of drugs and arms. Turkish and Albanian crime syn-
dicates have emerged as principal distributors of heroin culti-
vated in Southwest Asia targeted for Europe.
As in the United States, public opinion in many European
countries ascribes high crime rates and general societal distress to
foreign ethnic-organized crime groups. Also, in recent years, with
addiction becoming a more serious criminal and medical prob-
lem, the Europeans have become less tolerant of drug use (Fijnaut
2001). Now, two drugs in particular, heroin and cocaine, are most
often cited in drug-related crime, deaths, and HIV infection. In-
creasingly, EU nations are adopting a more aggressive posture to-
ward drug trafficking. With the criminal threat having become
more multifaceted since the collapse of Cold War barriers begin-
ning in 1989, many European states have broadened and intensi-
fied their law enforcement campaigns against transnational crime
that lies at the heart of illicit trafficking. For example, after the
1992 assassinations of magistrates Falcone and Borsellino, Italy
targeted the Sicilian Mafia, with the result that many key Mafia
bosses and soldiers were arrested and convicted (Martello 1992;
Schneider and Schneider 2003). In addition, the United Kingdom
and Italy are concerned about Nigerian crime groups, and Cen-
tral European states such as Germany, Poland, the Czech Repub-
lic, Slovakia, and Hungary are focusing on the growing role
played by ethnic Albanian and Bulgarian groups; Russian crimi-
nal groups have attracted attention not only in the United States
but also in Western Europe, Israel, and the Far East (Kelly and
Rieber 2001).
Greater awareness of the international crime threat has in-
creased anticrime cooperation within Western Europe. In 1990,
Europol was created as a crime-fighting initiative on the Conti-
nent. It serves as a collaborative mechanism for collecting, classi-
fying, and sharing information with member states and groups.
Eastern and Central Europe
In 1991, driven by nationalistic fervor in many of the republics
and a collapsing economy, the Soviet Union dissolved and Gor-
bachev resigned as president. This fall of communism and the
end of tight border controls in Eastern and Central Europe led
foreign criminal organizations to become involved chiefly in il-
20
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

licit trafficking in contraband and licit goods (Bell 2000). With the
breakdown of the old order and resources redirected to funda-
mental political and economic problems, Russian, Italian, Colom-
bian, Nigerian, and Chinese groups have all made inroads into
these regions as well as in the Balkans and southeast Mediter-
ranean. Several of the region’s nation-states serve as transit points
for heroin from Southwest Asia. Poland and Croatia may be
emerging as transportation routes for South American cocaine
destined for Western and Eastern Europe.
Geography is a primary factor in the growth of organized
crime in Eastern and Central Europe. The region functions as a
strategic crossroads between Russia and the new independent
states, which are major source areas for transnational and domes-
tic organized crime. Alcohol, tobacco, automobiles, and other
high-demand consumer items that are generally unavailable or
very expensive in Russia are smuggled into the region. For exam-
ple, Hungary shares borders with seven countries; its relatively
well-developed transportation system and road networks make it
a major transit zone for all sorts of contraband smuggling. Poland
and the Czech Republic also serve as crossroads for trafficking di-
rectly with Western European markets and include extensive
smuggling in stolen vehicles moving from West to East. Bulgaria
and Romania remain key countries on the old Balkan route be-
tween Turkey and Central Europe. The criminal entrepreneurs in
these countries have expanded their rackets in the West to acquire
amphetamines. Bulgaria, after China, is the world’s largest source
of counterfeit and pirated compact discs (CDs).
Russia, the Balkans, and the Newly
Independent States
At the end of the Cold War Russia and the Newly Independent
States (NIS) became fertile ground for expanding organized
crime. The end of police states, the relaxation of social controls,
and the opening of borders in these formerly “closed” societies
have allowed both local and foreign criminal organizations un-
precedented freedom to operate. Criminal networks comprised of
traditional organized crime groups, skilled professionals, and
corrupt politicians and officials have moved to fill vacuums cre-
ated by political and economic change. Criminal groups and
many public officials have become intertwined, thereby enabling
criminals to aggressively cultivate business relationships with of-
Illicit Trafficking
21

ficial and private entrepreneurs who can provide “front” compa-
nies with export licenses, customs exemptions, and government
contracts. Russian organized crime was notably pervasive
throughout the former Soviet Union and served as a model in
forming more indigenous, local groups in the region. Apart from
massive drug trafficking, Russian criminal groups have pene-
trated the banking sector of financial institutions by periodically
providing cash infusions to troubled banks and by using extor-
tion or sheer violent intimidation. In some cases, banks are
bought outright, and the control is used to launder illicit pro-
ceeds, to obtain financial information about potential extortion
targets, and to evade government regulators.
Some of the business enterprises suspected of association
with Russian criminal organizations are large MNCs that are en-
gaged in the export/import trade and commodities brokerage
whose assets are sufficiently hidden in offshore banking havens
that deprive the Russian government of substantial legitimate tax
revenues (Kelly and Rieber 2003). The hard currency–earning oil
and gas sector of the Russian economy is one of the most prof-
itable havens for organized crime. Russian organized crime has
also been extensively involved in smuggling gems and precious
metals out of the country. According to internal studies author-
ized by President Boris Yeltsin in 1994, 70 to 80 percent of private
businesses paid extortion to organized crime, amounting to 20
percent of their revenues, which put them in the awkward posi-
tion of not being able to fulfill their tax obligations (Williams
1997).
The relative dependence of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania on
Russian energy supplies, coupled with the importance of Baltic
seaports for Russian transit trade, offers opportunities for crime
groups. Geographically, the Baltic States are the major commer-
cial outlet between Russia and the West. Not surprisingly, organ-
ized crime groups take advantage of the high volume of trade
through these ports to smuggle contraband both ways. Operating
within the sizable ethnic Russian populations in the Baltic States,
crime groups have taken advantage and integrated legitimate
business enterprises into these criminal empires. Numerous front
companies are now situated in the export/import sectors that fa-
cilitate money laundering and illicit trade. In Ukraine, Moldova,
the Caucasus (Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan), and Central
Asia (Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan, Turk-
menistan), the mountainous regions have never had adequate
22
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

law enforcement control of criminal activity. These remote areas
have become alternatives to Southwest Asian/Balkan trafficking
routes for drugs. Local, powerful Russian criminal organizations
with international connections operate in these areas (Shelley
2003).
With close ties to a corrupt military, organized crime groups
are believed to be heavily involved in illicit arms trafficking. Most
of these deals involve sales of weapons and materials in Russia
and the NIS. Some of the arms, however, have gone to Chechnya
and to the Taliban and al-Qaeda in Afghanistan.
In the United States, Russian and Eastern European organ-
ized crime groups are now considered as significant a threat as La
Cosa Nostra. With their sophistication and international connec-
tions, Russian organized crime can advantageously expand their
criminal operations. American law enforcement analyses of the
Russian criminal element indicate that they are better educated
and more occupationally skilled than the average member of La
Cosa Nostra (New York State Organized Crime Task Force and
New Jersey Commission of Investigation 1996). Russian criminal
organizations in the United States are involved primarily in ex-
tortion, drug trafficking, auto theft, cigarette smuggling, money
laundering, trafficking in stolen art, and a wide array of schemes,
including health-care fraud (Finkenauer 1994; Kenney and Finke-
nauer 1995).
South Asia, Southeast Asia, and China 
South Asia is a primary source of heroin for the international
drug trade and European markets. Drug abuse has increased dra-
matically in the major and transit countries that are at the cross-
roads of the Southwest Asia heroin trade. According to UN esti-
mates, in Pakistan alone, the heroin addict population has grown
from virtually none in 1980 to more than 2 million and perhaps as
high 4 million by the turn of the century (Flynn 2000). Under pre-
dominantly Taliban rule, international terrorists and drug traf-
fickers were able to operate with impunity in Afghanistan (Nor-
land 2001). The Taliban gave sanctuary to renegade Saudi
terrorist Osama bin Laden, allowing him to operate terrorist
training camps in Afghanistan. Bin Laden, in return, used his
wealth and business networks to help support the Taliban. De-
spite the Taliban’s public condemnation of the illicit narcotics in-
dustry, virtually all of Afghanistan’s opium poppy cultivation
Illicit Trafficking
23

and morphine base and heroin processing were located in Tal-
iban-controlled territory (Kelly, in press).
In Southeast Asia, drug-trafficking armies operate in Burma’s
remote opium-producing region. Ethnic Chinese and Thai crimi-
nal networks in Burma and Thailand play a major role as brokers,
financial backers, and transporters in the heroin trade, with social
and political consequences for all countries in the region (Mueller
2001). A criminal underground largely immune from law enforce-
ment because of the corruption of powerful politicians, govern-
ment officials, police, and military figures has resulted in govern-
ment and institutional instability. AIDS, associated with narcotics
abuse, has spread; violence and poverty have damaged societies
caught up in the suffocating web of crime and trafficking.
China’s role as a source of transnational criminal activity has
paralleled its emergence as a global economic poser. The factors
attributable to the decline of communist social policies in China
have given criminal groups unprecedented flexibility. For exam-
ple, the abolition of internal travel controls facilitates moving
drugs, arms, and illegal aliens to coastal ports for smuggling out
of the country. Corruption, particularly at the local level, has con-
tributed to international criminal activity in China. Often what is
lacking is not so much interest in proper law enforcement as mod-
ern equipment and training in sophisticated police tactics (Chin
2003). The stake that many Chinese officials have in business en-
terprise lends itself to profit taking priority over duty and office.
Chinese arms factories, under pressure to earn hard currency and
attract easy money on the black market, may be a source of
weapons for Chinese arms traffickers. Similarly, in the legitimate
pharmaceutical production industry, drugs may be illegally ex-
ported or diverted to the international illicit drug markets. These
types of opportunities, together with Beijing’s policy of inviting
overseas Chinese businessmen to trade and invest in China, have
allowed powerful Chinese Triads, criminal organizations operat-
ing illicit underground economies from Hong Kong and Taiwan,
to establish strong footholds on the mainland. The Triads have set
up numerous varied businesses in Guangdong and Fujian
Provinces (Booth 1991).
By 1998, the Chinese government recognized that some of its
economic policies served as an inducement rather than a deter-
rent to crime. For example, high tariffs and taxes and other barri-
ers to trade made smuggling consumer goods very lucrative. Ille-
24
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

gal imports deprive the government of customs revenue and may
seriously disrupt the steady progression of start-up consumer re-
tail business.
As one of the world’s leading financial, commercial, and
transportation centers, Hong Kong has long been a hub of crimi-
nal activity in East Asia. Hong Kong is one of East Asia’s major
sanctuaries for heroin drug profits. Hong Kong’s ethnic Chinese
Triads hold control over local criminal activity. Its two largest Tri-
ads, 14K and Sun Yee On, continue to “protect” many retail busi-
nesses involved in manufacturing and distributing counterfeit
CDs and are engaged in buying and selling contraband CDs and
other illicit goods (Chin 1991). Like Hong Kong, Taiwan has
deeply entrenched organized-crime syndicates in its business and
politics. Groups such as United Bamboo and the Four Seas Triads
are very influential in Taiwan’s local communities.
Chinese organized crime has strong roots in ethnic enclaves
around the world. Local Chinese crime groups, ranging from
street gangs to Tongs (version of the Chinese Triads; fraternal as-
sociations engaged in criminal activities as well as legitimate
communal service) are also extensively involved in local rackets,
such as gambling, loan sharking extortion, drugs, and prostitu-
tion (Kelly, Chin, and Fagan 2000). Europe and North America are
major targets for Chinese criminal networks.
Japan
After the end of World War II in 1945, the Yakuza, Japan’s main
crime syndicate, gained power and popular appeal. The Yakuza
were among the world’s largest and most powerful crime con-
federations (Iwai 1986). They were highly structured like the tra-
ditional Italian American Cosa Nostra crime families. Yakuza
have penetrated Japanese society and achieved some acceptance
with society at large. Twenty years ago, according to Japan’s Na-
tional Police Agency, an estimated 3,000 Yakuza groups operated
(Kaplan and Dubro 1986). The Yakuza were adept at international
crime and set up shop in Manila’s prostitution and pornography
industries in the Philippines. Elements of the Yakuza also estab-
lished themselves in Australia as well as in the large Japanese en-
clave in the Hawaiian Islands. Today, however, as has happened
with the traditional La Cosa Nostra in the United States, their in-
fluence has declined.
Illicit Trafficking
25

South America and Central America:
Colombia and Mexico
As the main source of cocaine for the world market, South
America—especially Colombia, Peru, Bolivia, Ecuador, and
Venezuela—represents the primary locus of the international
drug trade (Lupsha and Cho 2001). Over the last three decades,
however, transnational criminal activities linked to South Amer-
ica have expanded beyond the drug trade and become more mul-
tidimensional (Inciardi 1991). The continent’s increased commer-
cial and transportation links to Europe and Africa as well as the
United States attracted foreign criminal organizations including
the Sicilian Mafia (Blumenthal 1998). The drug trade in Colombia
has helped fuel decades of corruption, violence, political strife,
and terrorist insurgencies. The drug traffickers in the large cartels
have bought power and influence at the highest levels of the gov-
ernment, judiciary, and financial institutions. Apart from drugs,
Colombia is also the world leader in the production of counterfeit
U.S. currency.
Although most Central American governments are strength-
ening their antidrug efforts, they appear to be less rigorous in
dealing with the problem of alien smuggling through their
countries. No major organizations or cartels control or dominate
alien smuggling. Still, nearly 500,000 U.S.-bound migrants are
estimated to move through Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras,
Nicaragua, and Santo Domingo and are handled by several hun-
dred independent smugglers who cooperate in loosely linked
networks stretching across the region from the Gulf of Mexico to
the Caribbean archipelagos.
For many years, Mexico has been a hideaway for bandits
and a staging area for cross-border smuggling. Criminal activity
across the U.S. Southwest border has been stimulated by a real
step-up in legitimate commerce occasioned by expanded bilat-
eral trade agreements. The substantial increase in trade between
the United States and Mexico resulting from the North American
Free Trade Act (NAFTA), though greatly benefiting legitimate
business interests on both sides of the border, has also generated
greater opportunity for traffickers smuggling in illegal immi-
grants, drugs, and other contraband (Rumors 2003).
Powerful Mexican drug-trafficking organizations exert con-
siderable influence on the Mexican side of the border. More than
half the cocaine smuggled into the United States comes across the
26
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

southwest border with Mexico. Also, criminal groups smuggle il-
legal aliens and engage in product piracy, stolen vehicles/auto
parts, tobacco, firearms, and alcohol. Mexico is also believed to be
one of the top money-laundering countries in Latin America.
Mexican drug lords reportedly repatriate much of their profits in
bulk cash shipments directly from the United States and recycle
these funds in money exchange houses along the border. Their
power and influence have significant political and economic im-
pact in Mexico (Lupsha 1995; Pimenal 2003).
United States
Until a decade ago, organized crime in the United States was so
tenacious that it was viewed as much more than a mere outlaw
way of life. Organized criminal conduct in the United States con-
tinues by performing services and providing goods for illicit ac-
tivities (e.g., pornography, prostitution, and narcotics). Much of
the public’s fascination and ambivalence about the American un-
derworld may be seen as a consequence of the intangible links be-
tween law-abiding and law-breaking elements. Unless someone
is a direct victim of a gangster, uncompromising public hostility
toward organized crime has always been muted. Moreover, busi-
nesspeople have frequently used criminal groups to break em-
ployee strikes and to participate in commercial wars over retail
and wholesale markets. Gangs have been utilized by legitimate
business to frustrate competition and ruin rivals. At the same
time, organized crime groups have played important roles in as-
sisting labor unions to resist employers and in putting together
the multiethnic labor force. In these roles, gangsters acted as
padrones, as labor disciplinarians, or as gatekeepers for industrial-
ists concerned with price stability, the control of labor costs, and
limiting the number of competitive firms in the industrial arena.
Thus, it is naïve to suppose that businesspeople were simply
preyed upon as victims. Indeed, the putative victims used the vic-
timizers for their own ends (Kelly 2002).
For more than a century, along with the infiltration of legiti-
mate business through extortion and their more conventional
vice activities, organized criminals have enjoyed lucrative rela-
tionships with political parties and their urban “machines” (Mer-
ton 1957). Many gangsters have become “political merchants”
and entrepreneurs and have played significant roles in urban
politics by terrorizing and manipulating votes in local elections,
Illicit Trafficking
27

by working around and through government bureaucracies, by
subverting them, or by using their natural inertia to stymie re-
forms. As consorts of greedy and unscrupulous businesspeople
and cynical politicians, organized criminals represent one ele-
ment in an illicit and mutually beneficial link that reaches deeply
into many social institutions. These relationships tend to blur the
distinction between legitimate society and the underworld. Thus,
the determination to destroy organized crime is necessarily
blunted by the facts that the underworld and the upper world of
American society have been dependent upon each other and have
been so intertwined that isolating one from the other is almost im-
possible.
The successful prosecution of Italian American crime families
in the 1980s and 1990s portend much about organized crime and
its future. Scholarly and popular fiction writing allot much space
to the Mafia because the historical record plainly demands such
emphasis. Such a focus, however, distorts the contexts in which
crime operates and deflects attention from gangsters of other eth-
nic backgrounds and social settings who are not usually thought
of as part of the criminal milieu. However, prosecutors’ relentless
use of RICO (the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organization
Act) has broadened the scope of organized crime to include other
ethnic criminals as well as white-collar and corporate offenders.
The idea that organized crime occurs in office suites as well
as on the impoverished streets has always been a leading theme
of radical criminologists (Chambliss and Block 1981). Conse-
quently, a significant number of modern scholars focus on the
conditions that breed organized criminality, the structure and or-
ganization of criminal groups, the environments in which they
operate, and their ties to the larger, legitimate upper world of
American society (Arlacchi 1995). Presently, organized crime in
the United States is popularly understood to be a function of
three major factors: conspiracy, enterprise, and ethnicity. Perhaps
more than in any other area of crime in America, ethnicity matters
in affecting the methods of criminal activities, in establishing po-
sitions within a crime organization, and in producing the sense of
trust and loyalty necessary to unite the group. Similar ethnic
background ensures, to some degree, that members share com-
mon values. For many observers, ethnicity is a delicate topic that
touches on matters of political correctness, though gangsters have
never felt bound by such discretion. In the 1963 government hear-
28
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

ings where La Cosa Nostra first received public mention, in-
former Joseph Valachi stated: “I’m not talking about Italians, I’m
talking about criminals”—a vital distinction for any discussion of
organized crime activities.
American prisons are filled with gangsters of every ethnic
background convicted of a wide variety of criminal offenses. Yet
until fairly recently, a debate still raged about the meaning of or-
ganized crime (Cowan and Century 2002). Although this may
seem odd and even trivial given the intensity of law enforcement
activity and prosecutions, no one definition seems to have satis-
fied both practitioners and scholars. Organized crime is not re-
stricted to the activities of the conventional and fairly well-known
criminal groups such as the Mafia, La Cosa Nostra, the Triads,
Colombian drug cartels, or other ethnic and racial criminal syn-
dicates. In the savings and loan scandal of the 1980s, for example,
there were criminal conspiracies between savings and loan offi-
cials, including accountants, lawyers, and real estate developers.
Such criminal collusion, when compared with traditional organ-
ized crime conduct involving no-show construction jobs or pro-
tection payoffs, reveals more similarities than differences. Some
examples illustrate that much organized crime is committed by
otherwise legitimate and official agencies and is as harmful as the
crimes of recognized criminal enterprises. Likewise in illicit traf-
ficking, otherwise legitimate businesses and entrepreneurs may
engage in illegal activities in goods and services if enforcement is
slack and profits are attractive.
Over the decades, commissions, congressional investigative
committees, law enforcement agencies, and the media in the
United States have used the term organized crime to describe a for-
mally structured nationwide conspiracy involving thousands of
criminals organized to gain control over whole sectors of legal as
well as illegal activities. Historically, organized crime flourished
in the absence of serious opposition. In the past, local police de-
partments and prosecutors lacked the resources and tools to
mount sustained investigations and prosecution of powerful or-
ganized crime figures. Prosecutions such as those conducted by
racket buster Thomas Dewey in the 1930s and 1940s in New York
City were successful but failed to disrupt La Cosa Nostra’s oper-
ations and power base (Dewey 1974).
Despite the important work of the Kefauver and McClellan
Committees, which exposed a powerful Cosa Nostra, the FBI
Illicit Trafficking
29

paid scant attention to the Mafia’s existence until 1970 (U.S. Sen-
ate Special Committee to Investigate Organized Crime 1951). All
that changed in 1970, when Congress passed RICO, the most im-
portant substantive anti–organized crime statute in history.
Among other things, the bill defined organized crime legally and
made it illegal to acquire an interest in, participate in the affairs
of, or invest in the profits acquired from an enterprise through a
pattern of racketeering activity.
Prior to passage of the Organized Crime Control Act of 1970,
the investigation and prosecution of organized criminal groups
had not been conducted in a coordinated manner. The U.S. Con-
gress passed the RICO act with the specific intent of combating
the infiltration of organized crime into legitimate businesses.
Providing a wide range of criminal and civil sanctions to control
organized criminal activities, RICO is employed by prosecutors
to imprison heads of crime families, to exact forfeiture based on
criminal earnings, and to triple the penalties associated with
racketeering. Other techniques and tools such as the witness se-
curity program (witness protection and relocation), electronic
surveillance, immunity from prosecution, the cultivation and re-
cruitment of informants, and antiracketeering laws such as the
Money Laundering Control Act of 1986 provide additional sup-
port and serve to challenge the status of American organized
crime.
RICO made it possible in a single trial to prosecute an entire
crime family or gang. Crime family members would be the de-
fendants who participated in the affairs of the same enterprise
through a pattern of criminal activity. RICO penalties appeared
draconian: once the Supreme Court gave the green light to use the
law against criminal enterprises, almost every significant organ-
ized crime prosecution was brought under the statute. In New
York City, Rudolph Giuliani, the U.S. attorney for the Southern
District of New York in the mid-1980s, brought the bosses of all
the families (known as “The Commission”) to trial on RICO
charges and convicted them all on patterns of racketeering activ-
ity. The Commission Case is probably the most famous and im-
portant organized crime prosecution in U.S. history.
To understand the rise of organized crime, it is necessary to
know something about conditions in American society that facil-
itated its development and evolution. Organized crime thrived
in the United States long before the country became fixated on
the Mafia. The outlaw gangs of the American western frontier in
30
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

the nineteenth century ravaged the Native American population
and preyed mercilessly on the new settlers. That early tumul-
tuous period passed into American social history and has been
sanitized in the country’s romantic legends and myths of its pio-
neer heritage.
The modern concern with crime is associated not with ban-
dits such as Jesse James raiding trains and stagecoaches but with
the cities filling up with immigrants, many of whom were es-
caping from desperate conditions abroad. Nineteenth-century
American history is replete with suspicions of newcomers,
whose exploitation produced crime and in turn laid the founda-
tions for xenophobic reactions and repressions. That legacy of
fear of the immigrant persists even today. For some European ar-
rivals in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and for some
contemporary waves of immigrants from Central America and
the Caribbean rim, the quick illicit money from crime often rep-
resents opportunities for rapid advancement up the first rungs of
the ladder of social mobility that promised them, and still does,
an escape from the squalor of slum life and poverty. Of course,
the bulk of immigrants patiently endured the indignities of
poverty and remained law abiding, as they do today. A small and
persistent percentage of immigrants gravitated toward crime as
a justifiable means of skirting the problems of assimilation and
acculturation.
The history of this ethnic succession in crime describes a re-
lationship among politics, crime, and minority social status. It
first infected the Irish, who formed notorious street gangs in the
large cities where they settled. By the end of World War I, the Irish
virtually dominated crime and big-city politics. Eventually, the
political influence they nurtured enabled them to shift into legit-
imate occupations in construction, trucking, public utilities, and
the nascent civil services, where Irish became synonymous with
police work.
The aftermath of the war also brought Prohibition, a defining
moment in the American crime scene. The Volstead Act of 1920
forbade the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages for per-
sonal consumption. From a moral standpoint the law was in-
tended to rescue the masses, mainly workers and immigrants,
from enslavement to liquor, which the legislation did to some de-
gree. At the same time, Prohibition helped to create unprece-
dented criminal opportunities for ethnic gangsters who cooper-
ated and competed with the Irish underworld. The subsequent
Illicit Trafficking
31

outbreak of murder and mayhem, which was labeled the “Roar-
ing Twenties,” witnessed vicious competition and violence for
control of the illegal alcohol business (Albini 1971).
La Cosa Nostra
Until the Crime Commission trials and defection of major figures
in the American mob, La Cosa Nostra was the largest, most so-
phisticated, and most powerful crime syndicate in the history of
the United States (Cressey 1969). It is unlikely in the foreseeable
future that any crime organization will achieve anything approx-
imating the influence of La Cosa Nostra in the country’s eco-
nomic and political life.
In different places and at different times, La Cosa Nostra or
the Mafia was identified as “The Outfit,” “The Combination,”
and “The Honored Society.” The term Cosa Nostra is a variation on
the Sicilian Mafia and Neapolitan Camorra, which some Italian
immigrants brought with them as part of their cultural heritage
when they immigrated to the United States in the twentieth cen-
tury. La Cosa Nostra became the center, and the main source of
continuity and power in the affairs of American organized crime
in the mid-1930s, when the competing Italian criminal factions
settled their differences in what has become known as the Castel-
lammarese War. The bloody showdowns of gang warfare, which
began in New York City, stretched all the way to Chicago and in-
volved Al Capone’s powerful syndicate as well as allies of the
warring Sicilian gangsters in major cities in the Midwest and
along the eastern seaboard.
When the fighting at last came to an end, the two leading an-
tagonists in the struggle, Salvatore Maranzano and Joe (Joe the
Boss) Masseria, were dead and the survivors crafted and in-
stalled, under the leadership of Charles (Lucky) Luciano, an or-
ganization that sustained the central cultural features of the
Mafia. It was decreed that only those of Italian descent could be
inducted as members (“Made Men”) and that the individual “sol-
dier/member” would be subordinated to and for the group and
its leaders. Oaths of secrecy and modes of defense were also re-
tained. What did change were the ways the Mafia restructured it-
self: the tradition of an autocratic “Boss of all Bosses” (Capo di
Tutti Capi) was now abandoned in favor of a national commission
that consisted of the leaders or representatives of the leading fam-
ilies across the nation (Ianni 1972). No one man dominated; deci-
sions were reached through consensus similar to the operational
32
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

style of an executive administrative apparatus in modern busi-
ness organizations. Each Mafia family was autonomous on its
own turf. The Commission’s authority lay in its role as a forum
rather than as a board of directors, and over time the Commission
gave the Mafia an expansive new scope, stability, and impact
across much of the nation.
Understanding the structure and operations of the Cosa Nos-
tra requires recognizing that (1) major components of organized
crime in the United States were organized in a nationwide al-
liance of at least twenty-four tightly knit crime families; (2) the
members of these families were all Italians and Sicilians or of Ital-
ian descent; and (3) the crime families (usually named after their
founders or Bosses) were organized in terms of statuses and func-
tional roles including a “Boss” (Don) directing the illegal and
legal activities of the members, an “Underboss” (Sotto Capo), sec-
tion leaders (Capos), and soldiers at the bottom of the hierarchy. In
the pyramid of power, the Bosses were protected by layers of sub-
ordinates from responsibility for the crimes committed on their
orders. The Mafia families were held together by violence and se-
crecy known as the code of omerta. Over time, however, federal
and local law enforcement agencies developed tools to loosen the
social glue that kept the organization intact and coherent: immu-
nity from prosecution for evidence, victim security programs to
protect witnesses and their families, sophisticated electronic
eavesdropping, and the power of RICO to compel evidence. All
these changed, dealing the Mafia a lethal blow. Its authority and
reputation in the affairs of organized crime remained intact
through the 1980s (Jacobs 1999). From 1950 to 1985, it gathered
vast, unpublicized power not only in strictly criminal activities
but also in the allied fields of labor racketeering and urban ma-
chine politics, which deteriorated rapidly under the pressure of
relentless RICO prosecutions. Even though the Cosa Nostra has
been battered by intense law enforcement efforts, it would be pre-
mature to write its obituary.
Organized crime has hardly disappeared from American
cities. Although the Mafia may live off its vaunted reputation,
new ethnic gangs from Latin America, East Asia, and Eastern Eu-
rope have become wealthy through their control of large-scale il-
licit drug distribution systems (Abadinsky 1999). They are also ef-
fective extortionists in their own communities. Whether the new
groups will take on Mafia-like style and capabilities is only a mat-
ter of conjecture at this point. So far, while the Colombian cocaine
Illicit Trafficking
33

traffickers and the Chinese groups organized by Tongs (versions
of Hong Kong Triads) have exhibited some Mafia-type entrepre-
neurial abilities, neither has branched out into other activities in
the United States. They have not been able or have chosen not to
diversify as widely as the Mafia into mainstream political and so-
cial institutions outside their own communities (United Nations
2002). 
Black, Asian, Hispanic, and indigenous, multiethnic crime
groups seem to be burgeoning and doing well in the United
States. They represent a broader spectrum of players than was
previously imagined; drugs especially have rewritten the formu-
las about criminal participation and strategies. The developing
consensus among specialists is that organized crime is more com-
plicated than it used to be and that the Mafia families continue to
play some part in it—a decisive role in some illegal markets but
merely a marginal one in others.
As the President’s Commission on Organized Crime noted in
1986, the highly profitable and dangerous business of drug traf-
ficking has attracted younger ethnic criminals, along with lower
echelon members of Mafia crime families (President’s Commis-
sion on Organized Crime 1986). Many of the new criminals are re-
cent immigrants to the United States. Chinese, Vietnamese, Ja-
maicans, Mexicans, Russians, Colombians, Dominicans, and even
Sicilians turn to crime not because the society is closed off to them
but because it is so wide open. Thus, the relative freedom and
anonymity possible in the United States with its diffusion of law
enforcement are inviting to those wishing to “adapt” legitimacy,
make as much money as possible doing whatever it takes, and
hiding themselves from police scrutiny in the protective cocoons
of ethnic enclaves.
One group that is exceptional to the social history sketched
above is the African American. The black underworld is far from
a monolithic, homogeneous structure of power wielded only by
native-born black Americans. Nor is it a mere ghetto appendage
of the Mafia rackets and business. Since the late 1960s, in many
major U.S. cities the Jamaican Rastafarian “Posses” have operated
successful drug rings alongside native blacks engaged in tradi-
tional vice activities (Schatzberg and Kelly 1997).
For African Americans and Hispanic ghetto dwellers, one of
their most important problems—one that confronted white ethnic
immigrants decades earlier—is how to escape poverty through
socially approved means when these means are virtually closed.
34
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

This problem is resolved to some extent by crime activities. For
most ghetto dwellers, the illegal provision of legal goods and
services is tolerated widely because it is not seen as intrinsically
evil or socially disruptive. Poverty provides its own moral cli-
mate for organized criminality in the ghetto with the exception,
perhaps, of drug peddling. And even here, escape from the
bondage of poverty provides emotional pressure and an accept-
able, if ambivalent, context for widespread drug use. It is then the
pervasive persistent poverty of the ghetto and its collective de-
spair that is at the basis of recruitment into criminal networks.
Crack cocaine is to the ghetto gangster what illegal alcohol
was to the white ethnic during the Prohibition era. Crack is the lu-
crative modus vivendi of today’s ghetto drug dealer, the currency
of the informal economy. Crack has helped minority criminals to
generate impressive amounts of criminogenic assets such as guns,
illegal capital, distribution networks, and credit with major co-
caine producers. These elements have enabled cocaine gangs to
develop street gangs that are much more than juvenile delin-
quents hanging around street corners seeking the thrills of com-
bat with other youth gangs for control of delinquent “turf.” The
rise of black gangs in the mid-1980s, primarily the Crips and the
Bloods of the Los Angeles ghettos, is due in large part to crack.
This is another way of saying that the rise of dangerous street
gangs involved in organized crime is an outcome of massive illicit
trafficking of cocaine into the United States. The Crips were orig-
inally a Los Angeles phenomenon that was estimated in the 1990s
at 30,000 strong, spreading eastward principally as purveyors of
crack. In 1991, the U.S. Department of Justice placed the Crips
and the Bloods (another southern California drug gang at 10,000
strong) in 113 cities across 32 states. Coupled with high unem-
ployment rates among young black males, the conditions for the
expansion of minority crime are ever present and ominous.
There is little reason to believe that the crime economy of the
new gang will stop growing, whatever the scale of repression
mounted by law enforcement, or that it will stay confined to the
black ghettos. Although the epicenter remains in the ghetto,
which is the zone of hardcore unemployment and utter disillu-
sionment, the gang mystique has spread into middle-class black
areas where people are close to panic or vigilantism.
The factors of size, population diversity, economic strength,
modern business, transportation infrastructure, and legal protec-
tions make the United States a lucrative target for international
Illicit Trafficking
35

criminals and provide an environment that supports and sustains
international criminal activity originating in the United States
and going beyond its borders. In its continental breadth and ex-
tensive coastlines, America offers an ideal trading crossroad for
Europe, Asia, and the rest of the world—an advantage exploited
by international criminals.
Both foreign and domestic crime groups mask their crimi-
nal networks and activities through the broad diversity of the
U.S. population. With the world’s largest and most diversified
economy and a very high standard of living, the United States
provides numerous opportunities for criminal ventures. Crimi-
nals also take advantage of the world’s most modern telecom-
munications, transportation, and financial systems. In the
United States, even though the law enforcement system is so-
phisticated, criminals can effectively hide behind individual
legal protections and due process, which no other country pro-
vides. The United States is one of the world’s leading sources of
contraband luxury goods, firearms, and tobacco. Both domestic
and foreign crime groups operating in the United States are also
involved in car theft rings that illegally ship vehicles out of the
country.
The tremendous volume of goods entering and leaving the
United States in legitimate trade provides crime groups with un-
paralleled opportunities to traffic contraband through U.S. ports
to overseas destinations. In addition to being a point of origin for
contraband smuggled overseas, the United States is used by
criminals as a transit country for goods being shipped from one
country to another. In the case of Latin America drug traffickers,
it is a supplier of precursor chemicals needed in the mass pro-
duction of illegal drugs. Despite strict regulations and currency
reporting requirements, the United States is attractive to interna-
tional criminals seeking to launder money because of the com-
plexity, strength, and stability of the American economy and fi-
nancial system.
Interestingly, some U.S. crime groups have established cells
and networks in foreign countries. Among the most notorious
U.S. crime groups operating overseas are the outlaw elements of
motorcycle gangs (Abadinsky 1997). Another powerful crime
group with extensive connections abroad is the Mafia. Its Sicilian
and Italian links have enabled it to reach across to Europe for
drugs and new members, or into Latin America and Asia for gam-
bling and money-laundering opportunities.
36
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

How Are Transnational Organized Crime
and Illicit Trafficking Related?
As we have seen, crime has become increasingly international
over the past two decades, especially in the wake of the Cold War.
The post–Cold War environment witnessed the growing integra-
tion of the world’s economic systems and institutions; the easing
of barriers to trade, migration, and travel; and the sophistication
of technologies that support global commerce and communica-
tions. All of these factors have also increased criminal opportuni-
ties across national borders for individuals and organizations
worldwide. In recent years, the United States and other countries
have devoted significant resources to the investigation and con-
trol of what has come to be called “transnational organized
crime.” At this point in time, however, reliable knowledge about
the phenomenon of transnational crime—whether it is indeed a
global threat to democracy and free enterprise as it is often por-
trayed to be—is an important issue that remains unresolved. The
literature and data on transnational offenses is only beginning to
emerge, and the complexities of law enforcement and political re-
sponses are only beginning to be assessed.
For the last quarter of a century, heroin and cocaine have
caused great damage to many nations. Also, large-scale smug-
gling of illegal immigrants into the United States has become
more prominent and a serious national issue in many countries.
This type of crime that is unconstrained by boundaries appears to
have been affected by a number of factors. In particular, the rise
in the number of immigrants to the United States is unprece-
dented. Also, the vast improvement in communication technolo-
gies makes borders permeable. Indeed, criminal activities can be
carried out in the United States without anyone stepping across a
border. No doubt, these factors have played a role in the Ameri-
can crime picture of the past, but they have become very pro-
nounced in the opening decade of the twenty-first century. A suf-
ficient number of incidents have occurred to give substance to
general anxieties about uncontrollable foreign crime impinging
upon everyday life in America.
Transnational organized crime has attracted considerable
media attention. Politically, some very visible activity is in evi-
dence in response to the issue former President Clinton raised in
two speeches before the General Assembly of the United Nations
Illicit Trafficking
37

in 1995. He observed that transnational organized crime and ter-
rorism were serious problems that threatened the integrity of all
nations. He accordingly issued Presidential Decision Directive
Number 42 (October 1995) authorizing government agencies to
develop initiatives against such crime. In addition, at the 1995
meeting of G7 nations, control of transnational organized crime
was a principal item on the agenda. Other policies emerging from
these decisions at the programmatic level have included efforts to
help other governments (such as Italy, Russia, and Colombia)
deal with crime organizations that pose a threat to both them and
the United States. During the 1990s and onward to the milestone
Palermo meeting of the United Nations in 2000, the U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice became interested in international crime prob-
lems, giving special attention to illicit trafficking in women, pre-
cious commodities, drugs, money laundering, and more
sophisticated methods of smuggling transnationally. The U.S.
government is strengthening its links through its participation in
a worldwide network of criminological institutes affiliated with
the United Nations. The issues now before us are to estimate the
kind of knowledge needed to prevent and control this type of or-
ganized criminal conduct.
Summary
Transnational or international organized crime possesses a signif-
icance not only for the United States but for all nations. Organized
crime and illicit trafficking lead to higher levels of corruption of
public officials and penetration of criminals into illicit profits,
compromising the integrity of the legitimate global economy. In
terms of their scope of action or capabilities, criminal organiza-
tions worldwide are transforming themselves to meet the de-
mands of survival in a new world order and to exploit the oppor-
tunities presented by a globalizing economy. The dramatic
changes in the political order that have swept across the world, as
well as the deteriorating economic circumstances in Africa, Latin
America, and parts of Europe and Asia, have promoted conditions
favorable to the growth of underground or informal economies.
Among the pernicious effects, many people have been habituated
into working outside the legal framework. The informal or under-
ground economy makes access to weapons easier and generates
massive flows of illegal immigrants and refugees. In addition to
38
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

the normal difficulties involved in establishing state-to-state coop-
eration, all of these circumstances and aftereffects work to the ad-
vantage of criminal organizations. The appearance of better-or-
ganized, international criminal groups with considerable financial
resources has created the conditions that threaten normal trade,
which in turn nourish growing illicit trafficking enterprises.
How Can States Deter and Contain
Illicit Trafficking?
The international scope of the threat of global crime places a pre-
mium on bilateral and international cooperation to develop pre-
ventive strategies. If state authority continues to erode in the
wake of globalization, perhaps in a decade the international
crime threat to U.S. interests will likely be more diversified and
have an even more direct impact. The extent and magnitude of
the problem will depend on the global political, economic, and se-
curity conditions prevailing at that time. Globalization and tech-
nological innovation will change the nature of organized crime.
Although large criminal syndicates will remain powerful players
with worldwide networks, at the same time law enforcement
agencies will continue to cope with even more highly skilled
criminal entrepreneurs. The world in 2025 or 2050 may be popu-
lated with large interactive crime networks.
There are many issues relating to illicit trafficking and organ-
ized crime. The question of the structure of crime networks is one
that deserves constant oversight. What strategy or strategies
should the international community and national governments
adopt in the struggle against organized crime? What are the objec-
tives of such a strategy? Should the initiative be eradication and de-
struction of organized crime—or, if that goal remains elusive,
should containment be the goal of international trafficking and
crime control? And if we accept containment as a realistic, achiev-
able objective, what sort of configurations of criminal power can
we tolerate? We believe the highlights of the United Nations
Palermo Conference in 2000 may well shed some light on these is-
sues. The Conference marked an unprecedented step in identifying
transnational organized crime as the key infrastructure in global il-
licit trafficking. The UN Convention highlighted the fact that illicit
trafficking forms the dark side of globalization, spanning nations
and continents through the exploitation of today’s open borders,
new technologies, and massive movement of peoples. 
Illicit Trafficking
39

References
Abadinsky, Howard. 1997. Organized Crime. 5th ed. Chicago: Nelson-
Hall. 
———. 1999. Organized Crime. 6th ed. Chicago: Nelson-Hall.
Albini, Joseph. 1971. Mafia: Genesis of a Legend. New York: Appleton-
Century Crofts.
Alexander, Shana. 1998. The Pizza Connection: Lawyers, Money, Drugs,
Mafia. New York: Weidenfield and Nicolson.
Arlacchi, Pino. 1985. Mafia Business: The Mafia Ethic and the Spirit of Capi-
talism. London: Verso.
———. 1995. “Men of Dishonor, Inside the Sicilian Mafia.” Journal of Con-
temporary Criminal Justice 1 (11): 159–160.
———. 2001. “The Dynamics of Illegal Markets,” In Phil Williams and
Dimitri Vlassis (eds.), Combating Transnational Crime, pp. 5–12. London:
Frank Cass.
Barber, Benjamin R. 1995. Jihad versus McWorld. New York: Times Books.
Bell, J. Bowyer. 2000. “Conditions Making for Success and Failure: Non-
state and Illicit Actors.” Trends in Organized Crime 6 (1): 32–61.
Block, Alan. 1983. Eastside/Westside: Organizing Crime in New York,
1930–1950. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books.
———. 1991. The Business of Crime: A Documentary Study of Organized
Crime in the American Economy. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Blumenthal, Ralph. 1998. Last Days of the Sicilians: The FBI Assault on the
Pizza Connection. New York: Time Books.
Booth, Martin. 1991. The Triads. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Chambliss, William, and Alan Block. 1981. Organizing Crime. New York:
Elsevier.
Chang, Dae H. 1999. “World Ministerial Conference on Organized
Transnational Crime.” International Journal of Comparative and Applied
Criminal Justice 23 (2): 141–180.
Chin, Ko-lin. 1991. Chinese Subculture and Criminality: Non-Traditional
Crime Groups in America. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing.
———. 2003. Heijin: Organized Crime, Business and Politics in Taiwan. New
York: M. E. Sharpe.
Chin, Ko-lin, and Robert J. Kelly. 1997. Human Snakes: Illegal Chinese Im-
migrants in the United States. Final Report, Grant SBR 93–11114, Law and
Social Science Program, National Science Foundation, Washington, DC.
Chin, Ko-lin, Robert J. Kelly, and Jeffrey Fagan. 1994. “Chinese Orga-
nized Crime in America.” In Robert J. Kelly, Ko-lin Chin, and Rufus
40
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

Schatzberg (eds.), Handbook of Organized Crime in the United States, pp.
213–214. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing.
Clark, David. 1996. Urban World/Global City. London: Routledge.
Cowan, Rich, and Douglas Century. 2002. Takedown: The Fall of the Last
Mafia Empire. New York: Putnam and Sons.
Cressey, Donald R. 1969. Theft of a Nation. New York: Harper and Row.
Dewey, Thomas E. 1974. Twenty against the Underworld. Garden City, NY:
Doubleday and Co.
Fagan, Jeffrey. 1989. “The Social Organization of Drug Use and Drug
Dealing among Urban Gangs.” Criminology 27 (4): 633–667.
Falchi, Nino. 1995. International Migration Pressure. Geneva: International
Organization for Migration.
Fijnaut, Cyrille. 2001. “Transnational Organized Crime and Institutional
Reform in the European Union: The Case of Judicial Cooperation.” In P.
Williams and D. Vlassis (eds.), Combating Transnational Crime: Concepts,
Activities and Response, pp. 276–302. London: Frank Cass.
Finkenauer, James O. 1994. “Russian Organized Crime in America.” In
Robert J. Kelly et al. (eds.), Handbook of Organized Crime in the United
States, pp. 245–268. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing.
Flynn, Stephen E. 2000. “The Global Drug Trade versus the Nation State:
Why the Thugs Are Winning.” In Maryann Cusimano (ed.), Beyond Sov-
ereignty: Issues for a Global Agenda, pp. 44–66. New York: St. Martin’s
Press.
Fuentes, Joseph R., and Robert J. Kelly. 1999, November. “Drug Supply
and Demand: The Dynamics of the American Drug Market and Some As-
pects of Colombian and Mexican Drug Trafficking.” Journal of Contempo-
rary Criminal Justice 15 (4): 328–351.
Gambetta, Diego. 1993. The Sicilian Mafia: The Business of Private Protec-
tion. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Handelman, Stephen. 1995. Comrade Criminal: Russia’s New Mafiya. New
York: St. Martin’s Press.
Holyst, Bruno. 1998. “Organized Crime in Eastern Europe and Its Impli-
cations for the Security of the Western World.” In S. Einstein and M. Amir
(eds.), Organized Crime: Uncertainties and Dilemma. Chicago: Office of In-
ternational Criminal Justice.
Ianni, Francis A. J. 1972. A Family Business: Kinship and Social Control in
Organized Crime. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Inciardi, James. 1991. “Narcoterroism: A Perspective and Commentary.”
In Robert J. Kelly and Donal E. J. MacNamara (eds.), Perspectives on De-
viance: Dominance, Degradation, and Denigration, pp. 38–104. Cincinnati,
OH: Anderson Publishing Co.
Illicit Trafficking
41

Iwai, Hiroake. 1986. “Organized Crime in Japan.” In Robert J. Kelly (ed.),
Organized Crime: A Global Perspective, pp. 203–233. Totowa, NJ: Rowman
and Littlefield.
Jacobs, James B. 1999. Gotham Unbound. New York: New York University
Press.
Jamieson, Allison. 1995. “The Transnational Dimension of Italian Orga-
nized Crime.” Transnational Organized Crime 1(2): 151–172.
Kaplan, David, and Alec Dubro. 1986. Yakuza: Explosive Account of Japan’s
Criminal Underworld. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Kelly, Robert J. 1973. “New Political Crimes and Emergence of Revolu-
tionary Nationalist Ideologies.” In R. Serge Denisoff and Charles
McCaghy (eds.), Deviance, Conflict and Criminality, pp. 220–238. Chicago:
Rand McNally Publishing Co.
———. 1979. “The Nature of Organized Crime and its Operations.” In
Herbert Edelhartz (ed.), Major Issues in Organized Crime Control. Wash-
ington, DC: National Institute of Justice: 5–51.
———. 1986, October. “The Political-Crime Nexus in the United States.”
In Confronting the Security Challenge of the Political Criminal Nexus, pp.
30–33. Georgetown University Research Colloquium.
———. 1990. “Organized Crime in the United States,” In S. Einstein and
M. Amir (eds.), Organized Crime: Uncertainties and Dilemmas, pp. 203–230.
Chicago: Office of International Criminal Justice.
———. 1994, July 27. “Breaking the Seals of Silence: Anti-Mafia Uprising
in Sicily.” USA Today: 76–79.
———. 1999. The Upperworld and the Underworld. New York: Kluwer/
Plenum Publishing.
———. 2001. “Organized Crime in the United States,” In S. Einstein and
M. Amir (eds.), Organized Crime: Uncertainties and Dilemmas, pp. 13–28.
Chicago: Office of International Criminal Justice.
———. 2002a. “Mafia.” The Encyclopedia of Organized Crime. Westport,
CT: Greenwood Publishing.
———. 2002b. “Al Capone.” In Encyclopedia of Organized Crime in the
United States: From Al Capone’s Chicago to the New Urban Underworld, pp.
47–55 Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing.
———. 2002c. “Organized Crime.” In Kermit Hall (ed.), The Oxford Com-
panion to American Law. New York: Oxford University Press.
———. (forthcoming). “Osama bin Laden.” In The Notorious. Westport,
CT: Greenwood Publishing.
Kelly, Robert J., Ko-lin Chin, and Jeffrey Fagan. 2000. “Lucky Money for
Little Brother: The Prevalence and Seriousness of Chinese Gang Extor-
42
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

tion.” International Journal of Comparative and Applied Criminal Justice 24
(1): 61–90.
Kelly, Robert J., and William J. Cook, Jr. 1998. “Criminal Organizations.”
Encyclopedia of Crime and Delinquency. Vol. II, 175–178. Philadelphia: Tay-
lor Publishers.
Kelly, Robert J., and Robert W. Rieber. 2001, July. “Twelve Years After:
The Berlin Wall as Will and Idea” Journal of Social Distress 1 (3): 217–228.
———. 2003. Terrorism, Organized Crime and Social Distress: The New World
Order. London: Psyche-Logo Press.
Kelly, Robert J., Patrick J. Ryan, and Rufus Schatzberg. 2002, December.
“Primitive Capitalist Accumulation: Russia as a Free Enterprise.” Journal
of Contemporary Justice 11 (4): 251–275.
Kelly, Robert J., and Rufus Schatzberg. 1995. “From Pistols to
Ploughshares: The IRA’s Farewell to Arms.” International Journal of Com-
parative and Applied Criminal Justice 19 (2): 175–177.
Kenney, Dennis, and James Finkenauer. 1995. Organized Crime in America.
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing Co., pp. 272–282.
Klein, Malcolm, Cheryl Maxson, and Lea Cunningham. 1989. “Crack,
Street Gangs and Violence.” Criminology, 29 (4): 623–650.
Lee, Rensselaer W., III. 1998. Smuggling Armageddon. New York: St. Mar-
tin’s Press.
Lee, Rensselaer W., III, and Francisco E. Thoumi. 1997, October. “The Po-
litical Nexus in Colombia.” Paper presented at the Georgetown Univer-
sity Research Colloquium. Washington, DC: National Strategy Informa-
tion Center.
———. 2003. “Drugs and Democracy in Colombia.” In Roy Godson (ed.),
Menace to Society, pp. 71–79. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books.
Lupsha, Peter. 1986. “Organized Crime in the United States.” In Robert J.
Kelly (ed.), Organized Crime: A Global Perspective, pp. 109–127. Totowa,
NJ: Rowman and Littlefield.
———. 1995, Spring. “Transnational Narco-Corruption and Narco-In-
vestment: A Focus on Mexico.” Transnational Organized Crime 1: 84–101.
Lupsha, Peter A., and Sung-Kwon Cho. 2001. “The Future of Narco-Ter-
rorism: Colombia, A Case Study.” In S. Einstein and M. Amir (eds.), Or-
ganized Crime: Uncertainties and Dilemmas, pp. 423–436. Chicago: Office of
International Criminal Justice.
Maloney, Wendy Hall, and Robert J. Kelly. 2000, April. “Notes on School-
Based Crime Fighting: International Lessons in Moral Education.” Jour-
nal of Social Distress 9 (2): 71–91.
Martello, Claudio. 1992. “Assessment of Anti-Mafia Legislation and
Illicit Trafficking
43

Strategies for the Future.” In Ernesto Savone (ed.), Mafia Issues: Analyses
and Proposals for Combating the Mafia Today, pp. 139–144, Vienna: United
Nations-ISPAC Program.
Merton, Robert K. 1957. Social Theory and Social Structure. New York: Free
Press.
Mueller, Gerhard O.W. 2001. “Transnational Crime: Definitions and Con-
cepts.” In P. Williams and D.Vlassis (eds.), Combating Transnational Crime:
Concepts, Activities and Response, pp. 12–21. London: Frank Cass.
National Security Council. 1998, May. The Global Content of International
Crime. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
New York State Organized Crime Task Force and New Jersey Commis-
sion of Investigation. 1996. An Analysis of Russian-Émigré Crime in the Tri-
State Region. Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, School of Crim-
inal Justice, Newark, NJ.
Norland, Rob. 2001, October. “Pakistan.” Newsweek 1: 30–33.
Pimenal, Stanley. 2003. “Mexico’s Legacy of Corruption.” In Roy Godson
(ed.), Menace to Society: Political-Criminal Collaboration around the World,
pp. 72–79. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books.
President’s Commission on Organized Crime. 1986. Final Report: The Im-
pact of Organized Crime Trafficking. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
“Results of a Pilot Study of Forty Selected Organized Criminal Groups in
Sixteen Counties.” 2002, September. United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Vienna.
Rumors, David M. 2003. Still the Golden Door: The Third World Comes to
America. New York: Columbia University Press.
Salzman, Michael. 2001, October. “Globalization, Culture and Anxiety:
Perspectives and Predictions from Terror Management Theory.” Journal
of Social Distress 10 (4): 337–352.
Schatzberg, Rufus, and Robert J. Kelly. 1997. African American Organized
Crime: A Social History. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Schneider, Jane C., and Peter T. Schneider. 2003. Reversible Destiny: Mafia,
Anti-Mafia, and the Struggle for Palermo. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Servadio, Gia. 1976. Mafioso: A History of Mafia from its Origins to the Pre-
sent Day. New York: Stein and Day.
Shelley, Louise. 1995. “Transnational Organized Crime: An Imminent
Threat to the Nation-State?” Journal of International Affairs 48 (2): 463–489.
Shelley, Louise. 2003. “Russia and Ukraine: Transition or Tragedy.” In
Roy Godson (ed.), Menace to Society: Political-Criminal Collaboration around
the World. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books.
44
Illicit Trafficking: A Brief History

Soros, George. 1998. The Crisis of Global Capitalism. New York: Public Af-
fairs.
United Nations. 2000. World Migration Report. Susan F. Martin (ed.). New
York: International Organization for Migration.
———. 2002. United Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime Preven-
tion (ODCCP). “The Role of the United Nations in Combating Organised
Drug Crime Activities.” September. Vienna: United Nations Institute for
Strategic Studies.
U.S. Senate Special Committee to Investigate Organized Crime. 1951. In-
terstate Commerce—Final Report. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Williams, Phil (ed.). 1997. Russian Organized Crime: The New Threat. Lon-
don: Frank Cass .
———. 1999. “Getting Rich and Getting Even: Transnational Threats in
the Twenty-First Century.” In S. Einstein and M. Amir (eds.), Organized
Crime: Uncertainties and Dilemma, pp. 19–66. Chicago: Office of Interna-
tional Criminal Justice.
Illicit Trafficking
45


2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
T
he prevalence of transnational organized crime at the end of the
twentieth century may be as important as the end of the Cold
War itself. The serious challenge that it poses has not been
clearly understood, as the UN Conference in Palermo in December
2000 observed. States have been slow in coming to terms with the
new features of international crime. The new global gangsters are
a different breed from their predecessors: their reach extends
beyond local communities, and their ambitions go beyond the bor-
ders and boundaries of their home nations. Also, the skills and ori-
entations of modern criminals are more businesslike than the
rough-and-tumble street hooligans of folklore.
Transnational Crime Survey
To determine the scope and seriousness of the problem, the
United Nations and its agencies have conducted regular surveys
on crime trends and the operations of national criminal justice
systems (Godson and Williams 2000). The results from countries
responding to survey queries concerning the presence and impact
of trafficking offenses suggest the following categories in the
order of their importance:
•
Money Laundering
•
Terrorism
47

•
Art and Cultural Objects Theft
•
Intellectual Property Theft
•
Illicit Arms Trafficking
•
Trafficking in Persons
•
Trade in Human Body Parts
•
Illicit Drug Trafficking
•
Alien Smuggling
•
Trafficking in Sex: Women and Child Pornography
•
Nuclear Smuggling
Money-Laundering: Structure and
Characteristics 
Money laundering refers to banking and financial activity that
seeks to make illegal funds and monies appear legitimate. The
process of taking monies and other sources of wealth generated
by illegal activities from drug trafficking to gun running and put-
ting them through the legal banking systems has had a massive
impact on the world economy. Money laundering has been de-
scribed as the “life blood” of illicit trafficking operations, but it is
also the “Achilles heel” of transnational organized crime (Mueller
1999). The ability to sanitize criminal earnings permits drug traf-
fickers and others to live lavishly from their illegal activity. How-
ever, the activities required to “rinse” the dirty money and make
it clean also provide law enforcement with opportunities to attack
criminal enterprises and criminals themselves. Although major
crime figures can separate themselves from street-level crime,
they cannot and do not separate themselves from the profits that
street-level criminal activity generates.
Today, criminals of every sort, ranging from drug traffickers
to stock manipulators and corporate embezzlers must launder the
money flowing from their crimes for two main reasons. First, the
money trail can become evidence against the perpetrators of of-
fenses; second, illegal money itself can be the target of investiga-
tion and seizure. Regardless of who puts the apparatus of money
laundering to use, the operational principles are essentially the
same. Money laundering may be understood as a dynamic three-
stage process that requires: (1) moving funds from a direct asso-
ciation with the criminal activity that generated them; (2) dis-
guising the origins of the money to confuse and frustrate any
investigative activity seeking to link and connect illicit money
with particular individuals; and (3) making the “cleansed”
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

money available to the criminal or criminal enterprise once again,
ensuring that the origins of the monies are securely hidden from
law enforcement scrutiny (United Nations Office for Drug Con-
trol and Crime Prevention 1998). Successful money laundering
also helps to support and finance future criminal activity. Esti-
mates about the amount of illicit money laundered vary, and
none can be deemed totally reliable in assessing the magnitude of
the problem globally, regionally, or nationally. According to one
estimate, however, worldwide money-laundering activity
amounts to roughly $1 trillion a year, with $300 to $500 billion of
that total representing laundered money related to drug traffick-
ing (Kelly 1994).
Laundering consists of an apparatus that places, layers, and
mixes legitimate monies with illicit funds. The illegal system is
extensive and worldwide. In essence, the rule in successful
money laundering is to approximate, as closely as possible, legal
transactions. Thus, the mechanisms and techniques used are
themselves minor variations on methods employed routinely by
legitimate businesses (United Nations 1999). Many methods may
be used for laundering money. Among those favored by criminal
organizations are “fronts”—seemingly legitimate businesses that
mask and hide illegal activity and provide a set of accounts
through which illegal money can be “cleansed.” These tend to be
cash-based businesses such as hotels, casinos, restaurants, finan-
cial service firms, travel agencies, bars, and construction agencies
whose ostensibly legitimate operations involve substantial cash
flow. This makes it difficult for law enforcement agencies to iden-
tify illegal proceeds.
Ever since Al Capone was imprisoned for tax evasion in
1932, financially successful criminals have become more sensitive
to ways of protecting their “dirty” money. Some have used a cash
business such as a vending machine firm to commingle money
from illegitimate sources with legitimately earned money. In the
state of New Jersey, for example, a drug-trafficking ring opened a
casino account for $125,000 and stayed several days but did not
gamble. They then left the hotel with checks payable to third par-
ties, who deposited the checks in a securities firm. The money
was later withdrawn—laundered (Grabosky 2001). In 1991, sev-
eral men from Lebanon and Argentina were convicted of laun-
dering $1 billion in Colombian drug profits through the purchase
and sale of gold, using jewelry companies in Houston, Miami,
Los Angeles, and New York City as fronts.
Illicit Trafficking
49

Money-Laundering Techniques
Taking advantage of the advances in technology and communi-
cations, sophisticated money launderers utilize electronic fund
transfers. This is a ready instrument for laundering: usually there
are no requirements for bank-to-bank transfers. A bank outside
the United States may transfer funds to a U.S. bank and then
draw on those funds by checks or credit. Schemes of this type
usually involve depositing illicit funds into a bank and then
transferring these funds to another, often through a number of
countries. Electronically, money can be moved anywhere in the
world with speed and ease (President’s Commission on Orga-
nized Crime 1984).
Bulk transfer is a traditional method of laundering money.
Covertly smuggling large amounts of cash across borders has
reappeared as a method of repatriating illicit funds as a result of
the strong anti-money-laundering measures enacted in many na-
tions and among numerous financial institutions. Also, crime
groups have improved their methods of obtaining export/import
businesses to hide “dirty money.” Money is shipped by air, by
sea, and by land and is even smuggled out of the United States
through the U.S. Postal Service.
Criminal groups also infiltrate banks and utilize safe havens;
they use offshore banking centers such as the Cayman Islands,
Aruba, the Philippines, Uruguay, Lebanon, and the Bahamas for
laundering purposes. Brokerage firms may also launder money.
The nature of the securities industry makes it vulnerable to
money launderers. It is international in scope; business is con-
ducted by electronic transfer, and the liquidity of securities is at-
tractive to launderers. Temptations for brokers are ever-present:
they often disregard the source of capital and do not make de-
tailed inquiries as to its origins because they typically work on
commission in highly competitive markets. These offshore bank-
ing centers are routinely used to legitimize and transfer criminal
proceeds. Huge sums of money are laundered in the world’s
largest financial markets, such as Hong Kong, Japan, Germany,
the United Kingdom, and the United States—even though exten-
sive legislation in the United States and aggressive enforcement
make it more difficult and risky to conduct illicit financial trans-
actions (Hess, Myers, Gideon, Gomez, and Daly 1999).
Several factors may make a country particularly vulnerable
to money laundering: lack of adequate legislation or appropriate
enforcement that can address the problem, inadequate secrecy
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

laws, weak or corrupted financial institutions, and ineffective reg-
ulatory oversight of the financial sector. In Latin America, money-
laundering investigations are hampered by massive corruption in
the state’s regulatory apparatus, inadequate legislation to moni-
tor banking activities, and a lack of trained personnel to conduct
investigations and carry out prosecutions (Smith 1991). In Russia
and the NIS, Western-style market economies and financial sec-
tors are developing. Organized crime groups gained an early and
deep foothold in the processes of privatization and in the new
segments of the legitimate economy mainly because law enforce-
ment itself was newly developing as, simultaneously, were bank-
ing regulations and oversight (Lupsha and Pimentel 1997).
Offshore banking centers typically offer banks corporate se-
crecy, low tax rates, ease of corporate formation, and low incor-
poration fees. These provisions or services create incentives for
criminals to conduct illicit financial activities in states where such
banking centers operate (Shelley 1997). In Southeast and South-
west Asia and the Middle East, for example, parallel informal
banking systems, known primarily as “Hawala,” “Hundi,” or
“Hui Kwan,” offer an alternative for laundering funds, outside
the formal banking system (United Nations Office for Drug Con-
trol and Crime Prevention 1998). These financial systems are in-
creasingly being used by criminals, drug traffickers, and even far-
flung terrorist organizations of the al-Qaeda network to launder
and move illicit funds long distances because they facilitate rapid
and cost-effective money transfers and leave virtually no telltale
paper trail evidence for law enforcement investigators. The tech-
nique is simple and effective: a money broker takes an order for a
money transfer to accounts in other locales that may be around
the world. A telephone call is made, and money is moved, de-
posited, withdrawn, and transferred, based on the reputation of
the agents making the calls.
Money-Laundering Threats to National Economies
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has identified some ad-
verse effects that result from money laundering. Among other
things, it leads to greater volatility in foreign exchange markets
and interest rates; and it distorts market expectations. Although
the economic stability of the United States has not been seriously
threatened by money-laundering activities, federal and state gov-
ernments have been hindered in their efforts to collect taxes and
to regulate the banking sector, financial markets, and the business
Illicit Trafficking
51

environment at large. In other nations money laundering can
destabilize a state’s entire economy. In the mid-1990s, for exam-
ple, widespread money-laundering schemes orchestrated by
Mafia and Albanian crime groups led to a crisis in Albania that
destabilized its economy and disrupted the lives of millions who
were ruined financially in the aftermath (National Security Coun-
cil 1998). The solvency of Albanian banks eroded as public confi-
dence collapsed following disclosure of the fraudulent schemes.
Money Laundering: BCCI, A Case Study
The Bank of Commerce and Credit International (BCCI), referred
to facetiously as the “bank of crooks and criminals international,”
was founded in 1977 by Palestinian and Arab financiers. Incorpo-
rated in Luxembourg, a small nation nestled between France and
Germany and known for its bank secrecy laws and casual regula-
tions, BCCI emerged as one of the largest private banks in the
world, with offices in seventy-two countries (Beare 1995). The
bank divided its corporate headquarters between Luxembourg
and the Cayman Islands, countries known for their bank secrecy
statutes. BCCI also wrapped itself in a mantle of respectability
and influence that included associations with former President
Jimmy Carter and a former presidential adviser and head of the
Department of Defense, Clark Clifford. In 1992, it was revealed
that influential former U.S. senator, Stuart Symington, sought to
protect BCCI against accusations that it operated as a full-service
bank for drug traffickers and terrorists such as Abu Nidal, the no-
torious head of “Black September”—a Middle Eastern terrorist
group that slaughtered the Israeli Olympic team at the 1972
Olympic games in Munich, Germany. Nidal maintained a $60
million account at the London branch of BCCI. BCCI also served
the banking needs of Hezbollah, the Iranian-backed terrorist
group operating out of Lebanon.
BCCI also laundered drug money for the Medellín cocaine
cartel in Colombia and for the opium warlord, Khun Sa, of the
Golden Triangle region in Southeast Asia. The U.S. government
alleged that the bank laundered $14 million for the Medellín car-
tel by accepting cash and placing it in certificates of deposit in its
European, Central American, and South American branches.
Using certificates as collateral, bank officials created accounts ac-
cessible through loans at other branches that permitted the drug
traffickers to withdraw the funds. The bank repaid the loans with
funds from the certificates of deposit. BCCI activities ended in
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

1991 when regulators seized the bank’s branches in the United
States, the United Kingdom, and several other countries.
Types of Money Laundering 
In some schemes, money launderers use “smurfs” (persons who
convert cash into money orders and cashier’s checks that do not
specify payees). Transactions are held to less than $10,000 to avoid
the need to report the transaction as required by law through a
Currency Transaction Report (CTR). One ring of money-launder-
ing smurfs operating out of New York City employed dozens of
persons who used about thirty banks in New York and New Jer-
sey to launder nearly $100 million a year for the Cali cartel in
Colombia. The checks were pasted between the pages of maga-
zines and shipped to Cali. From there the money was transferred
to banks in Panama (Potts, Kocham, and Whittington 1992). As
bank technology becomes increasingly electronic, enormous
amounts of cash across the globe can be transferred instanta-
neously, which makes proper accounting exceedingly difficult.
In addition, as we have noted, there are banking safe
havens—“offshore” banks such as those in Cayman Islands,
which, despite their claims of innocence, service the needs of
global criminal enterprises and the illicit wealth they generate.
The population of Cayman Islands depends on tourism for in-
come and its unique banking system. The islands have 500 banks
and 20,000 registered companies, firms, and business corpora-
tions. The financial district has the highest density of banks and
fax machines in the world. Most of the banks are “plaques” or
postal box offices that lack vaults, tellers, security guards, and all
the paraphernalia of a banking enterprise. Cayman Islands is ad-
ministered by Great Britain, and virtually anyone can establish a
“shell” company for a few thousand dollars in legal fees, open an
account, and hide behind a wall of strict secrecy. In the frame-
work of money laundering, an attorney acting on behalf of a
client can create a paper (a “boilerplate”) company in such a
haven that has strict privacy statutes. Funds to be laundered can
be transferred physically or wired to the firm’s account in a local
bank. The company then transfers the money to the local branch
of a large international bank. The paper company is subsequently
able to borrow money from any branch of this bank, using the
overseas deposit as security (Walter 1990).
Illicit Trafficking
53

Controls and Law Enforcement Responses to
Money Laundering 
Given the insidious impact of money laundering on the banking
and financial sectors of state economies, one would suppose that
efforts to reform the banking industry would take precedence in
the struggle to contain money laundering within limits. Thus,
measures to increase international attention to money laundering
have led many countries to implement money-laundering legis-
lation and other preventive measures. International standards are
being established to increase banking transparency and to reduce
bank secrecy that disguises asset ownership.
In 1994, not more than fifty countries required their banks
(and foreign banks doing business in the host state) to maintain
uniform financial records. These statutes of the Federal Act on the
Prevention of Money Laundering in the Financial Sector, Money
Laundering Act  of October 10, 1997, are modeled on the Ameri-
can Bank Secrecy Act of 1972 and the Money Laundering Act of
1986. These legislative weapons have undergone revisions as the
laws have matured over time. Also, some international standards
are being established to increase banking transparency and to re-
duce the banks’ secrecy and other ruses that hide asset owner-
ship. As of 1998, eighty-five countries required their banks (and
foreign banks) to maintain uniform financial records. Although
more countries are beginning to establish controls over nonbank-
ing financial institutions, much more needs to be done. In June
2000, the U.S. government issued advisories to U.S. financial in-
stitutions noting that the anti–money laundering regimes in these
countries cited above were deficient. Control of the problem is
best handled by uniform and harmonized laws operating across
the world.
Drug Trafficking
Despite the “war” on drugs, illegal narcotics are cheaper, more
potent, and more readily available than ever before. The United
Nations reports that in recent years, illicit drug consumption “has
become a global phenomenon” (Lohr 1992). The growth of the
drug problem is not necessarily the sole consequence of failed an-
tinarcotics efforts; in fact, as discussed in Chapter 1, it is also a re-
sult of post–Cold War policies that have opened up economic
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

markets, societies, and technologies. Briefly, as societies have de-
mocratized and liberalized their economies, they often find them-
selves facing serious problems with the abuse of illegal narcotics.
The rise in drug problems is attributable to many factors, includ-
ing those that are characteristic of legitimate economic activities
that shape market operations in free, democratic societies. For ex-
ample, criminal markets and black-market entrepreneurs copy
entrepreneurial activity that exists comparatively unfettered in
democratic societies. Markets, legal or illegal, cater to consumers.
Also, the evolution of modern business technology (cell phones,
faxes, computers, and the Internet) operating in the legitimate
marketplace function most effectively in illegal markets.
Despite decades of intensified eradication programs and ag-
gressive drug control and enforcement efforts, more drugs are
being produced and distributed. Gauging the quantities of
heroin, cocaine, marijuana, and related substances is difficult be-
cause of the illegal nature of producing and trafficking in these
drugs. Moreover, consumption of drugs takes place in environ-
ments that scarcely lend themselves to public scrutiny. Clearly,
this complicates any rigorous assessment of the economic, social,
and psychological consequences of illicit drug activity. Indeed,
the problem’s relentless spread throughout the world has given
rise to a greater awareness of the enormous negative effects of
drug abuse and trafficking on the economic and social fabric
holding societies together. The growth of drug use has occurred
within many international statutory structures whose laws and
criminal codes have been designed to contain it. In the United
States, with nearly a $275 billion investment in drug control pro-
grams funded at federal, state, and local government levels for
more than two decades, the drug business goes on and has even
thrived (U.S. Department of State 1998).
Aside from being more available and affordable today,
drugs represent one of the world’s largest and most lucrative
markets. Estimates of its value run as high as $500 billion. Mar-
keting narcotics and trafficking has become truly global: drug
seizures of cocaine manufactured in South America and heroin
originating in Southeast and Central Asia and Latin America
have occurred increasingly in areas outside the United States.
Virtually every nation reports that drugs are more available now
than at any other time.
The vaunted “war on drugs” appears to have failed in many
respects. This failure may be related to the continual reliance on
Illicit Trafficking
55

ineffective antitrafficking strategies. In the United States, for ex-
ample, the drug trade thrives in states where controls are weak or
nonexistent. Such states are often too corrupt to take action to
stop the cultivation of drug raw material within their borders.
Furthermore, with international trade rising sharply, it is not dif-
ficult to mix illicit narcotics into the huge tide of legitimate goods,
services, and people across national borders; and it is most im-
probable that drug seizures will occur that will have a significant
impact on the drug-using population (Office of National Drug
Control Policy 1997).
Drug-Trafficking Impacts on
Nation-State Stability
The expansion of drug trafficking has contributed to social turbu-
lence in many nations. The profits from trafficking are enormous
and provide terrorists, insurgents, and criminals with the re-
sources to buy weapons, hire gunmen, and intimidate state agen-
cies. Officials are corrupted by massive amounts of drug money,
as a result of which the legitimacy of political and judicial insti-
tutions is undermined. Social cleavages can only be sharpened
and deepened by illicit profits circulating throughout the eco-
nomic underground of nations teetering on the brink of economic
collapse.
Economic and Social Consequences of
Illicit Trafficking
The illicit drug industry outside the United States, which is very
destructive to the economy and social welfare of the indigenous
societies in which drugs are cultivated, constitutes a great threat
as well to the welfare and social stability of the United States.
Drug addiction carries a terrible human cost in terms of social,
economic, and health concerns, including HIV/AIDS, which es-
pecially afflicts users of illicit narcotics (Fuentes and Kelly 1999).
The negative effects of addiction on family cohesion poses life-
long negative consequences for the lives of children, the quality
of community life, and the workplace in terms of man-hours lost
to illness and distress (Kelly 1991). Results from the National
Household Survey on Drug Abuse, conducted in 1995, indicated
that 14.8 million Americans, or about 6.7 percent of the popula-
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

tion twelve years or older, were current users of illicit drugs.
Moreover, in 1999, according to a study sponsored by the Office
of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP), Americans spent $63
billion on illegal drugs. The National Institute for Drug Abuse es-
timated that the total cost of drug abuse in the United States, in-
cluding health care and lost productivity, was $110 billion in 1995.
In terms of decreased productivity and lost earnings, drug use is
estimated to cost $77 billion a year (Inciardi and Saum 1996).
Illicit Drug Production
The most dangerous drugs abused in the United States are co-
caine (and crack), heroin, methylenedioxymethamphetamine
(MDMA) (known popularly as “ecstasy”), and methampheta-
mine (speed). According to the Drug Enforcement Administra-
tion (DEA), the bulk of “ecstasy” and “speed” is manufactured in
Mexico and distributed in the United States. The source countries
for heroin and cocaine are in Asia and Latin America. Cocaine is
produced in the South American Andean countries of Colombia,
Peru, Bolivia, and Ecuador. The United States constitutes the
largest market for cocaine and its byproducts such as “crack.” 
Drug-Trafficking Networks
International drug-trafficking organizations have extensive net-
works of suppliers and front companies that facilitate narcotics
smuggling and the laundering of illegal earnings. In the Western
Hemisphere, Mexican and Colombian trafficking organizations
have dominated the drug trade. Colombian cartels supply most
of the cocaine through Mexican transshipment syndicates that
arrange distribution in the huge American market. In the Asian
source regions, heroin production is dominated by large traffick-
ing groups. The Asian trafficking networks are more diffuse than
their drug organization counterparts in Latin America: heroin
shipments from Asian sources (southeast or central regions) typ-
ically change hands among many criminal organizations on their
way to their destination. Trafficking patterns in general are more
like the Asian groups, which are capable of smuggling not only
drugs but also people and other contraband (United Nations In-
ternational Drug Control Programme 2001). In general, the trends
indicate that traffickers in many countries are rejecting traditional
types of criminal partnerships with similar ethnic and racial
Illicit Trafficking
57

groups and are increasingly collaborating in the purchase, trans-
port, and distribution of illegal drugs with different types of or-
ganizations, including rebel armies, terrorist groups, and other
ethnic criminal organizations that can protect turf and generate
revenue.
Taking advantage of more open borders and modern
telecommunications technology, drug trafficking has quickly
adapted to law enforcement pressures by finding new methods
for smuggling, new routes, and new mechanisms to launder
money. In many of the major cocaine- and heroin-producing
countries and states and among those that are transit routes for
smuggling, traffickers have acquired significant power and influ-
ence through the use of violence, intimidation, and the bribing of
corrupt officials (Chin 1999). These states include Colombia, Peru,
Albania, Bulgaria, Poland, Russia, Cuba, and Nicaragua. They
have also experienced a significant rise in drug addiction that is a
result of their direct or indirect involvement in the drug trade. In
some countries, large segments of the population are also stricken
by HIV/AIDS, which further undermines economic growth. The
social, economic, and political stresses associated with these
problems are felt across national borders and contribute to re-
gional tensions and problems (Bryant 1990).
Drug Market Structure and the
Trafficking Industry
In the illegal drug market, the cocaine cartels link the points of
coca growing with the street user of crack (a cocaine derivative),
a chain that is sometimes described as stretching from “the nose
to the pipe.” One of the most important features of the drug in-
dustry concerns the consumers who form markets for the prod-
ucts. They have little power over price or the quality of the prod-
uct partly because of the illegality of purchasing and using
narcotics. The fact that so many users of these illegal drugs are
addicted and dependent on their availability further diminishes
the product consumers’ capacity to affect quality, price, and avail-
ability. Nevertheless, it is their demand for illegal drugs that has
stimulated the emergence and growth of powerful criminal or-
ganizations engaged in this form of enterprise crime (United Na-
tions International Drug Control Programme 2001).
The supply side of the cocaine industry has been dominated
by Colombian cartels, which have not only turned cocaine into
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Latin America’s most successful export product but have also
provided the most successful focus for economic integration
among the three countries most involved in the cocaine trade:
Peru, Bolivia, and Colombia. There is clear specialization among
the three, with Peru, which has over 285,000 acres under cultiva-
tion, being the most important cultivator. Bolivia has between
88,000 and 110,000 acres for coca cultivation. Colombia is not an
important producer of coca but is both the largest producer of co-
caine hydrochloride and the corporate headquarters of the An-
dean cocaine industry. The emergence of Colombian cartels as the
major organizers and suppliers of cocaine may be explained in
terms of geographic location. Colombia is adjacent to the major
coca growers and has access to the Caribbean and Central Amer-
ica, including Panama, which has extensive money-laundering
facilities, a long entrepreneurial tradition, and the availability of
a network of Colombians in the United States who provide access
to retail markets. The Colombian drug-trafficking organizations
have been transnational from the outset. They developed in the
1970s from small smuggling groups into major enterprises partly
because they figured out that smuggling increasingly significant
loads of cocaine into the United States could mean huge gains. To
do this they utilized aircraft, which enabled them to smuggle
more volume.
The cartels also developed an increasingly sophisticated set
of organizational arrangements in which cooperation among var-
ious groups with different specializations greatly enhanced their
combined effectiveness, efficiency, and resistance to disruption.
The Cali cartel, in particular, had developed a highly specialized
and compartmentalized set of operations in which some of the
tasks such as money laundering were implemented by what
were, in effect, specialized service organizations. The industry
has also experienced considerable vertical integration, with the
cartels taking responsibility for collecting the coca leaf or coca
paste from the peasants, acquiring precursor chemicals, process-
ing them into cocaine hydrochloride, transporting to the United
States, supervising wholesale distribution, and even handling
some retailing. The industry itself was a particularly profitable
one partly because there was little threat from substitute prod-
ucts. The peasants who sell the coca leaf are relatively weak (ex-
cept in Bolivia, although even there, these efforts are directed
mainly against government attempts at eradication rather than at
getting a better deal from the traffickers). Drug consumers are
Illicit Trafficking
59

also in a weak position because their activity is illegal and they
are fragmented as a group.
Although certain benefits come from the illicit nature of the
industry, in other respects it resembles legal industries. It is not
particularly demanding technologically, but there is considerable
product innovation. The development of crack cocaine in partic-
ular was a brilliant marketing move, albeit one that has had dis-
astrous consequences for many cities in the United States. In as-
sessing the cocaine industry, therefore, it is necessary to
acknowledge that it is based on strong market principles but is
run by organizations that combine conventional business skills
with considerable ruthlessness and a total disregard for laws and
rules (Williams 1992).
The illicit drug industry has also undergone some significant
changes. In the early 1980s, it was dominated by the Medellín car-
tel in which Pablo Escobar, the Ochoa family, and Carlos Lehder
played key roles. The Medellín cartel initiated a frontal assault
against the Colombian state. Anxious to eliminate the extradition
treaty with the United States, the cartel murdered politicians,
members of the judiciary, and government officials who opposed
its activities. With the capture of Lehder and the effective aban-
donment of the extradition treaty (a shift in governmental policy
that encouraged traffickers to turn themselves in), the Medellín
cartel was gradually weakened. Even before the killing of Pablo
Escobar in December 1993, the other major Colombian cartel, lo-
cated in Cali, had established itself not only as Colombia’s pre-
mier drug-trafficking organization, but also as the Third World’s
most successful transnational corporation, albeit an illicit one.
Most recently, a number of small independent illicit firms and in-
roads made by law enforcement officials have challenged the po-
sition of the Cali cartel. Nevertheless, the organization has been
resilient and robust—not least because it has coopted rather than
confronted the local and regional, if not the national, power struc-
ture. No less importantly, the Cali cartel also initiated an impor-
tant process of diversification, moving into the more lucrative
heroin trade (Lee 1992).
The heroin industry differs from the cocaine trade in that the
growing and refining areas are more diverse. The major regions
where opium is grown are the Golden Triangle of Burma, Thai-
land, and Laos, and the Golden Crescent of Iran, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan, along with Mexico (which produces injectable black tar
heroin). The opium itself comes from the poppy plant and is re-
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

fined into morphine and either heroin-3, which is smokeable, or
heroin-4, which is dissolved in water and taken intravenously.
Burma and Afghanistan are the most important opium growers in
the world, and much of the processing of opium into heroin is
done in Burma and in locales in Southwest Asia before it is
shipped to European and American markets.
Efforts to disrupt the heroin industry at its source have
proved impossible, partly because Burma lacks a strong legiti-
mate government. Indeed, the country has long been character-
ized by considerable internecine strife in which opium warlords
and ethnic insurgents who desire autonomy from the Shan State
(the center of the opium growing region) are remnants of two
Kuomintang armies that fled into Burma when Chiang Kai-shek
was defeated by the Chinese communists in 1949. Perhaps most
famous of all is Khun Sa. With his Shan United Army, he has been
one of the most important drug lords in Burma.
Related to the changing fortunes of individual trafficking
groups has been a geographic shift; in recent years, the focus of
much activity has gone from the Burma-Thai border to the
Burmese border with China’s Yunnan Province, where a consid-
erable amount of refining is also done. Some of the heroin coming
out of the Golden Triangle goes through Bangkok, where it is
routed directly to Western Europe for the United States, or trans-
shipped through Malaysia and Singapore. There is also an over-
land route from Burma through China’s Yunnan Province to
Hong Kong, which seems to have taken on increasing importance
(Fuentes 1998).
As discussed in Chapter 1, the Chinese Triads based mainly
in Hong Kong play a crucial role in the heroin-trafficking indus-
try. The Triads, as already suggested, are secret societies that en-
gage in many types of criminal activities, including drug traffick-
ing, extortion, large-scale human smuggling, and gambling.
Hong Kong provides an excellent distribution center from which
heroin can be sent to destinations in the United States and West-
ern Europe. Triads control much of the trafficking in illegal im-
migrants and heroin that comes from Hong Kong through New
York, representing the largest Chinese gateway for illicit traffick-
ing into the United States; much of the trafficking in heroin is also
routed via Vancouver and Toronto, Canada, both of which have
significant Chinese populations, utilizing cells and networks in
these target “host” locales (Flynn 1998).
Another important opium-growing country is Afghanistan.
Illicit Trafficking
61

Much of its opium is refined in Pakistan, especially in the North-
west Frontier Province. The government has little control over
this area, which has been described as a sanctuary for heroin
manufacturers and, more recently, al-Qaeda and Taliban terror-
ists. Although significant amounts of heroin are consumed locally
by a substantial and growing addict population, heroin is also ex-
ported to Europe and the United States. Pakistani trafficking
groups play a crucial role, but perhaps as significant are the Turk-
ish criminal organizations that exploit Turkey’s geopolitical loca-
tion between Southwest Asia and Europe and operate transship-
ment points in the trafficking phase of the drug smuggling.
Smuggling Nuclear Materials and Arms 
India and Pakistan are now both nuclear states; therefore, recent
tensions between them are all the more threatening (Margolis
2000). Also, Iran and North Korea have proclaimed nuclear infra-
structure capabilities; and Sudan, Syria, and the Palestinian Is-
lamic jihad are actively designated on the United States govern-
ment’s terrorist list. Nonstate groups such as Osama bin Laden’s
al-Qaeda terrorist network have been trying to develop nuclear
capacities, as has Aum Shinrikyo, the Japanese group that carried
out a sarin nerve-gas attack in the Tokyo subway system in 1995.
Although the technological obstacles against building long-range
nuclear weapons equipped with reliable delivery systems (i.e.,
ballistic missiles) remain high, the bar is low for acquiring “dirty”
nuclear devices. These devices may consist of small amounts of
radioactive materials, whether bomb grade or not, and as such
could create immense havoc. In one recent incident along these
lines, a Chechen separatist group obtained a small amount of ra-
dioactive material (apparently from a nuclear lab in the former
Soviet Union) and left it in Gorky Park in the heart of Moscow as
a warning to Russian authorities that their demands for the polit-
ical autonomy of Chechnya must be taken seriously.
According to John Deutch, a former director of the U.S. Cen-
tral Intelligence Agency (CIA):
The chilling reality is that nuclear materials and tech-
nologies are more accessible now than at any other
time in history, due primarily to the dissolution of the
former Soviet Union and the region’s worsening eco-
nomic conditions. The protection of fissile materials in
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

the former Soviet Union has become even more critical
at the same time that control has become more diffi-
cult . . . the breakup of the Soviet Union, the opening
of Russian society, and its economic difficulties have
subjected the security system to stresses and risks it
was not designed to withstand.
As nations have retreated and their governance has slack-
ened and lost control of vital national resources, organized crim-
inals stepped in to fill the void. Criminal groups have created an
active black market in nuclear materials. Highly enriched ura-
nium and plutonium, beryllium, radium, palladium, and lithium
are just some of the component materials of nuclear weapons traf-
ficked out of the former USSR and Warsaw Pact countries
(Deutch 1996). Much of the smuggling appears to be supply
driven; that is, it has been prompted by the collapse of internal
state protection mechanisms rather than by the demand of spe-
cific customer needs at the time of theft. However, given the
availability of materials, the expertise to assemble components,
and the difficulties surrounding Russia’s law enforcement capa-
bilities, a great deal of smuggling into countries such as Iran and
Palestinian territories is on the rise. In addition, materials utilized
in civilian nuclear power and research facilities are even more
vulnerable to theft and smuggling (Zimmerman 1995). 
Weapons of Mass Destruction 
Since 1987, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD), mainly nuclear weapons, has been a formidable and
growing problem. Relatively weak states can gain enormous
stature by acquiring nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons.
Such capabilities are seen as particularly dangerous when they
are acquired by states that do not share the norms and conven-
tions of international society. North Korea and Iran, for exam-
ple, are regarded as particularly unpredictable and dangerous
nations. North Korea has openly declared that it possesses nu-
clear bomb capabilities. In order to prevent these states from ac-
quiring WMD, the international community has attempted to
implement a series of nonproliferation standards and protocols.
These standards have not only been imperfect, but have been
undermined by the operation of a market that includes both licit
and illicit business. The participants in the WMD market from
supply networks are able to circumvent complex, multilayered
Illicit Trafficking
63

export control regimes and thereby move the most advanced
technology to the consumer state with virtual impunity.
The commodities of weapons proliferators are the equip-
ment, materials, and land technology used in the production of
WMD. Except in rare cases, WMD are not available on the inter-
national market. When a state takes the decision to develop
WMD capability, it must create a research and development in-
frastructure and then rely on indigenous production. Once the
process engineering and production capacity has been installed,
the state must import—or produce—the raw materials needed for
the weapons. The actual manufacture of the weapon is in most
cases independent of the international market and is outside of
the area of focus. It is the creation of the domestic capacity that is
dependent on transnational organizations.
Nuclear Theft and Smuggling: The Threat
The dissolution of the Soviet Union made large quantities of
weapons susceptible to theft or diversion as the security of pro-
duction and storage facilities diminished. Never before had an
empire disintegrated while in possession of multiple nuclear
weapons in its military arsenal, including at least 40,000 tons of
chemical weapons and significant biological weapons capability.
Adding to the danger was the fact that thousands of scientists,
engineers, and technicians were left adrift, unsure of income. The
momentous political event of 1989—the fall of the Berlin Wall—
created a vast supermarket of nuclear weapons (Lee 1998). More-
over, the threat is a multifaceted one. The supply of nuclear ma-
terials attractive to terrorists and criminal groups resides in just
a handful of states, but the demand is widespread and may in-
clude substate groups (al-Qaeda) in addition to “rogue” states
such as North Korea. Nuclear material in the former Soviet
Union has become increasingly susceptible to theft. Political and
social turmoil worldwide has simply increased the appeal of nu-
clear material as a means of amassing power, exerting influence,
or seeking retribution.
How serious is the problem? An accurate assessment of the
problem would be difficult at this juncture, although the United
Nations International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has identi-
fied nearly 150 confirmed incidents of international nuclear
smuggling between 1993 and 1996 (Allison, Cote, Falkenrath,
and Miller 1996). Such a view could be very misleading, how-
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

ever, since it is based on incomplete data (IAEA 1996). New crim-
inal trade channels are likely to open up new opportunities in
view of the political unrest in Central Asia and in several former
Soviet republics. Russia is experiencing a particularly serious
problem as regards diverting sensitive nuclear materials inas-
much as the specialists and scientific/technical elements in the
military/industrial complex find themselves without jobs or fu-
ture career prospects. Apparently, two main markets for nuclear
materials have arisen in postcommunist Eurasia and the oft-
disputed borders created by the Himalayas. In addition, there
are the disorganized, supply-driven, and amateurish trade pat-
terns that converge through myriad smuggling routes, and the
shadow market organized by professionals and brokered by
criminal and corrupt officials with huge illicit trafficking infra-
structure resources. The shadow market presents a particular
danger, representing a direct challenge to Western security
(Williams and Woessner 1996).
The Impact of Change
The centers of weapons design and production in the former
USSR, which had been known as “secret cities,” were off limits to
foreigners and anyone not cleared for access. With the collapse of
Soviet control structures, the KGB was replaced with the fledg-
ling Russian Federal Security Services (FSS); these “cities” experi-
enced an influx of thieves, criminals, and profiteers, which cat-
alyzed the spread of nuclear-related crime. In the post-Soviet era,
borders became porous and guards were easily bribed, as a result
of which most of the theft and trafficking originated with oppor-
tunistic insiders in the nuclear complex. Some acted individually,
whereas others mobilized a number of accomplices when the
components required technical expertise to disassemble, trans-
port safely, and reassemble. A breakdown in discipline and moral
standards, coupled with motives of personal gain, helped to cre-
ate an atmosphere conducive to nuclear materials trafficking.
In such dire circumstances, even government agencies may
be susceptible to corruption and conspiracy to traffic: powerful
bureaucracies and agencies employing thousands might be more
interested in generating revenues and protecting the livelihood of
employees than in promoting countertheft policies. Economically
hard-pressed government employees may emphasize profits and
survival in a crisis and turn a blind eye to violations of their own
Illicit Trafficking
65

export control and enforcement policies. Generally, conditions in
Russia and the NIS have favored the growth of nuclear material
and weapons trafficking.
Biological and Chemical Weapons
Biological warfare—or germ warfare, as it was known in the
1950s—is associated with massive, unpredictable, and potentially
uncontrollable consequences. With the onset of the Cold War fol-
lowing World War II, the development of germ warfare in the
United States, the Soviet Union, and in other countries was fren-
zied, often poorly planned, and of course shrouded in secrecy.
Unlike nuclear weapons, biological weapons are tactical, not
strategic, because a large quantity of a chemical weapon is re-
quired to destroy a small number of enemies. In 1972, the United
States signed the Convention on the Prohibition of the Develop-
ment, Production, and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological)
and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, commonly known
as the Biological Weapons Convention. The Soviet Union sup-
plied much of the language of the treaty and became one of the
three so-called depository states for the treaty. (The other two sig-
natories were the United States and Great Britain.) The conven-
tion solidified the international venue for oversight of biological
warfare.
In the chemical weapons field there are two key acquisition
goals: (1) to accumulate precursor chemicals, and (2) to stockpile
corrosion-resistant manufacturing equipment. The basic compo-
nents of the nerve agents—oxygen, phosphorus, hydrogen, car-
bon, fluorine, and sulfur—all exist, in one form or another, in
every country in the world. The state seeking a chemical
weapons capability therefore needs time and energy to turn
these basic building blocks into the complex molecules that can
be used as weapons agents. The industry is so structured that
some firms produce precursor chemicals while others utilize the
intermediaries to make final commercial products. The trade in
precursor chemicals is extensive, involving hundreds of millions
of tons per year. In most countries, the precursors that are of
greatest utility for chemical weapon manufacture are controlled
by export restrictions. Yet the vast legitimate application of these
compounds makes it relatively easy to hide their illegal move-
ments. A state seeking a chemical arsenal must develop sources
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

of precursors that can meet its weapons production require-
ments. Precursor chemicals are considered “commodity chemi-
cals” in the industry in that there is little product differentiation
between producers, the cost is uniform across producers, and
production is undertaken by several manufacturers. Supply net-
works for precursors of an illegal chemical weapon site, how-
ever, are essentially the same as the networks utilized by com-
mercial manufacturers for legal chemical products. In the
commercial case, chemical manufacturers often multisource their
precursors even if they have to pay a little extra for one of the
sources. Such an approach ensures continued supply even if a
particular precursor manufacturer encounters production prob-
lems. For the chemical weapons producer, the same multisourc-
ing technique is a logical response to the threat of export en-
forcement efforts. Many of the chemical weapons agent
production techniques require the use of specialized pipes, fit-
tings, and reactor vessels. Such equipment is difficult to manu-
facture, and only a handful of countries have the domestic ca-
pacity for their construction. Consequently, supply networks for
special chemical manufacturing equipment must be developed
to link the countries that have the available manufacturing tech-
nology to the end user. Once the network has been assembled, it
facilitates the movement of the equipment to the consumer.
Yet another proliferation concern is the spread of advanced
missiles. Like nuclear weapons, guided missiles require a signif-
icant industrial infrastructure if indigenous production is to suc-
ceed. Missile airframes, engines, pumps, valves, guidance, and
telemetry systems are just a few of the sophisticated components
that must be developed. As with chemical weapons, however,
states that seek to procure weapons are not forced to perform all
the manufacturing steps themselves. Iraq, for example, pur-
chased SCUDs from the Soviets in the 1980s and then modified
them in ways that extended their range during the Gulf War in
1991. Even local modification, however, required a significant
domestic infrastructure, based on foreign manufacturing and
testing equipment. Iraq purchased machine tools, inspection
equipment, and testing systems abroad. The acquisition of these
technologies was supported by the same network as used for its
WMD programs.
The programs described here share many of the same tech-
nologies used in nuclear medicine, machine tool manufacturing,
pesticide production, and the like. These industries operate in a
Illicit Trafficking
67

set of legitimate markets that are supported by their host nations.
The companies that research, develop, produce, market, and dis-
tribute these technologies do so in search of profits. They work
hard to expand their customer base and to develop new markets
for their products. Of course, the majority of these legitimate na-
tional and multinational firms rarely cross the line to include
criminal behavior. Nonetheless, the profit-driven market struc-
ture facilitates the transnational supply of weapons technologies
to pariah and rogue states, even when the international commu-
nity and domestic export restriction legislation seek to deny these
technologies to such states. The legitimate firms in the market
provide the source of equipment and materials for these states,
which desire weapons-use front companies and prime contractors
to connect their nefarious technology needs with those of law-
abiding companies. Ironically, legitimate firms are not necessarily
aware of the end use of their product and so find themselves in-
advertently dealing with criminal firms masking the purpose of
their activities.
The trafficking process applicable to biochemical weapons
technologies is similar to that involved in narcotics trafficking.
Both processes attempt to move a product from a willing seller to
a willing end user without the knowledge of, or interference from,
other parties. Although both markets keep the contents of ship-
ping materials secret, for the biochemical weapons technology
market it is the destination rather than the source that is sensitive.
During the early 1990s, Iraq was believed to have come close
to using anthrax (a single-celled bacterium that feeds on meat) on
the Allied coalition forces. If Iraq had laid down a strain of an-
thrax during the first Gulf War, Allied casualties might have been
the largest sustained by any army in history. Also during the Gulf
War of 1991, the Iraqis made large quantities of botulinum toxin
or botulism, which is one of the most powerful toxins known. The
Iraqi government admitted that it had manufactured enough bot-
ulism to kill every person on earth a thousand times over. The in-
trigues and mysteries of stockpiles of Iraqi chemical munitions re-
main unsolved as a result of the corruption in the current wartime
Iraq. Anthrax spores were sent through the U.S. mail immediately
after September 11 to major politicians, officials, and leading fig-
ures in the news broadcasting industry. The dried anthrax spores
had the potential for becoming lodged in the lungs and eventu-
ally migrating into the bloodstream. Indeed, death followed
quickly for at least two of the exposed victims.
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

One consequence of the increasingly interconnected nature
of the present world is that minor outbreaks of disease in a re-
mote region could result in pandemics. Terrorists, of course,
aware of this fact, seek to take advantage of this vulnerability
and sow the seeds of a devastating disease. A bioterror attack in-
volving infectious particles can be stored in a small vial, which is
much easier to smuggle into a country than a nuclear device. A
smallpox plague initiated by such means could produce enor-
mous social unrest and political instability. Bioterrorism is in-
deed a matter of heightened concern, as highlighted by the warn-
ing by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) to New York public
health agencies, in the wake of 9/11, to be on the lookout for dis-
ease entities.
There are some important similarities in the drug-traffick-
ing and biochemical-trafficking markets. In summary, the par-
ticipants in the drug and biochemical technology markets oper-
ate in a hostile environment designed to prevent, obstruct, or
disrupt their activities. In both the drug- and biochemical-traf-
ficking cases, the organizations involved tend to display consid-
erable resilience, impressive adaptive capabilities, great ingenu-
ity and skill in circumventing law enforcement and export
control efforts, and garner more and more profits in spite of the
obstacles they encounter. The results can be seriously damaging
to national and international security. Drug abuse and violence
are closely related, and the drug-trafficking organizations both
thrive on and exacerbate political chaos in countries such as
Burma and Afghanistan. In a similar vein, biochemical weapons
supply networks can undermine international regimes and pro-
vide capabilities to states hostile to the values of the UN mem-
ber states, such as the EU and the Organization of American
States.
Law Enforcement and Control Efforts
In the case of biochemical weapons, the poles of the market
should be the prime target of law enforcement and control efforts.
This means reducing incentives for states to acquire biochemical
weapons technologies, notably by rendering such capabilities un-
necessary through more satisfactory security arrangements. Suc-
cess in this effort is particularly difficult, however, with pariah
states such as North Korea. The alternative is to impose such high
Illicit Trafficking
69

costs on circumventing international regimes to acquire prohib-
ited technologies that such a course of action no longer appears
attractive. This is of course easier said than done.
Illicit Arms Trafficking
If international networks of weapons producers and supplies
were not available, many regional and national armed conflicts
would not be possible. Ethnic, religious, and nationalist wars as
well as the proliferation of arms trafficking are attributable to the
openness of markets for buying and selling weapons. The prof-
itability of arms manufacturing and the collapse of Cold War na-
tional alliances, with the consequent loss of the services provided
by national police and military organizations, greatly diminished
the safety and security of many regions of the world. As a result,
tribal, religious sects, clans, and extended family groups have
been called upon to perform many of the public safety and order
functions formerly assigned to state agencies (Timmerman 1990).
Local conflicts and clashes can disrupt economies by de-
stroying civil order and domestic life and can also set the stage for
perpetuating age-old conflicts as warlords, gangs, and bandits
alongside guerrilla terrorist organizations compete for control. In
many regions of Southeast Asia (Burma, Laos, Thailand, Kashmir,
Pakistan, and the Philippines), East Africa (Somalia, Eritrea, and
Yemen), Central Africa, the Middle East, and the Andean coun-
tries of South America, the presence of illicit arms promotes con-
flict and terrorist violence. Indeed, in Somalia, Vietnam, Peru,
Colombia, Sierra Leone, and numerous other countries in the
world, entire generations possess skills that are primarily military
and violent; when legitimate economic opportunities disappear,
they will naturally turn to criminal activity for survival’s sake.
Warlordism thrives in places where the distinction between crime
and politics is murky. Theft, extortion, and contraband traffic en-
rich criminal groups and also enable ethnic and religious groups
to push their goals and objectives through warfare, jihad, and ter-
rorism. And they can do so today on a scale that has been made
possible by the prevalence of weapons of all sorts and of all lev-
els of sophistication and destructive power.
A historic fact has been shattered by the post–1989 world in
which globalization is the increasingly dominant economic and
political reality. During the Cold War conflicts between the two
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

superpowers, small-arms trafficking, including technologically
sophisticated automatic infantry weapons and rocket-propelled
grenade rifles (RPGs)—the weapon of choice of al-Qaeda and ter-
rorist organizations worldwide—was early on a system of
weapons manufacture and procurement controlled by the two
powers. Together, the United States and the USSR could adjust
the political temperature in their Third World “client states” by
expanding or contracting access to the gun and weapons markets.
The controls were generally of two sorts. On the supply side of
the market, the major powers influenced and even controlled the
movement of weapons ammunition and spare parts around the
world (Williams 1997). On the demand side, the ability to obtain
weapons, whatever the cause or purpose, depended greatly on
the ability to pay. Today, neither constraint obtains: weapons are
now available to all who can pay, and the means of paying have
become possible for a diverse group of terrorists, militants, reli-
gious sects, paramilitary forces, and organized criminals. Despite
comprehensive treaties and international agreements that control
arms transfers, illegal arms proliferation and transfer remains a
serious threat.
Dynamics of Arms Trafficking: The Cold War
In past eras, at the conclusion of a major war, arms production
would fall rapidly and the availability of weapons would decline
sharply. These conditions affected the durability and intensity of
guerrilla wars, political insurrections, colonial liberation strug-
gles, insurgencies, and the capacities of criminal groups to en-
gage in sustained violence. In the aftermath of World War I, the
view emerged that the responsibility for the massive carnage and
violence of the war lay with the manufacturers of weapons who
secretly instigated political crises in order to sell their lethal mer-
chandise. Efforts were therefore made at the national and inter-
national level to impose controls on the manufacture and distri-
bution of weapons, but these efforts failed. Only in the wake of
World War II did international agreements emerge that would at
least regulate arms production and sales. But none of these could
amount to much because so many weapons of all kinds lay in nu-
merous battlefields across the world. With the exception of
China, which, in the immediate post–World War II period was
engaged in a major civil war that loomed across its mainland
from 1946 through 1949, there was no serious concern beyond
Illicit Trafficking
71

immediate civilian safety in war-torn countries to round up, in-
ventory, and control the dissemination of small arms and other
weapons designed for conventional warfare. 
The United States was preoccupied with the spread of atomic
weapons to the Soviet Union—America’s principal antagonist in
the emerging Cold War. The Marshall Plan was designed to re-
build the countries destroyed during the war, and was concerned
with discovering and confiscating land mines and arms that were
being smuggled into regions of Western Europe, the Balkans, and
southeast Mediterranean countries where communists were a po-
tential threat in the outbreak of civil wars. 
In the post–Cold War period meetings of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) treaty signatories, the G7 states,
SEATO members, the OAS council, and the United Nations at-
tempted to examine their control agency efforts against arms and
weapons smuggling. A restrictive protocol common to all agree-
ments concerns export licenses. These would be issued on the
condition that a purchaser of arms must produce an end-use doc-
ument specifying that the weapons would be employed solely for
the use of the country’s military forces and would not be trans-
ferred to third parties without the permission of the country of
origin. At the same time, during the Cold War, the United States
and the Soviet Union produced sophisticated equipment for their
own forces, allies in NATO, and the Warsaw Pact, respectively.
Both powers gave away or transferred second-hand materials to
Third World satellites.
For several decades after 1945, it was generally accepted that
it would be difficult to restrict light weapons (hand guns, infantry
weapons). Major weapons systems (missiles, aircraft, tanks, and
heavy ordnance) were subject to political controls by the NATO
and Warsaw Pact alliances concerning the universal acceptance of
the end-user certificate. Still, gun runners managed to figure out
ways around these regulations. In the 1960s, wars of colonial liber-
ation in Africa attracted entrepreneurs and adventurers into the
arms supply trade. Later, with world production accelerating in the
1970s, the black market began to disintegrate, especially in the
light-weapons business. By the 1980s, the market collapsed com-
pletely. The United States, the USSR, and other major industrial
countries decided to keep arms production at wartime levels (Nay-
lor 2001), and the end of the Cold War did little to reverse the trend.
A nation has many reasons for creating and keeping its own
arms industry operational. A domestic arms-producing sector is
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

often considered essential to assure survival of the nation-state
and to provide diplomatic clout in international relations. Equally
important, the arms industry may become an important and irre-
placeable source of jobs and economic growth (Naylor 1995). The
expansion of technological development has meant that more
arms are produced than can be absorbed by the arsenals of the
producing countries’ own armed forces. The result has been that
arms-producing countries have promoted arms exports. Today,
the arms business has been almost completely commercialized
just at the point when arms are their most lethal (Ratner 1996).
Arms Trafficking in the Post–Cold War Era
In the contemporary scene, the sheer mass of second-hand equip-
ment, the strong pressures to curtail the legal obstacles to un-
loading it, and the downward trends in prices resulting from the
glut of weapons taken together constitute ominous signs of
chronic violence in many regions of the world. For example, an
AK-47 automatic, considered one of the best weapons ever made,
used to cost about $125 factory-fresh in the USSR. Now, it can be
purchased for only $30 to $40 in a Russian flea market. In
Uganda, the weapon costs about the same as a live chicken; on
the Cambodian black-market, it may go for as little as $8.00—
about the same price as a pair of fake designer jeans (Howe 1980).
In the past, weapons were supplied or trafficked in at least three
ways: (1) they were sold legally and openly to other states fol-
lowing procedures and export controls; (2) they were sold ille-
gally and covertly to other states by diverting weapons through
third parties; or (3) they were secretly supplied to other parties
working in criminal black markets. All of these methods exist
today, but a fourth deadly factor has been added: the arms bazaar
feeds the needs of narco-militias, mafias, and paramilitaries
(throughout the Balkans, Central Africa and Afghanistan, for in-
stance).
Weapons “Supermarkets” and
Conflict Zones
The availability of weapons has also resulted in large part from
the spillover effects of the Vietnam War, which raged for more
than a decade and ignited related conflicts in Southeast Asia
where violence and warfare were stoked by demands for arms
Illicit Trafficking
73

and ammunition. In recent years, the Tamil Tigers in Sri Lanka,
the Muslim separatist guerrilla Abu Sayyaf in the Philippines,
Burmese drug armies, and others turn to Thai arms merchants to
replenish their stocks.
There are yet more examples of weapons-trafficking net-
works in the last three decades of the twentieth century. Within
two years of the outbreak of the civil war in Lebanon in 1975,
arms dealers from all over the world flocked into the country.
Identifiable conflict attracted weapons entrepreneurs who per-
ceived the war as a business opportunity. And when the war
ended, Lebanese militias, French Corsican gangsters, and others
began selling arms to the breakaway Republic of Croatia in the
Balkans (Yudken 1992). Also during the 1970s and extending
into the 1980s, the Horn of Africa was ablaze in war and civil
unrest. Weapons of all sorts flooded into Ethiopia, Eritrea, and
Somalia, and then into Afghanistan after the Soviet Union in-
vaded that country. During the 1980s, $10 billion worth of
weapons poured into Afghanistan in support of the antigovern-
ment Mujahideen forces. Weapons dealers from Pakistan, Kash-
mir, and India pushed guns to the rebels, including Osama bin
Laden and the Taliban. Once the government in Kabul fell, the
Soviet tanks, RPGs, and other weapons ended up in the same
cauldron.
The collapse of the Warsaw Pact in the late 1980s, however,
has had the greatest impact on the weapons black markets. With
the withdrawal of the Red Army from Eastern Europe, a huge
amount of military equipment and stocks became available. The
collapse of the USSR, though a cause for celebration in many
parts of the world, proved catastrophic and extremely dangerous:
in some cases, entire military units sold their weapons in ex-
change for basic supplies of food, clothing, and shelter (Gamba
1996). Cities in Russia took over local arsenals; and the Ukrainian-
Serbian Commodity Exchange switched from selling grain and
oil to selling fighter planes, tanks, and antiaircraft weapons sys-
tems. The infamous “Kaliningrad Yard Sale” followed. (Kalin-
grad was a city with a large military complex attached to it serv-
ing as a satellite military base for Moscow, and the entire military
arms industrial city went on sale as a sort of “supermarket” of il-
licit arms.)
Because enormous sums are to be made in arms trafficking,
many of the political impediments that states might have im-
posed on commercial trade have been eliminated or temporarily
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

lifted. Importantly, arms dealing and trafficking fit neatly into
black-market transactions at large. Weapons might be sold for
cash, exchanged for hostages, bartered for heroin or cocaine or
stolen art and precious stones, or traded for grain or oil. Then
deals may be conducted not by military men or ex-professional
soldiers but may be handled by middlemen who are equally at
home smuggling rubies, dumping toxic waste in Central Africa,
or stealing computer chips in the United States (Light 1996).
Transportation of illicit weapons can be entrusted to a phony cor-
poration registered in the Cayman Islands; to haul the arms, ships
can be hired that are registered to one of many states that ignore
arms trade embargoes and the rights of seamen. Payments can be
moved clandestinely through coded bank accounts in networks
of shell companies protected by the banking and corporate se-
crecy laws of financial safe havens scattered throughout the
world.
The Machinery of Arms Smuggling
Effectively curbing arms trafficking involves coping with a
number of obstacles and problems. A restriction on the flow of
weapons in and out of countries has not slowed down traffick-
ing activities partly because countries and groups seeking arms
develop their own groups and production capacities sooner or
later. In the tumultuous climate of post–Cold War tensions
which have given rise to ethnic nationalism, new states’ libera-
tion movements, and transnational organized crime, the de-
mand for weapons is high and unlikely to diminish in the im-
mediate future. As is true of another demand-driven product,
narcotics, if weapons traffickers get caught, they are easily re-
placed. So the real problem is not so much the greed of the traf-
ficker who is merely an intermediary. Indeed, before a trafficker
can smuggle in weapons, it is necessary to have access to
weapons to sell and a buyer who is eager to purchase arms
legally or illegally. 
Given this reality, a possible place of interdiction in the
smuggling may be on the supply side—where the weapons are
produced and manufactured. However, in view of the profits that
can be had, governments may opt for financial expediency and
turn a blind eye to practices that produce substantial revenues.
However, as the United States has learned so painfully, selling
weapons to the Afghan rebels in the 1970s came back to haunt
Illicit Trafficking
75

them and some of their allies, for those very weapons have been
turned against the United States in the present conflict against
terror. The problem involved in greatly reducing the production
of weapons that have wound up on the black market is that for
decades governments in both the West and East used military ex-
penditure as a means of stimulating their economies when they
were threatened by recession. The unfortunate consequence was
an increase in the productive capacity of the arms industry ac-
companied by the insidious constant supply of weapons to a ra-
pacious marketplace of smugglers, brokers, and international
dealers.
The Gray Arms Market
The U.S. government estimates that military equipment worth
several hundred million dollars is sold annually on the illegal
arms market to countries under UN arms embargoes. Most illegal
arms sales are conducted through the so-called gray arms market,
which has been dominated by individual brokers and their firms
during the past decade (Naylor 2001). Gray market firms are
often legitimate companies operating illegitimately by providing
false paperwork to disguise the buyer and the military character-
istics of the goods involved. Obtaining licenses, even when fraud-
ulent, allows gray market players to make deals that seem legiti-
mate and in compliance with export regulations and international
shipping protocols. 
In some cases, large illegal arms shipments arranged by traf-
fickers will be smuggled as contraband. Illegal arms transacted
with Afghan rebels and Yugoslav ethnic fighters in the 1970s and
1980s were often disguised as “humanitarian aid.” Illicit arms
trafficking fuels conflicts and undermines the political and mili-
tary efforts of the United States to promote stability in several re-
gions of the world. Weapons trafficking helped to arm combat-
ants in the Balkans and on the African continent. Nations under
UN or other international arms embargoes in which the United
States participates are major clients in the illicit arms markets.
Purchases of ordnance and weapons of all kinds by insurgents
and factions in civil wars and guerrilla/terrorist activities in-
crease the risk to U.S. military personnel and others operating in
hostile environments.
Genuine supply-side reduction of arms production and con-
versions from weapons manufacturing to other products are both
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

difficult to achieve. The reasons are partly technical and partly
the absence of a corporate orientation among weapons producers
for domestic industrial production in the civil sector. Further-
more, governments have offered few incentives to cover the huge
overhead costs of conversion. Hence, it is not easy to slash mili-
tary spending when it is a convenient mechanism for economic
stability and jobs, even when peacetime conditions constrain mil-
itary expenditures. Getting industries to cease manufacturing
weapons is akin to curing a drug addict or alcoholic: these indus-
tries need to be weaned away from war commodities of the mili-
tary-industrial complex. That is a tall order, however. The stock of
weapons that have been manufactured over the six decades since
the end of World War II have flooded the world. Putting an end
to weapons production is not likely in an environment where
peacekeeping is based largely on the certainty of retaliatory de-
struction. Parading around arsenals of sophisticated weapons
only heightens fears and drives impoverished paranoid states
like North Korea and Pakistan to arm themselves to the maxi-
mum, even though there are masses of people in both countries
that are in abject poverty (in the case of North Korea, starvation
and famine in past years). In addition, buybacks of weapons and
amnesties to encourage voluntary surrender of weapons has a
spotty success history. All too often only the worst junk is handed
in. Furthermore, the most dangerous elements of society, those
most prone to use their weapons, are the last to give them up, if
they ever do.
Any global attempt to solve the problem of weapons prolif-
eration and smuggling requires attention to the supply side—en-
couraging industrial conversion so that fewer weapons are man-
ufactured and attempting to implement the voluntary
self-disarming of populations. None of these alternatives will
work miracles, nor will they have discernible long-range effects
unless attention is focused squarely on the demand side of the il-
licit arms market. This may well require a major political/socio-
logical reorientation of peoples globally. In this era of globaliza-
tion, shifting loyalties away from the clan, the sect, and the tribe
in forms of building and rebuilding, secular civil societies that are
multicultural (meaning that they are more tolerant of social, reli-
gious, and ethnic differences) will also help reduce gross in-
equities and animosities in the global (and local) distribution of
income and wealth. If such an environment can be realized,
weapons will become irrelevant (Cukier 2001).
Illicit Trafficking
77

Trafficking in Precious Stones
The highly profitable market in diamonds, gold, and precious
gems has always attracted professional thieves and organized
crime. It has also become a significant source of revenue for war-
lords and insurgent groups in the war-torn diamond-rich areas
of Africa (Cusimano 2002). Nearly 75 percent of the world’s
rough diamonds—valued at about $5.2 billion on the open mar-
ket—are mined in Africa (Mueller 1999). Russian, Chinese, Ital-
ian, and African criminal groups are particularly involved in the
illegal trade of precious metals and gems. Russian crime groups
are believed to have infiltrated the legitimate diamond and gold
industries in Russia in order to smuggle precious gems out of the
country. Russian crime groups illegally extract and sell 300 met-
ric tons of amber worth an estimated $1 billion each year (Na-
tional Security Council 2000). In South Africa, criminal syndi-
cates stole 20 metric tons of gold and diamonds valued at $350
million in 1996 (Theobald 1994). In Southeast Asia, smuggling of
precious gems was a major source of revenue for the Khmer
Rouge insurgency in Cambodia (Kampuchea) and remains a sec-
ondary source of income for drug-trafficking insurgent armies in
Burma (Ebbe 1997).
Trafficking in Human Body Parts
One of the most shocking trafficking crimes is surely the trade in
human body parts, including lungs, kidneys, livers, and hearts.
They are sometimes obtained through coercion of prison inmates
or from “donors” who are slaughtered for the benefit of affluent
“recipients” who can afford illegitimate transplants. The trade ap-
pears to be internationally organized and is linked to the first kid-
ney transplant in 1954, the first lung transplant in 1963, and the
first heart transplant in 1967. Approximately a half million kid-
neys have been transplanted in these subsequent years; trans-
plantable organs are stimulating a very large industry indeed. At
any given moment, thousands of people worldwide are waiting
for a transplant, while the potential of an adequate number of
donors is constantly problematic. Thus, demand far outstrips
supply, setting the conditions for illicit activity and giving rise to
an illegitimate industry that makes organs available—for the
right price (Finkenauer 1999).
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Kidneys are the most sought-after organ worldwide. With
populations living longer because of nutritional, medical, and hy-
gienic improvements in most countries, kidney disease has in-
creased dramatically. Dialysis machines and other medical/phar-
maceutical technologies extend the lives of many, but by and
large, people in developing countries do not have access to ex-
pensive machines and so survival there is dependent on kidney
transplant—providing a kidney is available along with the mon-
etary and political (often illicit) access to receive a transplant. Or-
gans for transplant are in short supply almost everywhere in the
world. One reason for the shortage is that many people are ap-
prehensive about donating organs after death—some because of
religious or cultural reasons. Orthodox Jews, some Asians, and
Muslims, for example, are hostile to the idea of organ donations.
As a consequence, the waiting list to obtain a kidney from a ca-
daver is a long one. In the United States, the waiting period is two
to three years; in other areas of the world, the wait may be much
longer, if a waiting list is kept at all (Rothman and Rothman 2003).
The other alternative in obtaining an organ involves a living
donor. Ordinarily a spouse, sibling, relative, or friend may be the
donor; in the United States and Europe, live donors provide
nearly 40 percent of donated kidneys. But when relatives and oth-
ers are unwilling to serve as donors for religious or personal rea-
sons, what then? Many may seek out organs by purchasing them
in the flourishing and largely unregulated international traffick-
ing rings. Estimates of the size of the illicit organ markets are not
precise, but evidence suggests that they have grown dramatically
each year and will continue to do so. Demand will increase com-
mensurate with the response to pressure: as supply shrinks rela-
tive to an aging global population and as transplant technology is
spreading everywhere, the result has been a growth in the illicit
trafficking markets. Other factors promoting the illegal trade in-
volve the prohibition of commercial trafficking by numerous in-
ternational transplant societies, including the World Medical As-
sociation (World Medical Association 2000). Unfortunately, these
protocols and guidelines are rarely enforced and, consequently,
no effective international regulatory system of guidelines is in
place.
Selling organs can be highly profitable. In Thailand and the
Philippines in particular, a great many impoverished peasants in
the countryside and slum dwellers in the cities are prepared to
sell their kidneys. Illicit trade flourishes in the poorer countries
Illicit Trafficking
79

because generally they lack the professional and civic organiza-
tions that will oppose the trade in organs. In most cases, the med-
ical and legal organizations in these countries merely respond to
complaints, they do not initiate investigations. Misdeeds occur,
and action is taken only if disgruntled staff members bring these
incidents to the attention of regulators. The enforcement and reg-
ulatory agencies that are in place in countries like Thailand have
been successful in uncovering and ending some of the illicit trans-
plant activities. However, the weaknesses in the enforcement en-
gine are flagrant: Thailand has no central registry for organs, and
private hospitals are not effectively supervised by a state medical
authority. The result is that physicians and medical administra-
tors are relatively free to set up their own deals with families and
would-be donors.
Singapore’s government, unlike many of its neighbors, care-
fully regulates organ distribution and appears to have avoided fi-
nancial corruption (Radcliffe et al. 1999). However, because Sin-
gapore’s citizens, like most other Asians, object to removing
organs from deceased relatives, the result is a long waiting list for
kidneys. Many of those who need transplants may travel to China
to get the organs of executed inmates in the correctional system.
Some succeed. For some, the system has a ghastly efficiency: cap-
ital punishment is carried out in Singapore by hanging; the mo-
ment the trapdoor swings open and the neck is snapped, order-
lies hurry the body to an adjoining operating room to have the
organs removed while they are fresh and still functional. In 1987,
Singapore enacted the Human Organ Transplantation Act
(HOTA), a law that is unique in Asia. It provides that everyone
who is in a fatal accident is presumed to be a kidney donor, un-
less there is written documentation on file that the deceased ob-
jects to the removal of the kidneys at death.
In the Philippines, pollution, poverty, and slums ring the
cities of the archipelago’s islands. Not surprisingly, many slum
dwellers are willing to sell their kidneys. How are the organs har-
vested? Kidneys are sold openly and legally. For example, many
residents of a squatter community called Tondo in Manila, which
is located on the top of a huge garbage dump, have sold their kid-
neys. Medical teams go out to the slum, perform blood and tissue
tests, and store the results until a recipient arrives for a transplant.
Usually the medical team gets in touch with a broker who con-
nects them with someone whose blood and tissues provide the
best match for a transplant. Many of those who sell their kidneys
80
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

do not improve their lot economically. Often, the organ sellers can
no longer do heavy lifting, and so they lose their jobs; others suf-
fer disabilities as a result of kidney removal.
In India, the practice of organ sales has generated a market in
which organ brokers intensify the search for sellers. Similarly,
creditors become more aggressive in calling in debts, and rela-
tives of patients become more reluctant to donate kidneys when
a seller’s market expands (Cohen 1999). With the development of
more sophisticated transplant technology, the illicit trade and
market has expanded but follows the same demand and supply
situation as in overpopulated and poverty-stricken areas. The sit-
uation regarding organ trafficking has become a great concern to
the parliamentary assembly of the Council of Europe, which is-
sued a declaration on forbidding the trafficking in organs. The
Council, like other international bodies, lacks the power to en-
force its edicts. Nevertheless, it insists that the flourishing trade in
kidneys globally promotes criminal organ transplants and a
thriving commerce in organ selling that cannot be safely regu-
lated under current conditions. The Council noted that the televi-
sion and print media provide the principal and often sole investi-
gations of these practices. It also urged that member states tighten
their laws on organ donation and make the medical profession ac-
countable for monitoring irregularities and sharing information
about medical practitioners who violate the law (World Medical
Association 2000). Furthermore, the Council sees the need to
amend criminal codes to punish organ trafficking, which should
include sanctions against brokers, intermediary agents, hospital
and nursing staff, and laboratory personnel who participate and
collude in conspiracies to violate the law. The Council has en-
couraged its members to deny national medical insurance reim-
bursements for illegal transplants.
Will such initiatives succeed? It remains to be seen how gov-
ernments address the issue. When patients become desperate, un-
fortunately, some hospitals and surgeons cannot resist these lu-
crative opportunities for cash-paying patients and cash-desperate
donors. The fact is that human organ brokers and criminal mid-
dlemen are energetic and quick to see that poor people are vul-
nerable to exploitation. At the international level, it would be
helpful if the medical profession on its own, and not just in re-
sponse to external pressures, would seize the initiative and pro-
mote a universal commitment to organ transplant policy and
standards (Chang 1995). This may be a vain hope.
Illicit Trafficking
81

The Illicit Trade in Art and
Cultural Objects
Art theft and the plundering of archaeological treasures have oc-
curred for centuries, but as demand for objects has soared, there
has been a proliferation of the market. New to the illicit art mar-
ket are international networks that smuggle art objects into the
museums and auction houses of developed countries. They target
particular museums, archaeological sites, and churches world-
wide. The trafficking networks participate in the theft of art
works, and they tend to be linked with transnational criminal or-
ganizations that have found art theft profitable (Conklin 1994).
Traditional transnational criminal organizations such as the Ital-
ian Mafia and Colombian drug cartels use stolen art to facilitate
other illicit transactions, thus linking art crime to other types of
organized crime such as drug trafficking and money laundering
(Bernick 1999).
No country is safe from crime organizations that strip cul-
tural sites, which represent the heritage of a nation. Traffickers/
smugglers typically act as the intermediaries between the actual
thieves and the dealers. Most smugglers have connections with
the underworld of thieves and looters, and some auction houses
willingly traffic in stolen property. Thefts of this kind require con-
siderable expertise in handling, packing, and transporting ob-
jects, as well as knowledge of import/export law. In addition,
they usually have access to corrupt government officials (Alsinsla
1995).
The data on transnational criminal organizations’ involve-
ment in art and antiquities smuggling leaves many issues unre-
solved. Do the networks engaged in this type of crime cooperate
with each other? What are their connections to the legitimate art
and museum world? One fact is clear: the demand for antiquities
and other art objects dwarfs the legitimate supply. Porous bor-
ders, weak law enforcement, and economically distressed regions
all combine in facilitating the trafficking. Most significant of all,
however, is the presence of transnational networks that actually
stimulate such crime endeavors.
82
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Theft of Intellectual Property
The stealing of industrial trade secrets, copyrights, trademarks,
and patents is typical intellectual property rights (IPR) crime that
is affecting business worldwide. Criminal violations of IPR, par-
ticularly the sale of counterfeit or illegally manufactured prod-
ucts, distort international trade, undermine the legitimate mar-
ketplace, and result in significant business revenue losses.
Because the United States leads the world in the creation and ex-
port of intellectual property, primarily in computer software, mo-
tion pictures, sound recording, and book publishing, American
commercial enterprises and industries are especially vulnerable
to such crimes and are hardest hit by counterfeiting and varied
forms of copyright and patent infringements (Kelly 1989). These
industries stimulated more than $300 billion, or approximately 4
percent of the gross domestic product (GDP) in 1986. Copyright
industry products have surpassed agricultural products as the
single largest export sector in the U.S. economy. The United
States’ three largest software companies are currently worth more
than the steel, automotive, aerospace, chemical, and plastic in-
dustries combined (National Security Council 2000). Many of the
illegal products that violate intellectual property rights are ex-
ported to the United States, but most are circulated in markets
abroad in direct competition with the legitimate products of
American firms (Sell 1989).
IPR violations are a global phenomenon. Most countries
have laws protecting IPR, but few devote sufficient resources to
suppress the criminal activity. Because of ineffective laws and
weak enforcement, intellectual property violations have not been
reasonably suppressed. Moreover, law enforcement personnel are
inadequately trained, and public officials turn a blind eye to such
crimes in the interest of boosting trade and providing indigenous
business firms with a competitive edge (Grau 1989). Southeast
and East Asia are primary regions of IPR violations that result in
significant losses to U.S. businesses. China and Hong Kong har-
bor criminal operations that duplicate toys and clothing manu-
factured in Western countries. Firms in Malaysia, Singapore, and
Taiwan copy U.S. audio, video, and software products. In Eastern
Europe, Ukraine has emerged as the leading producer of illegal
optical discs, and Latin America is the third-largest market for il-
legal duplication of CDs, videos, and cassettes (Grabosky 2001).
Illicit Trafficking
83

Organized Crime and IPR Crimes
Although many IPR crimes are committed by ostensibly legiti-
mate foreign manufacturing, business, and import/export entre-
preneurs, criminal organizations are becoming participants in all
aspects of IPR crime, from manufacture to distribution. Product
piracy and counterfeiting are attractive to criminal organizations
because of the absence of strong criminal counterfeiting laws and
the potential for huge profits in the counterfeit goods market.
Some criminal and terrorist groups utilize the proceeds from pro-
ducing and selling counterfeit brand-name consumer goods to
fund crime and terror in the United States and elsewhere. In New
York City, for example, ethnic Chinese crime syndicates produce
counterfeit consumer products as a source of tax-free income. The
Vietnamese gang, “Born to Kill,” relies on the sale of counterfeit
Rolex and Cartier watches to fund gang activities (Chin 1996). In
1995, the Los Angeles Police Department discovered several Chi-
nese crime groups, including the Wah-Ching, the Big Circle Boys,
and the Four Seas Triad, engaged in manufacturing floppy disks
and CD-ROMs (Kelly, Chin, and Fagan 1997). Past press reports
indicate that the Provisional Irish Republican Army funded some
of its terrorist activities through counterfeit perfumes, home
videos, computer software, and pharmaceuticals (Kelly and
Schatzberg 1995). The problem is chronic and one of increasing
significance. The stealing of trade secrets from the U.S. govern-
ment and from U.S. businesses through economic espionage, in
addition to industrial theft, is a growing threat to U.S. global eco-
nomic competitiveness.
Alien Smuggling: Trafficking in
Human Beings 
People move in reaction to a variety of social, economic, and per-
sonal pressures. Issues of politics, the ups and downs of
economies, livelihoods lost and gained, wars, conflicts, natural
disasters—all play a role in precipitating the flow of migrants and
refugees. The Middle East crisis is a good example of multifaceted
social unrest.
The slave trade made up most of the migration activity from
the sixteenth century to the early decades of the nineteenth cen-
84
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

tury (Kane 2000). Europe, the Middle East, indeed the Western
Hemisphere, was populated by the migrations of people in small
or large roaming bands. Migration creates problems but also
solves them. It reduced overcrowding in Europe during the eigh-
teenth and nineteenth centuries, and it helped to populate North
and South America and Australia, but it also subjected millions of
people to the tragedy of slavery and colonialism. The biography
of nations can be understood in terms of the great migratory
shocks they experienced during their formative periods. The pro-
found effects of migration on a region are apparent today as more
people worldwide move about in one year as have moved in past
centuries (Anderson 1991).
The end of the Cold War and the breakup of the Soviet
Union have resonated like a powerful earthquake across the
world. The consequent realignment of political forces, the rise in
ethnic and social conflicts, the assertion of new nationalist aspi-
rations, and the economic desperation across Africa and Latin
America have produced crime, violence, and millions of
refugees. Economic and demographic stresses are also major fac-
tors stimulating illegal migration, especially from China, India,
Mexico, Central America, and the Caribbean in the Western
Hemisphere (Chin and Kelly 1999). Illegal immigrants, like legal
immigrants, seek the “better lives” they believe await them in
the United States and Canada; they share the same motives as
legal immigrants: economic security and opportunities for a bet-
ter life for their families. However, as noted in Chapter 1, among
the illegal immigrants smuggled into the United States, Western
Europe, and Canada are many criminals and terrorists. Upon ar-
rival they “disappear” into the ethnic and racial migrant com-
munities, insulating themselves from the probing eye of the
larger community.
Estimates of undocumented aliens vary, but the U.S. Immi-
gration and Naturalization Service (INS) indicates that there may
be nearly 10 million living and working in the United States.
These numbers represent about 2 to 5 percent of the total U.S.
population. Although it is not known with any precision, it is es-
timated that more than 2 million illegal immigrants come into
the United States yearly through alien smuggling networks. Ap-
proximately another half-million enter without the help of smug-
glers. Most illegal aliens enter via Mexico and Canada. Ironically,
smuggling not only persists but tends to rise even though U.S.
immigrant policies are among the most lenient in the world (U.S.
Illicit Trafficking
85

Immigration and Naturalization Service 1999). By far, the United
States is the largest recipient of international migrants, with
about 3.5 million foreign-born residents at the end of the 1990s.
Migrants come from everywhere and go everywhere; the largest
numbers of migrants come from Asia. The United States is the
major recipient followed by other parts of North America, Eu-
rope, Third World countries in Latin America, and Africa (U.S.
Department of State 2001).
Demographically, migration streams became feminized to-
ward the latter decades of the twentieth century. That is, hereto-
fore immigration was primarily a male phenomenon. Many of the
modern female immigrants—legal or illegal—are relocating as
the principal wage-earners rather than as passive, economically
dependent family members.
During the 1990s, many world leaders identified alien smug-
gling and trafficking as major issues that should be addressed by
the United Nations. In 1993, the UN General Assembly adopted
Resolution 48/102 on the prevention of alien smuggling. It urged
states to change the laws by increasing the penalty for migrant
trafficking, criminalizing the activity, developing more sophisti-
cated procedures for detecting forged documents, and aggres-
sively monitoring airports and seaports.
Alien smuggling is becoming one of the most profitable ac-
tivities of organized crime groups. From 700,000 to 2 million
women and children are trafficked globally each year (United Na-
tions 2000). The number of all migrants including men and
women of all ages is unknown, but every observer believes that
the numbers are increasing as the pace of globalization acceler-
ates in every region of the world. This smuggling of people tends
to be an organized process that takes different forms. In the case
of Chinese alien smuggling, it is increasingly professionalized
with “Snakeheads”—as the smuggling organizations are
known—linked to crime syndicates on an intercontinental basis.
These syndicates provide links to local networks of gangsters,
employers, and facilitators who provide a full range of services
from transport to safe houses, jobs, and false documents (U.S. De-
partment of State 1999).
Female Migrants
Nearly one-half of migrants worldwide are women. Although
most still accompany families, increasing numbers migrate on
86
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

their own and are the principal wage-earners for themselves and
their families. Women migrants, especially from underdeveloped
regions where they do not enjoy men’s rights, tend to be vulner-
able to deprivation, abuse, and discrimination because of their
status as migrants and because of their gender. As such, they have
limited access to legal, lucrative employment and generally earn
less than men and even native-born women.
The trafficking of women for sexual exploitation is a serious
problem that is growing worldwide. Some observers contend that
the profits from the sex trade in women and children are among
the highest sources of illegal income in America, ranking just
below drugs and gun dealing. But unlike drugs or guns, human
trafficking deals in reusable and resaleable commodities—people.
Smuggled into prostitution rings in the United States equipped
with faked visas, women aliens have often been kidnapped or
lured by false stories of great opportunities and then find them-
selves trapped in the sex trade industries in a foreign country. Re-
moved from the protection of family and friends, and held cap-
tive in apartments in strange cities, they are forced to engage in
unspeakable sex acts with complete strangers (Chin 1999). Al-
though there is nothing new about this (traditionally termed
white slavery), since the 1980s, sex trafficking has become a well-
organized international criminal enterprise. It flourished in the
Philippines and Thailand after the Vietnam War by catering to
soldiers and then broadened its appeal and accessibility to
tourists from North America, Japan, and Europe who found a
wide variety of sexual activities available in South Asian brothels
(Edwards and Harden 2000).
Prior to the 1990s, many of the women trafficked came from
Asia (U.S. Population Division 2000). Many of them share similar
social backgrounds and profiles: often they are desperate young
people in search of opportunity and livelihood and even a means
to survive. The breakup of the Soviet Union in December 1991,
the economic revolution across the globe, the porous borders, and
the expansion of criminal syndicates are landmark events leading
to the profound economic upheavals affecting young women and
families. Before 1991, sex trafficking was conducted mainly
through mail-order brides and recruitment activities in Thailand
and across Asia. Once the Soviet Union collapsed, a new sex mar-
ket emerged, facilitated by criminal groups operating interna-
tionally. The main smuggling routes cover much of Africa, South-
east Asia, Eastern Europe, and South America. Apart from the
Illicit Trafficking
87

criminal exploitation of women, men, and children, other dangers
are associated with human trafficking, notably HIV/AIDS, He-
patitis C, and the full range of blood pathogen and sexually trans-
mitted diseases.
The growth of sex trade trafficking has prompted the United
States Congress to propose legislation to monitor and combat this
crime worldwide. The Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protec-
tion Act of 2000 became law in November 2000. The United Na-
tions General Assembly Resolution of January 31, 2001, reaf-
firmed that sexual violence and trafficking in women and
children for purposes of economic exploitation are serious viola-
tions of human rights. The United Nations supports efforts by
governments to develop local and regional action plans against
trafficking in persons, especially women and children (Sheldon
2003).
The People’s Republic of China, the largest country in the
world in terms of population, also provides the largest source of
unskilled labor in East Asia. Estimates on Chinese international
migration are as high as 400,000—with 200,000 unauthorized mi-
grants leaving China each year through Snakehead organized
smuggling rings (United Nations 2001). Of interest is not just the
volume of alien trafficking but the role of the criminal organiza-
tion, which appears to have turned smuggling people into a
multibillion dollar business that challenges the integrity of the
borders of all nations, particularly the United States. Like all gov-
ernments, the Chinese government condemns unauthorized mi-
gration. Numerous antitrafficking laws have been executed to
crack down on this type of organized crime and the victimization
it causes (Chin 1999).
The cost of arranging migration is substantial, in excess of
$30,000 per person. This illegal migration is likely to be restricted
to families with access to resources. Since the sums demanded by
the smugglers usually exceed a family’s capacity to pay, Snake-
heads will advance the sums of money and enforce collection.
There is no super, all-powerful syndicate running the operation
from numerous locales, but small-scale groups that at times oper-
ate alone and other times in association with other smuggling
syndicates. Upon arrival at the destination, migrants are often
kept as virtual prisoners or bonded labor in the sweatshops of the
Chinatowns of some American and European cities (Kelly, Chin,
and Fagan 1997).
88
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

General Observations: Looking Ahead
Relaxation of tensions following the Cold War led to a weakening
of safeguards against both weapons of mass destruction and
small arms falling into clandestine hands. Until then, nuclear,
chemical, and biological terrorism was never likely. Not only are
weapons complicated, intricate, and, therefore, formidable to
manufacture, transport, and conceal, their use requires an elabo-
rate support apparatus from a segment of a population within the
targeted state. The retaliatory capacity of the United States and
the former USSR made that risk dreadful to contemplate, such
that a doomsday terrorist apocalypse had to be taken seriously
within a war plan but was not very probable given the likely out-
come of mutual destruction (Elshtain 2003).
The irony of the Cold War logic, which drained the resources
of the major protagonists, was that its end meant that sovereign
states would not be interested in becoming involved in combating
terrorism on a global scale. After all, terrorism did not pose a
strategic threat that could escalate to global confrontation. At least
for a time a decade ago that threat had all but disappeared. Dur-
ing the Cold War, terrorist campaigns were often seen as proxy
wars between the superpowers. Events in Cuba, Vietnam, Indone-
sia, Korea, or Afghanistan therefore took on global strategic di-
mensions. With the end of the Cold War, however, as the second
Iraq War illustrates, governments are increasingly asking how a
terrorist campaign in some remote region of the world affects their
vital interests. We believe that these new realities in international
relationships have emboldened dissident organizations to adopt
terrorist tactics on the assumption that the great powers will first
consider if their self-interest warrants an intervention and justify a
military action before actually committing themselves to take up
arms. Indeed, what has improved the environment for terrorism
has also benefited illicit trafficking in the post–Cold War world.
With the symbolic Berlin Wall tumbling down, the greatest change
has been the marked increase in the capacity of people and mate-
rials to avoid surveillance in crossing international borders (Kelly
2001). Those permanent—often deadly—fixtures in our land-
scapes and mentalscapes did not close off perceptions of East and
West, opulence and squalor. Instead, the boundaries and borders
locked the destinies of the “haves” and “have nots” into a pas-
sionate grip of desire and hatred.
Illicit Trafficking
89

Facilitated by political, economic, and cultural changes, in-
cluding most importantly the globalization of trade (open
economies), transportation, and financial systems, and the fast-
paced revolution in communication and information technologies,
organized crime and illicit trafficking on a transnational scale are
in full swing. National strategies are inherently inadequate in re-
sponding to challenges that cross many borders and invoke many
participants. Although governments largely still operate in a bor-
dered world based on antiquated notions of sovereignty (that may
be symbolically appealing, though they have lost much of their
substance) to inhibit crime, terror, and trafficking, few govern-
ments are able to cope effectively with organizations that can sim-
ply suspend their activities or shift them to other locales to recover
losses and to evade pressure or scrutiny.
Illicit trafficking is linked with international relationships
among nation-states. The war on illicit trafficking is not going
well because controls rest almost entirely on the coercive arm of
the state. Drug trafficking is a good example of the problems con-
nected with the control and containment of trafficking activities.
Most of the world’s illicit drug supply is cultivated within states
that are weak or failing and thus lack effective law enforcement
capacities and agencies. Even in strong states, the drug trade and
consumption take place in economic and social realms where lib-
eral democratic states have the least ability to intercede. Police
cannot randomly break into houses to apprehend drug users; this
would be a grievous infringement on civil liberties. Interdiction
efforts also run directly counter to legal market forces, making it
increasingly difficult to find the needle of contraband in the huge
haystack of legal goods, services, and people that now vanish
across national borders as a consequence of globalization.
Turning around the war on drugs, organized crime, terror-
ism, and smuggling of goods, services, and people may require
some novel, even radical, responses to these issues. As the evi-
dence of chronic persistent problems involving trafficking indi-
cates, the reactive policies of nation-states, such as increased bor-
der patrol and interdiction, may be futile. Fundamental solutions
to these problems of refugees, illegal aliens, transnational organ-
ized crime, and smuggling demand proactive policies that will
enable people to avoid flight and mitigate push-and-pull factors.
State-centric responses to illicit trafficking issues appear to be less
effective than responses to international threats. Technology and
its networks of nonstate, nongovernmental actors can act swiftly
90
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

to bridge gaps in existing state-sponsored programs and political
will. Given the state’s limited regulatory and oversight roles, non-
state NGOs may constitute powerful allies in battling trafficking
problems. However, as states “contract out” to NGOs, accounta-
bility may be lost and may adversely impact problems that mu-
tually affect states. At the same time, state-sponsored responses to
illicit trafficking problems cannot be utterly abandoned in favor
of NGO solutions. The issue of increasing law enforcement efforts
against international crime, which constitutes the machinery that
delivers goods and services—licit and illicit—is of practical con-
cern for the future. Most prescriptions along these lines focus on
state-centered responses, including the improvement of police
training, routing out corruption, expanding intelligence gather-
ing and analysis (Maghan 1994; 2004), generating anticrime con-
ventions and norms, and harmonizing legal and regulatory
regimes (like RICO) across national boundaries.
The era of big government, as President Clinton put it, is
dead (Clinton 2004). What he meant was that when a country’s
political, economic, and development activities become global-
ized, the national government may no longer be the dominant en-
tity as transnational cooperation has emerged at all levels of gov-
ernment (national and subnational) and among all types of
organizations (public organizations, multinational organizations,
and NGOs). Global changes are creating new, complex, decen-
tralized systems of networks that are different from the conven-
tional systems of governance that once controlled the process of
international activities and decision making.
Likewise, criminal threats today are diffuse and decentral-
ized; the existence of groups like La Cosa Nostra, the Triads, the
drug cartels in Asia and Latin America, and terrorist groups such
as al-Qaeda poses few questions of hegemonic forays guided by
an ideology of world domination. The problems—as with the nu-
merous advantages modern technologies bestow—lead to more
dangerous forms of illicit trafficking because they easily trans-
gress borders and are facilitated by the open global economy,
which most societies desire and modern technology promotes. 
What has unfortunately emerged as a growing and fore-
boding aspect of the twenty-first century is widespread,
transnational organized crime, which appears to be an offshoot
of modern technologies that interact with and overlap terror-
ism. Terrorists are keenly aware of and utilize the networks,
collusions, and coalitions that make up transnational crime in
Illicit Trafficking
91

acquiring needed funds, munitions, and resources to augment
their control of illicit markets through the regulatory mecha-
nisms of fear and the threat of credible violence. The threat is
further heightened by the ugly reality that there are groups pre-
pared to kill randomly, and who are skilled in the use of chem-
ical weapons, ballistic devices, and biological weapons, which
they seem eager to use. With these threats in mind, it is not far-
fetched to classify such lethal instruments of mass murder and
genocide as weapons of mass destruction. The daunting reali-
ties of terrorism and transnational organized crime, when wed-
ded together, are quite alarming. Despite our apprehensions, it
is evident that nations have little choice but to act together in
order to frustrate the spread of these social viruses.
References
Allison, Graham T., Owen Cote, Richard Falkenrath, and Steven Miller.
1996. Avoiding Nuclear Anarchy: Containing the Threat of Loose Russian Nu-
clear Weapons and Fissile Material. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Alsinsla, Konstantin. 1995. Beautiful Loot: Soviet Plunder of Europe’s Art
Treasures. New York: Random House.
Anderson, Benedict. 1991. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin
and Spread of Nationalism. New York: Verso.
Beare, Margaret E. 1995. “Money Laundering: A Preferred Law Enforce-
ment Target for the 1990s.” In Jay S. Albanese (ed.), Contemporary Issues
in Organized Crime, pp. 171–188. New York: Willow Trees Press.
Bernick, Lauren L. 1999. “Art and Antiques Theft.” In Stanley Einstein
and Menachem Amir (eds.), Organized Crime: Uncertainties and Dilemmas,
pp. 317–344. Chicago: Office of International Criminal Justice.
Bryant, Robert. 1990. “Chinese Organized Crime Making Major Inroads
in Smuggling Heroin to the United States.” Organized Crime Digest 11 (7):
1–6.
Chang, Dae H. 1995. “A New Form of International Crime: The Human
Organ Trade.” International Journal of Comparative and Applied Criminal
Justice 19 (1): 1–18.
Chin, Ko-lin. 1996. Chinatown Gangs: Extortion, Enterprise and Ethnicity.
New York: Oxford University Press.
———. 1999. Illegal Chinese Immigration in America. Philadelphia: Temple
University Press.
Chin, Ko-lin, and Robert J. Kelly. 1999. Human Snakes: Illegal Chinese Im-
migrants in the United States. Washington, DC: National Science Founda-
tion, Final Report, Grant SBR 93–11114.
92
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Chin, Ko-lin, Sheldon Zhang, and Robert J. Kelly. 2001. “Transnational
Chinese Organized Crime Activities: Patterns and Emerging Trends.” In
Phil Williams and Dimitri Vlassis (eds.), Combating Transnational Crime,
pp. 127–154. London: UN Crime Prevention Program and Frank Cass.
Clinton, William J. 2004. My Life. New York: Random House.
Cohen, Lawrence. 1999. “Where It Hurts: Indian Material for an Ethics of
Organ Transplantation.” Daedalus 128 (4) (Fall): 135–165.
Conklin, John. 1994. Art Crime. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Cukier, Wendy. 2001. “Measures to Reduce Illicit Trafficking in
Firearms.” Gun Control Alliance. Toronto: Coalition for Gun Control in
Canada. (August).
Cusimano, Maryann. 2002. Unplugging the Cold War Machine: Rethinking
U.S. Foreign Policy Institution. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Deutch, John. 1996, March 20. “Testimony before the Permanent Sub-
committee on Government Affairs.” Washington, DC: Congressional Jour-
nal: 1–2.
Ebbe, Abi N. I. 1997, October 30–31. “Political-Criminal Nexus: Nigerian
Case Study.” In Roy Godson (ed.), Confronting the Security Challenge of the
Political-Criminal Nexus, pp. 19–31. Washington, DC: Research Collo-
quium, Georgetown University.
Edwards, Catherine, and James Harden. 2000, November. “Sex Slave
Trade Centers the United States.” Insight: 14–17.
Elshtain, Jean Bethke. 2003. Just War Against Terror: The Burden of Ameri-
can Power in a Violent War. New York: Basic Books.
Finkenauer, James. 1999. “Russian Organized Crime in America.” In
Robert J. Kelly, Ko-lin Chin, and Rufus Schatzberg (eds.), Handbook of Or-
ganized Crime in the United States, pp. 245–268. Westport, CT: Greenwood
Publishing Group.
Flynn, Stephen E. 1998. “Asian Drugs, Crime and Control: Rethinking
the War.” In James Shinn (ed.), Fires Across the Water: Transnational Prob-
lems in Asia, pp. 18–44. New York: Council of Foreign Relations.
Ford, James L. 1996, March 20. “Nuclear Smuggling: How Serious a
Threat?” Testimony to the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigation of
the Senate Committee on Government Affairs. Washington, DC: 48–53.
Fuentes, Joseph R. 1998. The Impact of Managerial Style on the Colom-
bian Distribution of Cocaine to the Wholesale Level. Ph.D. dissertation,
The Graduate Center, City University of New York.
Fuentes, Joseph R., and Robert J. Kelly. 1999, November. “Drug Supply
and Demand: The Dynamics of the American Drug Market and Some As-
pects of Colombian and Mexican Drug Trafficking.” Journal of Contempo-
rary Criminal Justice 15 (4): 328–351.
Illicit Trafficking
93

Gamba, Virginia. 1996. Managing Arms in the Peace Process. New York:
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research.
Godson, Ray, and Phil Williams. 2000. “Strengthening Cooperation
Against Trans-Sovereign Crime: A New Security Imperative.” In
Maryann K. Cusimano (ed.), Beyond Sovereignty: Issues for a Global
Agenda, pp. 111–146. Boston: St. Martin’s Press.
Grabosky, Peter. 2001. “Crime in Cyberspace.” In Phil Williams and Dim-
itri Vlassis (eds.), Combating Transnational Crime, pp. 195–208. London:
Frank Cass.
Grau, Joseph J. 1989. “Managing Trade Secrets.” Legal Studies Forum
13(4): 391–406.
Hess, David, Kenneth Myers, Michele Gideon, Sal Gomez, and John
Daly. 1999. “Money Laundering.” In S. Einstein and M. Amir (eds.), Or-
ganized Crime, Uncertainties and Dilemmas, pp. 64–97. Chicago: Office of
International Criminal Justice.
Howe, Robert W. 1980. Weapons: The International Game of Arms, Money
and Diplomacy. New York: Doubleday.
IAEA. 1996, December. “Inside Technical Cooperation.” Reuters Review.
Inciardi, James, and Christine A. Saum. 1996, Spring. “Legalization Mad-
ness.” The Public Interest (123): 43–59.
Kane, Hal. 2000. “Leaving Home: The Flow of Refugees.” In Maryann K.
Cusimano (ed.), Beyond Sovereignty: Issues for a Global Agenda, pp. 74–91.
Boston: St. Martin’s Press.
Kelly, Robert J. 1989. “Introduction.” The Legal Studies Forum (Special
Issue on Intellectual Property Rights) 13 (4): 335–341.
——— 1991. “AIDS and the Societal Reaction.” In Robert J. Kelly and
Donal E. J. MacNamara (eds.), Perspectives on Deviance: Dominance, Degra-
dation and Denigration, pp. 47–63. Cincinnati, OH: Anderson Publishing.
———. 1994. “Turning Black Money into Green: Money Laundering.” In
Robert J. Kelly et al. (eds.), Handbook of Organized Crime in the United
States, pp. 311–330. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing.
———. 2001, July. “Twelve Years After: The Berlin Wall as Will and Idea”
Journal of Social Distress 10 (3): 217–233.
Kelly, Robert J., Ko-lin Chin, and Jeffrey Fagan. 1997. “Lucky Money for
Little Brother: The Prevalence and Seriousness of Chinese Gang Extor-
tion.” In P. J. Smith (ed.), Human Smuggling: Chinese Migrant Trafficking
and the Challenge to America’s Immigration Tradition. Washington, DC: Cen-
ter for Strategic and International Studies.
Kelly, Robert J., Patrick J. Ryan, and Rufus Schatzberg. 1995, December.
“Primitive Capitalist Accumulation: Russia on a Rocket.” Journal of Con-
temporary Criminal Justice 11 (4): 257–275.
94
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Kelly, Robert J., and Rufus Schatzberg. 1995. “From Pistols to
Ploughshares: The IRA’s Farewell to Arms.” International Journal of Com-
parative and Applied Criminal Justice 17 (2): 165–177.
Lee, Rensselaer. 1992. “Colombia’s Cocaine Syndicates.” In Alfred
McCoy and Alan Black (eds.), War on Drugs, pp. 93–124. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
———. 1998. Smuggling Armageddon: The Nuclear Black Market in the For-
mer Soviet Union and Europe. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Light, C. Smith. 1996. “Weapons and the International Arms Trade.” In
Small Arms Management and Peacekeeping in Southern Africa. Geneva:
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research.
Lohr, Steve. 1992, March 29. “When the Money Washes Up: Offshore
Banking in the Cayman Islands.” The New York Times Magazine. pp. 26–52.
Lupsha, Peter, and Stanley Pimentel. 1997. “The Nexus of Organized
Crime and Politics: Mexico.” In Roy Godson (ed.), Confronting the Secu-
rity Challenge of the Political-Criminal Nexus, pp. 87–136. Washington, DC:
National Strategy Information Center.
Maghan, Jess. 1994, Winter. “The Correction Connection: Intelligence
Gathering in Prisons.” Low Intensity Conflict and Law Enforcement 3 (3):
548–557.
———. 2004, September. “The Post 9/11 Prison, Interagency Intelligence
Coordination.” Crime and Justice International 20 (83): 7–14.
Margolis, Eric S. 2000. The War at the Top of the World: The Struggle for
Afghanistan, Kashmir, and Tibet, pp. 91–92, 192–208. New York: Routledge.
Millson, Anita. 2001. “International Atomic Energy Agency Programme
Against Illicit Trafficking in Nuclear Materials and Radioactive Sources.”
In Phil Williams and Dimitri Vlassis (eds.), Combating Transnational
Crime, pp. 315–320. London: Frank Cass.
Mueller, Gerhard O. W. 1999. “Transnational Crime: An Experience in
Uncertainties.” In S. Einstein and M. Amir (eds.), Organized Crime: Un-
certainties and Dilemmas, pp. 3–18. Chicago: Office of International Crim-
inal Justice.
National Security Council. 1998, May. “Money Laundering.” International
Crime Threat Assessment. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Of-
fice.
———. 2000, May. International Organized Crime. Washington, DC: NSC.
Naylor, R. T. 1995. “Loose Cannons: Covert Commerce and Under-
ground Finance in the Modern Arms Black Market.” Crime, Law and So-
cial Change 25: 67–81.
———. 2001. “The Rise of the Modern Arms Black Market and the Fall of
Illicit Trafficking
95

Supply-Side Control.” In Phil Williams and Dimitri Vlassis (eds.), Com-
bating Transnational Crime, pp. 209–236. London: Frank Cass.
Office of National Drug Control Policy. 1997. National Drug Control Strat-
egy, 1996: Programs, Resources and Education. Washington, DC: U.S. Gov-
ernment Printing Office.
Potts, Mark, Nicholas Kocham, and Robert Whittington. 1992. Dirty
Money: BCCI: The Inside Story of the World’s Sleaziest Banks. Washington,
DC: National Press Books.
President’s Commission on Organized Crime. 1984. The Cash Connection:
Organized Crime, Financial Institutions and Money Laundering. Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Radcliffe, Richards J., et al. 1999, June 27. “The Case for Allowing Kidney
Sales.” The Lancet (254): 113–139.
Ratner, Steven R. 1996. The New UN Peacekeeping: Building Peace in Lands
of Conflict After the Cold War. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Rothman, Sheila M., and David J. Rothman. 2003, October 23. “The
Organ Markets.” The New York Review 50 (16): 69–75.
Sell, Susan K. 1989. “Intellectual Property as a Trade Issue: From the Paris
Convention to GATT.” Legal Studies Forum 13 (4): 407–422.
Sheldon, Ronald. 2003. “Trafficking: A Perspective from Asia.” Interna-
tional Migration, Perspective on Trafficking of Migrants and Trafficking in
Human Beings. 38 (3): Special Issue, Vienna, United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.
Shelley, Louise. 1997. “The Political-Criminal Nexus: Russian-Ukrainian
Case Studies.” In Roy Godson (ed.), Confronting the Security Challenge of
the Political-Criminal Nexus, pp. 1–31. Washington, DC: National Strategy
Information Center.
Smith, Eugene. 1991. A Study of the Banking Secrecy Act. Ph.D. disserta-
tion, Graduate Center, City University of New York.
Theobald, Robin.1994. “Lancing the Swollen African State: Will It Allevi-
ate the Problem of Corruption.” The Journal of Modern African Studies 32
(4): 701–706,
Timmerman, Kenneth G. 1990. The Poison Gas Connection: Western Suppli-
ers of Unconventional Weapons and Technologies to Iraq and Libya. Vienna:
Wiesenthal Center.
United Nations. 1999. 1998 World Drug Report. New York: UN Secretariat.
———. 2000. World Migration Report, 2000. Susan F. Martin (ed.). New
York: International Organization for Migration, United Nations.
United Nations, General Assembly. 2001. Resolution Adopted by the Gen-
eral Assembly, Resolution 48-804-01. New York: United Nations, 217-A III.
96
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

United Nations International Drug Control Programme. 2001. “Eco-
nomic and Social Consequences of Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking.”
Vienna: United Nations.
United Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention. 1998. “Fi-
nancial Havens, Bank Secrecy and Money Laundering.” In Global Pro-
grams Against Money Laundering. New York: Secretariat, United Nations,
V3-V11.
U.S. Department of State. 1998. International Narcotics Control Strategy Re-
port. (INCSR-2001). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
———. 2001, July. “Human Smuggling and U.S. Policy.” International In-
formation Program: East Asia Issues. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Intelligence and Research. 1999. In-
ternational Trafficking in Women to the United States: A Contemporary Mani-
festation of Slavery and Organized Crime. Washington, DC: Center for the
Study of Intelligence.
U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service. 1999, May. The Triennial
Comprehensive Report on Immigration. Washington, DC.
U.S. Population Division. 2000. Replacement Migration: Is it a Solution to
Declining and AgingPopulations? New York: United Nations.
Walter, Ingo. 1990. Secret Money: The World of International Financial Se-
crecy. New York: Harper.
Williams, Phil. 1992, Winter. “The International Drug Trade: An Industry
Analysis.” Low Intensity Conflict and Law Enforcement 2 (3): 397–420.
———. 1997. “Drug Trafficking, Weapons Connection and the Political
Criminal Nexus.” Washington, DC: Georgetown University Conference,
Private Communication.
Williams, Phil, and Paul N. Woessner. 1996, January. “The Real Threat of
Nuclear Smuggling.” Scientific American 274: 40–41.
World Medical Association. 2000, October. Statement on Human Organ and
Tissue Donation and Transplantation. 52nd World Medical Association As-
sembly, Edinburgh, Scotland.
Yudken, Jay. 1992. Dismantling the Cold War Economy. New York: Basic
Books.
Zimmerman, Tim. 1995, October 21. “The Russian Connection.” U.S.
News and World Report: 28–29. 
Illicit Trafficking
97


3
Chronology
1949
The United Nations consolidates earlier treaties into
the Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons
and the Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others, a hall-
mark event that officially recognized an ancient prob-
lem. However, the 1949 convention is problematic in
that it does not elaborate a definition of trafficking,
but rather simply equates trafficking with prostitu-
tion. Consequently, this initial definition of trafficking
centers primarily on trafficking for prostitution and
excludes vast numbers of women and other persons
from its protection. Nonetheless, it lays a framework
for the first documentation of illicit trafficking under-
taken for several purposes, including, but not limited
to, prostitution or other sex work; domestic, manual
or industrial labor; and marriage or adoption.
1956
The International Criminal Police Commission (IPC)
headquartered in Vienna, Austria, is reinstituted into
the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL). Functioning as an IGO by the United
Nations, its mission is to promote the widest possible
mutual assistance among all police authorities of the
world. Interpol cooperates with NGOs that deal with
exposing and interdicting illicit trafficking in persons,
smuggling migrants, weapons, body parts, precious
stones, and drugs.
99

1957
On November 19, a meeting of sixty organized crime
bosses in Apalachin, New York, is uncovered by the
New York State Police. The meeting had been sum-
moned for a number of reasons, including the
arrangement for drug trafficking into the United
States by members of the Sicilian and Corsican Mafias.
As a result of these decisions a drug pipeline, known
as the “French Connection,” begins smuggling heroin
into Canada and the United States.
1969
The countries of South America form the Council of
the Cartagena Agreement (JUNAC) and sign the An-
dean Regulation on improved management of migra-
tion flows through bilateral and multilateral action.
Under the agreement, the countries of South America
and the United States are joined in a coalitional and
centralized oversight center to monitor legal and ille-
gal migration patterns. 
1970
Congress passes the Racketeer Influenced and Cor-
rupt Organizations (RICO) Act, Title 18, United States
Code, Sections 1961–1968. At the time, Congress’s
goal was to eliminate the ill effects of organized crime
on the nation’s economy. The law as enacted allows
prosecutors to go after whole criminal enterprises, not
just stray individuals or low-level criminals. Under
RICO, any two of several dozen defined crimes over a
ten-year period can convict an individual of taking
part in an ongoing rackets enterprise; anyone plan-
ning or discussing a crime is considered as guilty as
the actual perpetrator. Different crimes by different
criminals can still point to a single criminal organiza-
tion. Crime bosses are no longer insulated from sub-
ordinates acting on their orders. RICO also enables
law enforcement authorities to seize any stolen loot
through property forfeitures. It takes about a decade
to apply the new legal tools. In effect, RICO creates a
new crime categorization. Belonging to an enterprise
engaged in racketeering activities—or illicit traffick-
ing that has emerged in the three decades since the en-
actment of RICO—comes under the reach of the law.
RICO makes it unlawful to acquire or operate a busi-
100
Chronology

ness that receives income from racketeering. In the
modern context, virtually every type of illicit traffick-
ing comes under the purview of the RICO statutes.
Many countries have adopted versions of RICO to
fight all forms of organized crime, including varieties
of illicit trafficking that confront developing states in
Eastern Europe, Southwest Asia, the Far East, as well
as African nations struggling with decolonialization
and modernization.
1972
U.S. and French law enforcement initiate a series of
successful indictments against the French Connection,
a Marseilles-based industry controlled by Corsican
gangsters and the U.S. Mafia; heroin trafficking is im-
paired on the U.S. East Coast.
1973
The “Palermo Connection” is implemented by Mafia
heroin smugglers after the French Connection is bro-
ken up by the Federal Narcotics Bureau. This drug
trafficking network operates successfully throughout
the 1980s.
President Nixon establishes the Drug Enforcement
Administration, a “superagency” to handle all aspects
of the drug trafficking problem. The DEA consolidates
deployment of agents from the Bureau of Narcotics,
Customs, and the CIA in the war on drugs.
On April 3, the modern mobile telephone is introduced
in New York City. Mobile phones began to proliferate
through the 1980s with the introduction of cellular net-
works, including the first automatic roaming cellular
network in Saudi Arabia in September 1981, followed
by the installation of automatic cellular roaming be-
tween the Nordic countries. The first digital cellular
phone call is introduced in the United States and Eu-
rope in 1990. At the beginning of the twenty-first
century, satellite mobile phone systems, with full
service Internet capabilities, are now publicly avail-
able. Cell phones have fundamentally shifted
telecommunication to the individual person and away
from landline-determined place, thereby facilitating
Illicit Trafficking
101

1973
immediate universal communication, even in the
(cont.)
most remote locations. Simultaneously, cell phones
are, by default, furthering a massive increase in illicit
criminal activity.
1979
On December 24, the Soviet Defense Ministry orders
troops into Afghanistan, where commandos seize
strategic installations in Kabul; resistance intensifies
with various Mujahideen groups fighting Soviet
forces.
1980
The United States, Pakistan, China, Iran, and Saudi
Arabia supply money and arms to the Mujahideen
groups. 
1979–1980 Carlos Lehder, a key member of the alliance that
would become the Medellín cartel, revolutionizes the
cocaine trade with his purchase of 165 acres on the Ba-
hamian island of Norman’s Cay. Lehder is the first to
use small planes for transporting the drug. The al-
liance between Mexico’s Ochoa family, Pablo Escobar,
Carlos Lehder, and Jose Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha
evolves into the “Medellín Cartel.” Later, in 1981, the
United States and Colombia ratify a bilateral extradi-
tion treaty (which they had previously approved in
1979), and extradition becomes the greatest fear of the
Colombian traffickers.
1980
The Andean Pact is established to govern migration
by providing for the administration of labor move-
ments and the regularization of migrants in the 1970s
and 1980s. In the late 1980s, the enforcement and ap-
plication of the Andean Regulations weakens and
loses its authority of interdiction. Concurrently, the
“war” of the narco-traffickers against regional gov-
ernments in Venezuela, Peru, Colombia, Ecuador, and
Bolivia devolves into massive corruption and govern-
ment inertia in its law enforcement agencies. Migra-
tion policies in the Andean region continue to be char-
acterized by a double standard: governments increase
restrictive measures against illegal migration and
smuggling while these states simultaneously allow
102
Chronology

porous borders to sustain an internal economic bal-
ance affected by increased oversight of illegal migra-
tion/immigration.
1987
The so-called Pizza Connection—twenty-two Mafia
defendants and their associates—are tried and con-
victed in one of the largest international heroin and
cocaine trafficking operations in the United States. As
a result of these convictions the Mafia drug pipeline is
severely disrupted and one of its key organizers, Tom-
maso Pouscetta, becomes an important informant
against the Sicilian Mafia and its associates in North
and South America.
1988
The U.S. Congress passes the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of
1988 (P. L.100–6900) and establishes the High Intensity
Drug Trafficking Areas (HIDTA) program to operate
under the direction of the Office of National Drug
Control Policy. The HIDTAprogram provides federal
assistance to better coordinate and enhance drug law
enforcement efforts of local, state, and federal law en-
forcement agencies in areas where major drug pro-
duction, manufacturing, importation, or distribution
flourish. In 1990, Federal funds are specifically appro-
priated to five areas of the United States that are con-
sidered the most critical drug trafficking “gateways”
into the nation.
1989
In February, the USSR announces the departure of the
last Soviet troops from Afghanistan. The civil war con-
tinues as the Mujahideen push to overthrow Soviet-
backed Afghanistan President Najibullah, who is
eventually toppled in 1992. The Taliban era begins
and illicit drug trafficking becomes a main source of
money and arms for its members.
The Berlin Wall is torn down, symbolizing the disinte-
gration of the Soviet Bloc and the end of the Cold War.
Eastern European countries within the orbit of the for-
mer Warsaw Pact treaty are initially left vulnerable to
massive waves of corruption and illicit trafficking in
arms, illegal immigration, drugs, and white slavery.
Illicit Trafficking
103

1989
The United States charges Panamanian general and
(cont.)
the country’s de facto military leader, Manuel Nor-
iega, with drug smuggling. Noriega declares Panama
in a state of emergency in the wake of a failed coup,
then declares a “state of war” in the face of increased
threats by American law enforcement officials and
policymakers. The United States invades Panama in
1989 under Operation Just Cause, and ousts Noriega.
The U.S. Federal Court for the Southern District finds
Noriega guilty of eight counts of drug trafficking,
racketeering, and money laundering in April 1992 and
sentences him to forty years of imprisonment in a U.S.
federal prison in Miami; on December 4, 2004, he is
moved to an undisclosed Miami federal prison hospi-
tal after suffering a very minor stroke.
1994
Operation Steady State is jointly inaugurated by the
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) with local
authorities in Peru and Colombia to stem drug pro-
duction and trafficking. The program lasts two years
and gives rise to Operation Selva Verde, conducted by
Colombian law enforcement and military groups to
destroy drug laboratories or the processing of cocaine
and the cartels’ trafficking apparatuses. The opera-
tions continue to the present.
1995
Presidential Decision Directive 42 by President Clin-
ton declares international crime a threat to the na-
tional security interest of the United States. The direc-
tive orders the Departments of Justice, State, and
Treasury, the Coast Guard, National Security Council,
Intelligence Community, and other federal agencies to
integrate their efforts against international crime syn-
dicates and money laundering. A key component of
this presidential directive is the imposition of sanc-
tions under the 1995 International Emergency Eco-
nomic Powers Act (IEEPA), which blocks the assets of
the leaders, cohorts, and front companies of identified
Colombian narcotics traffickers in the United States
and in U.S. banks overseas. The IEEPA authorizes the
Secretary of the Treasury to impose sanctions, includ-
ing freezing assets held in U.S. financial institutions,
104
Chronology

against nations and entities posing a threat to the na-
tional security, foreign policy, or economy of the
United States.
On October 21, President Clinton amplifies and ex-
tends the purview of significant foreign narcotics traf-
fickers centered in Colombia, noting that the unparal-
leled violence, corruption, and harm that they cause
constitutes an unusual and extraordinary threat to the
United States’ national security and economy. U.S. in-
dividuals and companies are barred from engaging in
financial transactions or trade with those identified in-
dividuals or enterprises linked to the Colombian Cali
cartel.
In Operation Zorro II, a joint counter-drug operation
is launched by the United States and Mexico against
traffickers and growers. As a major interdiction effort,
it lasts through 1996.
Operation Marathon Pacific/Prompt Return goes into
effect near Wake Island in the Southwest Pacific in an
effort to catch Chinese boat people being smuggled
into the United States and elsewhere.
1996
The Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigration Re-
sponsibility Act is codified, inaugurating a watershed
year for implementation of U.S. policy on immigra-
tion and illicit trafficking in persons. Three major laws
are enacted that aim to accelerate the deportation of
criminal immigrants, reduce access of immigrants to
welfare, and step up efforts at reducing illegal immi-
gration. These acts authorize more Border Patrol
agents, fences, and lighting along the U.S.-Mexican
border.
The International Crime Control Act (ICCA) of 1996
establishes a comprehensive package of legislation
formulated to substantially assist U.S. law enforce-
ment agencies in their efforts against drug traffickers,
terrorists, and other international crime syndicates as
well as to counter money laundering. The ICCA is 
Illicit Trafficking
105

1996
devised to enhance U.S. efforts to investigate and
(cont.)
prosecute violent international criminals, including
the ability to deprive them of their money and deny
them access through America’s borders.
The International Organization for Migration (IOM)
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) organizes a world conference to
address the problems of refugees, displaced persons,
and trafficking of women in the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) and relevant neighboring
states.
1997
On January 15, the U.S. Treasury Department identi-
fies twenty-one businesses and fifty-seven individuals
determined to be directly involved with illegal traf-
fickers and their seemingly legitimate business fronts.
Bringing a total of 359 businesses and individuals
whose assets have been blocked since 1995 under au-
thority of Presidential Decision Directive 42 (PDD 42),
this action consolidated the interagency deployment
of measures against international criminal cartels.
1998
In June, migration ministers from more than thirty
countries meet in Budapest, Hungary, for a special
conference on illegal migration through southeastern
Europe. The meeting urges the imposition of stricter
controls on migration at the borders in countries sur-
rounding Western Europe. In September, the EU an-
nounces a plan to tighten border controls, fingerprint
all unauthorized and detained foreigners, and increase
penalties on employers who hire unauthorized mi-
grants. Also the EU launches “Operation Odysseus” to
combat unauthorized immigration by financing new
border control initiatives both within and outside the
EU and supporting training and police cooperation
throughout the EU.
2000
High-level Political Signing Conference for the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime meets in Palermo, Sicily, on December 12–15.
106
Chronology

The convention marks an unprecedented step in the
history of the struggle against organized crime.
Transnational organized crime is identified as the key
infrastructure in global illicit trafficking. By signing
the protocols of the convention’s declaration, the
world community of more than 140 signatory nations
begins to free itself of the decades-old failed solution
of attempting to address international crime with
local, parochial solutions and perspectives. The UN
Convention highlights the fact that organized crime
today forms the dark side of globalization, which
reaches across nations and continents by exploiting
today’s open borders, new technologies, and massive
movement of peoples.
2001
On September 11, a series of attacks by al-Qaeda
occur against the United States in Washington, D.C.,
at the Pentagon and in New York City at the World
Trade Center. The United States retaliates with at-
tacks in Afghanistan against the Taliban, continuing
its search for Osama bin Laden and its operations for
liberating and securing Afghanistan. The United
States establishes the Department of Homeland Secu-
rity (DHS), consolidating domestic security of trans-
portation and infrastructure, surveillance of borders,
intelligence operations, and illicit arms and terrorist
interdiction strategies. Global illicit trafficking mar-
kets maneuver to more sophisticated modes in re-
sponse to consolidated security initiatives in the
United States and Europe.
2004
The twelve nations bordering the Indian and Pacific
oceans experience massive infrastructure damage and
suffer the death of approximately 280,000 persons as a
result of a tsunami produced by an undersea earth-
quake, registering 9.0 on the Richter scale below the
southwest Pacific Ocean area on December 26. In
Thailand and sections of northern Indonesia, children
orphaned by the catastrophe are vulnerable to kid-
napping and child traffickers. These child slaves are
sold in the region’s sex industries or put to work on
Illicit Trafficking
107

2004
fishing vessels, in factories, or in manufacturing busi-
(cont.)
nesses. The tsunami disaster also disrupts a range of
large-scale illicit trafficking networks in the region
and will have a profound influence on exposure and
surveillance of these illicit networks.
108
Chronology

4
Biographical Sketches 
Al Kassar, Monzar (1945–)
Place of origin: Nabek, Syria
Monzar Al Kassar is involved in known arms sales with Ar-
gentina, Austria, Bosnia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chad, Croatia,
Guatemala, Iran, Lebanon, Nicaragua, Panama, Poland, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Syria, the United States, and Yemen, as well as
large-scale trafficking in cocaine, hashish, and stolen cars. He
speaks Arabic, English, and Spanish, and these language skills
have helped him to conduct illicit trafficking across the globe. Al
Kassar has been the subject of ongoing investigations for arming
various Palestinian terrorist groups and for involvement in ter-
rorist attacks during the 1980s. He offered cruise missile technol-
ogy to Iran in 1997 and was involved in brokering the sale of $1.11
billion worth of submarines by the Argentine Defense Ministry.
He has been falsely accused of involvement in the bombing of
Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland. Al Kassar has had
dealings with the International Bank for Credit and Commerce
(BCCI); former Argentine President Carlos Menem; Popular Front
for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command (PFLP-GC),
and its leader, Ahmad Jibril; Abu Abbas, leader of another Pales-
tine Liberation Organization (PLO) extremist splinter group; and
the Palestine Liberation Front (PLF), which orchestrated the
Achille Lauro hijacking. He has also been tied to Abu Nidal, leader
of the Fatah Revolutionary Council, a.k.a. Black September or Arab
Revolutionary Brigades. Currently, he travels freely, claiming that
he has not sold weapons in twelve years. In 1992, his Swiss bank
109

accounts were frozen at Spain’s request. He continued to be the
subject of investigations conducted for gun running and for
money laundering, false documents, and false foreign certificates.
He was arrested in Spain in 1993 on charges of piracy and pro-
viding weapons for the hijacking of the Achille Lauro in which the
American tourist Leon Klinghoffer was murdered. In 1993, he
was released, after serving nine months, on $15.5 million bail. In
1995, Al Kassar was acquitted of all charges in the Achille Lauro
case. In 2000, he was indicted in Argentina for obtaining docu-
ments under false pretenses in the course of his 1992 acquisition
of an Argentine passport with the help of high-level Menem ad-
ministration officials.
bin Laden, Osama (1957–)
Place of origin: Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Osama bin Laden gained a following principally because of his
mostly financial commitment to the anti-Soviet jihad (holy war)
in Afghanistan in the 1970s. In Kenya and Tanzania, he bolstered
his credentials as an Islamic warrior by destroying U.S. em-
bassies in the capitals of those African nations. On September
11, 2001, terrorists connected with bin Laden’s al-Qaeda net-
work hijacked four American commercial airliners at U.S. air-
ports and flew three into the World Trade Center and the Penta-
gon. A fourth plane, diverted by resisting passengers, crashed
into a field in Sharpsburg, Pennsylvania. The combined attacks
killed approximately 3,000 people including hijacked passen-
gers, the 19 suicidal terrorists, hundreds of police, firefighters,
emergency service workers, and building occupants. Prior to the
World Trade Center and Pentagon attacks, bin Laden and his as-
sociates were sought by the United States on charges of terror-
ism in connection with the 1998 bombings of American em-
bassies in Africa and the attack on the battleship USS Cole in
Yemen in 2000.
Bin Laden grew up in great wealth. His father made a for-
tune in engineering construction in Saudi Arabia, and as a youth,
bin Laden fully indulged himself in the West but soon grew bored
with the Western lifestyle. Through an arranged marriage to a
distant relative, a young Syrian girl, he returned to Saudi Arabia
and enrolled in the King Abdul Aziz University in Jeddah to
study management and civil engineering. It was at the university
that bin Laden developed his militant beliefs.
110
Biographical Sketches

In the late 1970s bin Laden’s father died and reportedly left his
son more than $450 million as his inheritance. In 1979, Leonid
Brezhnev ordered Soviet troops into Afghanistan. At this point, bin
Laden began to use his wealth to create training networks of Mus-
lim fighters across the world to protect the Islamic Afghan people
from the infidel invader. With his money he created recruitment
centers around the world enlisting, sheltering, and transporting
thousands of individuals from more than thirty-five countries to
Afghanistan to fight the Soviets. In Afghanistan, bin Laden himself
built roads, storage depots, tunnels, and hospitals to move, shelter,
and manage supplies and support anti-Soviet fighters.
Bin Laden’s political celebrity helped his family businesses
enormously. In 1983, bin Laden Brothers for Contracting and In-
dustry secured the most important contract in its history: a $3 bil-
lion deal to restore Mecca and Medina, the two holiest sites in the
Islamic world. At the end of the Afghan War, bin Laden became
involved with Algeria’s radical Islamic movement, the Islamic
Salvation Front. His role was that of financier and organizer as
well as frontline soldier. His organization, al-Qaeda (“The Base”),
became international, and he himself something of a major leader
who was increasingly radical in his religious and political beliefs.
In 1994, because of his activities in weapons smuggling, the
Saudi authorities revoked his citizenship. Bin Laden took up res-
idence in Khartoum, Sudan, the home base of Sudan’s Islamic
revolution in 1989, and became the leader of the country’s ruling
National Islamic Front.
In an August 1998 indictment, Osama bin Laden and his or-
ganization, al-Qaeda, were alleged to have conspired in the killing
of American military personnel in Saudi Arabia and Somalia. They
were also indicted for the bombings of the American embassies in
Kenya and Tanzania. In Nairobi and Dar es Salaam, 220 people
were killed and 5,000 wounded. A $5 million reward was offered
by the American government for information that would lead to
his arrest and conviction. Bin Laden also marked for assassination
Middle Eastern leaders whom he opposed, such as Crown Prince
Abdullah of Jordan and President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt.
American missile attacks on Sudanese and Afghani locales in re-
taliation for his acts of murder obliged the Sudanese to force bin
Laden out of the country. Even as he moved from Sudan back to
Afghanistan, al-Qaeda prepared more attacks. On June 25, 1996,
nineteen American servicemen were killed in an explosion in Dha-
ran, Saudi Arabia. In 1998, bin Laden met with Islamic and Taliban
Illicit Trafficking
111

leaders (Afghan Islamic radicals) to discuss building a broad coali-
tion against the West and the regimes in the Islamic world which
they despised. Bin Laden and his associates in al-Qaeda perceive
the United States as a hostile force of evil. They advocate the de-
struction of America because they view it as the chief obstacle to
radical reform in Muslim societies.
When confronted by journalists in 1999, bin Laden claimed that
he did not consider it a crime if he tried to obtain nuclear, chemical,
and biological weapons. In the same interview, he claimed that
should he acquire such weapons from rogue scientists in the East or
West, he would use them without hesitation against the West and all
of the infidels in the East. Bin Laden’s financial resources are so di-
versified and well hidden that they are not readily immobilized and
frozen. His followers on the Pakistan-Afghanistani border are nu-
merous and loyal; therefore, detection and the possibilities for arrest
and prosecution have proven to be extremely difficult. Bin Laden’s
current location is unknown. He previously resided in Parmir
Mountains, Tajikistan, and Afghanistan
Bout, Victor (1967–)
Place of origin: Dushanbe, Tajikistan
Victor Bout’s background is Tajik. He attended the Soviet Military
Institute of Foreign Languages in Moscow, earning a degree in
economics. He speaks six languages fluently. He served in a mili-
tary aviation regiment until 1991. It is said that he worked for the
KGB in Angola when the Soviet Union dissolved on December 25,
1991. In 1992, he struck his first business deal. He bought three
Antonov cargo planes for $120,000 and then brokered their serv-
ices for long-haul flights from Moscow, leasing the planes both
“wet” (with a crew) and “dry” (plane only). His maiden voyage
was to Denmark. In 1995, his air freight services were expanded
west to Ostend, Belgium, and to Odessa in the Ukraine.
Ostend served as a transit point for weapons in the Iran-
Contra operations. From Shariyah, United Arab Emirates, and
South Africa, Bout tapped into what Africa and the Middle East
needed in terms of arms. It may have been true in the Cold War
that control of arms shipments was merely a matter of international
diplomacy. Traffickers were often no more than subcontractors
feeding the proxy conflicts sponsored by Washington and Moscow.
After the fall of the Berlin Wall, the exclusive club of arms brokers
coalesced. Some still worked at the behest of governments and in-
112
Biographical Sketches

telligence agencies, but most went entrepreneurial, becoming free-
lancers who sold weapons without regard to ideology, allegiance,
conscience, or consequences, with profit being the ultimate goal.
In the wake of the Cold War, adapting meant exploiting the
chaos of the Soviet east. The Soviet Army’s massive arsenal ended
up in the hands of former Soviet republics. Desperate for hard
currency, they sold off weapons the same way they sold off other
resources and products they inherited from the defunct Soviet
Empire. Of all the republics outside of Russia, Ukraine obtained
the most and most lethal weapons—enough conventional fire-
power to sustain a million troops. However, the Ukrainian gov-
ernment made a public show of transferring its vast nuclear arse-
nal back to Russia. The Ukrainian military degenerated into a tool
for revenue by a cache of politicians who took advantage of the
factories and used them to manufacture and ship weapons for
money to anyone who wanted them and could pay. Representa-
tives from Iraq, Iran, Somalia, Yemen, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
joined in this illicit trafficking market, as well as North Korea, by
way of Pakistan and al-Qaeda through the Taliban.
In the hands of Victor Bout and others, Ukraine became the
epicenter of global boldness in illicit arms. Bout had access to the
former Soviet Union’s Cold War weapons supply network along
with its clandestine transport system and shipping pipelines. By
2000, according to the arms investigators of Human Rights
Watch, Bout was the top arms trafficker in the world. Skirting the
United Nations embargo on weapons by going to Africa where
weapons smuggling was vigorous, Bout employed false end-user
certificates required for any legal sale of weapons to a legitimate
government. False certificates can be purchased from corrupt
governments for under $100,000. Arms traffickers like Bout
adroitly disguise their smuggling with what appears to be legiti-
mate business activity. Weapons shopping lists are quietly passed
through webs of people who fill orders, usually for cash on de-
livery. Bribes are paid to military officers and officials to look the
other way, and soldiers are paid to act as warehouse stock clerks.
Crates of ammunition are sometimes labeled as perishable fruit.
Waiting freight handlers switch cargo at “refueling” stops; a pilot
may fly into an airport under one registry number and depart
under a different one—and all is bogus. Payments are wired from
a buyer’s shell company into a seller’s shell account in money-
laundering havens like Dubai or the Cayman Islands. Bout’s pro-
curement and logistics network was fully integrated.
BIllicit Trafficking
113

For Bout, arms cargo hauling is no different than transport-
ing aspirins. He claims it is not his business to know the contents
of the crates he hauls; after all, rebels very often become legiti-
mate governments, he reasons. There is simply not enough law
on arms trafficking to deter the process. Since 1990, not one UN
arms embargo has resulted in the conviction of an arms trafficker.
The United Nations has no power to arrest. Interpol, which basi-
cally is an information-sharing organization, depends on the co-
operation of local authorities. Astonishingly, the United States,
despite its having the toughest arms-trafficking laws in the
world, has not prosecuted a single case of arms trafficking. As
Bout is noted for stating, what is for many observers the most re-
pugnant kind of commerce is usually not illegal at all.
Capone, Alphonse, a.k.a. “Big Al,”
“Snorky,” and “Scarface” (1899–1947)
Place of Origin: Brooklyn, New York
Capone, a major crime leader in the United States in the 1920s, be-
longs to that handful of successful criminals who enjoy a kind of
public admiration during their careers, despite the repugnance of
their profession. Al Capone was a master criminal who stands sec-
ond only to Jesse James. And just as Jesse James’s popularity ben-
efited from the Civil War tragedy, Capone’s celebrity derives in
large part from the war between the government and the people
over Prohibition. It is estimated that in 1927, when he was only
twenty-eight years old, his organization took in some $105 million.
In 1930, students at the Medill School of Journalism in Chicago
chose Capone as one of the most outstanding persons in the
world, along with Mahatma Gandhi, Albert Einstein, and Henry
Ford. Countless films, melodramas, and books have been done
about Capone. He believed that he symbolized the public’s dis-
content with social and cultural policies (Prohibition) and eco-
nomic trends (the 1929 Wall Street collapse). He was a master in
manipulating the media to both entertain and mislead the public.
Al Capone was born into a working-class family in Brooklyn,
New York, in 1899. Typically, the family was large and close-knit.
Al was a bright pupil but had little use for school. Minor squab-
bles with the law and his work as a bouncer in a saloon–house of
prostitution produced the scar on his left cheek. As a young man,
he learned the way of the streets in Brooklyn and joined a gang
run by a slightly older man, Johnny Torrio, who would later play
114
Biographical Sketches

a fateful role in Capone’s life in Chicago. Torrio and his partner
Frankie Yale operated a brothel in Brooklyn and hired the burly
young Capone as a bouncer. Within two years, Capone was fac-
ing murder charges and Torrio had relocated in Chicago to join
his uncle “Big Jim” Colosimo to fend off Black Hand extortionists
who wanted a piece of Colosimo’s profitable prostitution empire.
The Black Hand (La Mano Nera) was simply a crude method of
extortion with a long Italian (chiefly Sicilian) tradition, trans-
planted to America during the mass immigrations of the 1880s.
By the time Capone arrived in Chicago, Torrio was at odds with
Colosimo over bootlegging. Torrio realized that Big Jim would
have to be eliminated. Together with Capone, Torrio arranged Big
Jim’s assassination. Capone’s position with Torrio was strength-
ened after Colosimo’s murder.
Bootlegging dragged the gangsters to center stage. As
Capone himself noted, manufacturing, importing, and serving al-
cohol brought him into contact with virtually every level of soci-
ety, from the spacious penthouses along Lake Shore Drive to the
crowded shacks on the South Side. The visibility proved, in the
long run, to be a tremendous liability, exposing Capone to unre-
lenting law enforcement scrutiny. It was as if Prohibition had
been an allure and a gigantic trap to ensnare the racketeers.
The Torrio-Capone gang moved quickly to take over criminal
territories by crushing competitors. Capone organized black
bootleggers, protected them from the police, and shared profits
equitably with them. His willingness to work with blacks demon-
strated his ability to build a broad-based economic coalition,
which contributed to his political power.
In 1920, Torrio put together a bootleg syndicate, which in-
cluded all the major gangs in Cook County and the Chicago sub-
urbs. The idea was to create a business out of Prohibition; street
gang leaders owned and operated breweries and distilleries, but
by Torrio’s gang treaty, they were to receive their supplies from
Torrio as well as protection of deliveries, shipments, and trucks.
The syndicate would furnish gunmen, when needed, corrupt law
enforcement, where needed, and intimidate saloon keepers and
“speakeasies” (illegal bars) into buying beer and whisky from the
syndicate.
In the election of 1924, Al and his brother Frank brazenly led
a group of 200 gunmen into Cicero to ensure the victory of local
Republican candidates with a record of “accommodation” to the
bootlegging underground. In the melee with police, Frank
Illicit Trafficking
115

Capone was killed, but Cicero became the headquarters of the
syndicate—and remained so throughout Capone’s career.
As gang war raged against the North Side gangs under Earl
“Hymie” Weiss, Capone inherited an organization that was multi-
ethnic, with loose ties to the local Mafia organization. Gang wars
were bad for the image of the bootlegger and bad for business. So
in 1926, a truce was arranged among the warring gangs, princi-
pally between Vincent (“The Schemer”) Drucci, Bugs Moran—
both leaders of the North Side gang—and Capone’s forces.
Capone’s rackets employed hundreds, if not thousands, of
people caught up in the misery of the Great Depression. Indeed,
the entire city of Chicago required the services of the Capone or-
ganization, in one way or another. The police needed his payoffs
because they could not survive on their civil service salaries, nor
could they be expected to keep order; newspapers needed the
image of “Scarface” with his bodyguards, armored-plated limou-
sine, colorful suits, and big-spending ways to sell papers; and the
city’s numerous speakeasies needed him to keep them supplied.
Most of all, the political machine needed Capone’s money and
vote-generating ability to stay in office and keep the peace among
the murderous gangs. Al Capone, the gangster, bootlegger, gun-
man, and corrupter, became, paradoxically, a force of public com-
munity stability, doing more perhaps in maintaining law and
order than the police and civil authorities.
By 1927, Prohibition was entering its tenth year and had
turned hundreds of thousands of otherwise law-abiding citizens
into lawbreakers. Because of Prohibition, a casual disregard of the
law became part of the American way of life. Capone and others
like him exploited this cultural malaise. Capone was both Robin
Hood and Public Enemy Number One, the villain/hero who fed
hungry, out-of-work citizens from soup kitchens operated by re-
tail food suppliers “encouraged” by Capone to provide the bread
and the soup. His political power, which was crucial to his rack-
eteering enterprises, was based solely on corruption. As his trial
for tax evasion and the detailed newspaper accounts would sug-
gest, although he did an efficient job of redistributing some
wealth, he also stole as much from the poor as he did from the
rich, very probably more through his control of unions and ex-
tortion activities of small businesses. Indeed, his natural victims
were the small people, and the glittering wealth he displayed
came largely out of the pockets of the working people who were
tempted into his speakeasies, gambling dens, and brothels.
116
Biographical Sketches

The year 1929 was a benchmark in Capone’s life and in the
nation’s history. The racketeering coalition he had built reached
across ethnic boundaries and derived illicit wealth from Jews,
blacks, Italians, Irish, Polish, and WASP communities; Capone
was not only the bootlegger in Chicago, but clearly he was the
most dominant trafficker of illegal goods and services in the
United States. He was also dominant in the areas of brothels and
gambling: Capone’s move into large racketeering and his infiltra-
tion of legitimate businesses made it difficult to describe him as
just another thug or hoodlum. Bugs Moran was a hoodlum, Dion
O’Bannion and Spike O’Donnell were gangsters, and Jake
“Greasy Thumb” Guzik was a racketeer; Capone appeared to
have transcended these labels: He was all of these at one time or
another, but he was also something else—a feared political boss
with wealth and powerful connections, legal and illegal. No one,
including Capone himself, could say what he earned. He natu-
rally avoided banks and saved nothing beyond stashes of cash he
kept in his homes. He was a pipeline through which huge quan-
tities of money passed; when he needed funds, he simply dipped
into the stream and helped himself. Political circumstances fa-
vored him, even though his antihero status and great popularity
among the working class and the unemployed was worrisome.
A tax evasion case against Capone was begun in 1929, and by
October 1931 he stood convicted and faced a prison sentence of
eleven years. In 1932, Capone entered the federal prison in Atlanta.
He was transferred to the newly constructed Alcatraz facility in
1934, where it was discovered that he was suffering from an ad-
vanced case of syphilis. With his good behavior and illness, he was
released in 1939. He was the quintessential illicit trafficker. Capone
slowly deteriorated at his Palm Island estate in Miami during his
remaining years. On January 25, 1947, he died of cardiac arrest.
Escobar, Pablo Emilio Gaviria, a.k.a. “The
Godfather” (1949–1993)
Place of origin: Rionegro, Colombia
In December 1993, Pablo Escobar, leader of the Medellín Colom-
bian drug cartel, was killed in a shootout with police officers. He
had escaped from the prison he had built (a vivid example of the
intrinsic extortion power of illicit criminals and insurgent forces
in Colombia) to ensure his own safety and comfort prior to sur-
rendering to authorities on drug-trafficking charges. Dissatisfied
Illicit Trafficking
117

with prison restrictions, Escobar escaped and was the subject of a
countrywide manhunt that ended with his death.
One of the most powerful drug traffickers in the world, head-
ing an organization capable of manipulating the national state
through bribes and intimidation, Pablo Escobar and his cartel
partners operated a government within a government in Colom-
bia during the 1970s and 1980s. Escobar was physically unimpos-
ing: he was a short man, overweight, with a mustache and a
shock of black, curly hair. He was not born in abject poverty, nor
was he underprivileged as his apologists and imagemakers sug-
gested. He in fact graduated from high school and had some uni-
versity training.
Escobar’s criminal career began in adolescence when he
stole headstones from local graveyards and engaged in stealing
and fencing (illegal resale) of stereo equipment and auto parts.
He was first arrested in 1974 for auto theft, and it was not until
1976 that Escobar was arrested on drug-smuggling charges. Dur-
ing the marijuana-smuggling days of the late 1970s, he would
emerge with a reputation in the Medellín underworld not only as
a cold-blooded killer but also as a master schemer and an evader
of justice.
Escobar was only one of Colombia’s many cocaine traffickers
who expanded their operations in the late 1970s. The men who
became the leaders and biggest allies of the Medellín cartel were,
like Escobar, all born between 1947 and 1949 during a chaotic po-
litical period in Colombia’s history; Jorge Luis Vasquez Ochoa,
Jose Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha, and Carlos Lehder-Rivas would
come together to create one of the world’s most powerful drug-
trafficking syndicates. Escobar’s involvement as cocaine traf-
ficker began as a middleman: he obtained small amounts of coca
paste from Ecuador and sold it within Colombia. Then, after buy-
ing it from newly established laboratories in the Colombian Ama-
zon that converted the paste into cocaine, he started to employ
“mules” (couriers) who moved it to traffickers in Panama. In
order to earn serious money, Escobar had to make the business
vertical—that is, he needed enough money to buy bulk direct
from Bolivia and Peru, and he needed enough access to consumer
markets abroad. Mustering the cash brought him into partner-
ships with the Ochoa brothers, whose high-society links ensured
a ready supply of investors.
Marijuana smuggling was so structured that many American
groups could deal directly with suppliers in Mexico, Panama,
118
Biographical Sketches

Colombia, and the Caribbean basin islands such as Jamaica. The
American mob never had a chance as regards cocaine, however,
inasmuch as they were too far away from its source. In any event,
aided by the sudden boost of Latin American migration during the
1970s, the Colombians were already developing their own U.S.
distribution networks among Cubans and Dominicans. Escobar’s
first priorities were to gather enough capital in order to import Bo-
livian and Peruvian coca paste himself—Colombian coca leaf was
as yet too low in quality—and to create cocaine in his own labora-
tories. By the mid-1970s, his criminal activities in car theft, kid-
napping, fencing stolen goods, and drug trafficking yielded suffi-
cient profit to establish drug labs and smuggling routes.
The cartel dramatically improved its capacity to move co-
caine into the United States when Carlos Lehder bought Nor-
man’s Cay, an archipelago in the Bahamas. Lehder equipped the
narrow strip of coral reef with electronic equipment and airport
facilities for the transport of cocaine. Larger shipments of cocaine
began to make their way into the Florida Everglades and loca-
tions in the Southwest via Mexico. To operate with minimum in-
terference from authorities, Escobar and Lehder paid bribes to
Lynden Pindling, the governor-general of the Bahamas, and
Panama’s dictator, Manuel Noriega.
Like other Colombian traffickers, Escobar poured his money
into land and buildings. Construction in Medellín quadrupled in
the 1980s with money from the cartel drug mafia. Escobar’s pride
and joy was his 8,000-acre ranch equipped with five swimming
pools, human-made lakes, a jet aircraft runway, and animal parks
and zoos accommodating elephants, lions, buffaloes, zebras, rhi-
noceroses, and hippopotamuses. The clever Escobar used his zoo
animals in his smuggling operations very effectively: animal
dung masked the smell of contraband cocaine.
Along with growing political pressure from the United States,
internal unrest in Colombia created serious threats to Escobar’s
drug empire in the late 1980s. Cocaine, and its derivative “crack,”
saturated American cities, and the outcry that Colombia stop the
trade mounted steadily. Within the country, competition and vio-
lence among narco-traffickers were heightened by left-wing and
communist terrorists such as M-19 and FARC (the Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia), who demanded either ransom for
kidnapped cartel members or a share of the drug profits.
Escobar would have none of it. He mobilized his enforcement
squads, and the Medellín mafia declared war on the guerrillas.
Illicit Trafficking
119

Dozens of top Colombian cocaine traffickers—including those
from Cali, Medellín’s chief competitor—gathered to develop a
strategy of resistance. One Sunday in early December 1981, the
cartels bared their teeth. At a soccer match in Cali, leaflets fluttered
down from a small aircraft announcing the formation of Muerte a
Secuestradores (Death to the Kidnappers). The leaflet indicated that
Colombian “businessmen” had formed a defense group against
the kidnappers, who would be subject to immediate execution and
hung from trees in public parks. Within two months assassins
killed dozens of M-19 leaders and militants; other guerrillas were
turned over to Colombian security forces. The kidnap threat
ended in 1982.
Escobar’s problems were not over, however. Pressure from
the United States on the Colombian government to extradite Es-
cobar on drug-trafficking charges increased. Many within the car-
tels began to think that Escobar could be a sacrificial lamb to ap-
pease the Americans and relax the pressure on the government
and the mafias, but “The Godfather” had a different approach to
the problem: He arranged for an attack on the Ministry of Justice,
where his hit men sought out judges who were marked for death
and proceeded to destroy incriminating files. With his private
army of 1,000 men, Escobar could easily kill rivals, politicians, po-
lice, and informers. During the struggle with the government, it
is estimated that he was responsible for 400 deaths. Extradition
on drug charges to the United States would become an irrelevant
issue for the likes of Escobar.
In 1988, the Cali cartel made an attempt on Escobar’s life.
The “War of the Cartels,” as it came to be called, ended shortly
thereafter with eighty people murdered, more than sixty of
whom were from Cali. Escobar had much to defend. He had put
together a highly sophisticated operation with its own security
force, air network, export outlets, mechanics, chemists, and hit
men. The trafficking network operated across the United States
and Canada and was making inroads in Europe through the Si-
cilian Mafia. In 1988, when Escobar faced threats from the gov-
ernment and drug competitors, the Medellín cartel was taking in
$10 billion a year.
The Colombian government faced a dilemma with powerful
traffickers such as Escobar. The U.S. government demanded their
extradition, and the traffickers insisted that Colombia assert its
independence and ignore American pressure. Bribes, threats,
election fraud, and other forms of intimidation persuaded the
120
Biographical Sketches

Colombians to decide to punish their own and not extradite car-
tel bosses. Escobar acceded to government decisions and surren-
dered on condition that he build his own jail to ensure his safety
from other inmates.
In late November 1993, Escobar escaped from the prison fa-
cility he built and was shot dead on December 2, 1993, in a fire-
fight with police and army units. The press indicated that mem-
bers of the rival Cali cartel helped police locate Escobar. The
question facing both Colombians and Americans, many of whom
suffer greatly from cocaine and crack addiction, is whether the
elimination or incarceration of the leaders of criminal organiza-
tions is enough to frustrate narcotics trafficking. So far, the evi-
dence suggests that a kingpin strategy focused on the leaders has
not dramatically affected the availability of cocaine on the streets
of American cities.
Herrera-Buitrago, Helmer, a.k.a. “Pacho”
(1951–)
Place of origin: Palmira, Colombia
Helmer Herrera, a Colombian cocaine-trafficking boss, was one
of the most influential and violent members of the Cali cartel
leadership. Herrera was one of the charter members of the Cali
trafficking organization and was the last remaining “kingpin”
sought by Colombian authorities. At one point he was the sub-
ject of an intensive manhunt by both the Colombian National
Police (CNP) and the Drug Enforcement Administration of the
U.S. government. (In June 1995, a federal grand jury in Miami is-
sued the first RICO indictment against the Cali cartel, charging
fifty-nine defendants, effectively smashing the top hierarchy of
the Cali cartel. The defendants included the four Cali king-
pins—Miguel Rodriguez-Orejuela, Gilberto Rodriguez-Ore-
juela, Jose Santacruz-Londono, and Helmer Herrera-Buitrago—
as well as nine managers, ten lawyers, and several hit men. The
indictment charged the Cali cartel with the importation of
200,000 kilograms of cocaine and the laundering of $2 billion
dollars from 1983 through 1995. Cali kingpins Gilberto and
Miguel Rodriguez-Orejuela were apprehended and jailed in
Colombia in 1995. Santacruz-Londono and Herrera-Buitriago
were later killed.)
Pacho Herrera started his criminal career selling relatively
small amounts of cocaine in New York, where he was arrested in
Illicit Trafficking
121

1975 and again later in 1976. He was a major supplier of cocaine
for both New York and southern Florida. The Colombian charges
against Herrera were based on the seizure of 3,500 kilograms of
cocaine in Tarpon Springs, Florida, in 1988. The violence and suf-
fering caused by Herrera’s criminal activities extended from the
jungles of Colombia to the neighborhoods of Florida and the
streets of New York.
Herrera’s organization was large and well organized. He had
multiple sources for cocaine base from both Peru and Bolivia and
an excellent transportation organization, which delivered cocaine
base to numerous conversion laboratories in Colombia. DEA in-
telligence reports indicate that Herrera had used his close associ-
ation with various guerrilla groups, including M-19 and the Rev-
olutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) for the protection
of remote laboratory sites. Herrera’s organization staged cocaine
shipments from clandestine airstrips in Colombia and from north
coast ports through Central America and the Caribbean to vari-
ous U.S. locations. To ensure the rapid return of his cocaine dis-
tribution profits to Colombia, he operated one of the Cali cartel’s
most profitable money-laundering operations in New York. In
1995, Pacho Herrera became the subject of law enforcement in-
vestigations in the Eastern District of New York and was indicted
on drug-related charges in Federal District court in the Southern
District of Florida in June 1995. In September 1995, Herrera was
murdered, by an unknown assassin, to prevent him from incrim-
inating other members of the Cali cartel.
Khan, Abdul Qadeer, a.k.a. A. Q. Khan,
“Father of the Muslim Atomic Bomb”
(1936–)
Place of Origin: Bhopal, India
Since the invention of nuclear weapons sixty years ago, no one
has done more as a trafficker of nuclear materials than Khan,
whose network flourished across thirty countries. Khan has con-
fessed to transferring nuclear know-how to Iran, Libya, and
North Korea. U.S. officials and investigators at the United Na-
tions’ International Atomic Energy Agency still continue to search
for other customers who possess Khan’s blueprints for nuclear
equipment and how-to manuals for running uranium enrichment
centrifuges.
122
Biographical Sketches

Pakistan exploded a series of atomic bombs in 1998, bringing
it into nuclear parity with India. Khan trained as an engineer at
the University of Karachi and obtained metallurgical training in
Germany, Belgium, and Holland. In the 1970s, he worked for a
consortium funded by the British, Dutch, and German govern-
ments that manufactured centrifuges used to make atomic
bombs. Khan later stole centrifuge designs and fled to Pakistan in
1976 where he ran the country’s nuclear program for the next
twenty-five years. In contrast to bin Laden, Khan’s whereabouts
are well known. He is living under house arrest in Islamabad, the
capital of Pakistan, as part of a deal that Pakistan’s president Per-
vez Musharraf unveiled in 2004 with the United States and the
global community. That deal pardoned Khan and allowed him to
keep the millions of dollars he is thought to have netted from the
illicit sales. In exchange, Khan took responsibility for the crimes
and agreed to house arrest—a punishment that has forced him to
vanish from public life and scientific endeavor.
Khun Sa, a.k.a. Chang Chi Fu, “The Prince
of Death” (1934–)
Place of Origin: Burma
Khun Sa was the head of the Shan United Army (SUA), the lead-
ing heroin-trafficking group in the Golden Triangle, which com-
prises the countries of Burma, Thailand, and Laos. Khun Sa and
his family have been active in the opium trade for many years. In
1960, the Burmese government organized a self-defense force
under Khun Sa to defend itself against ethnic Shan resistance
groups in the Shan State. To support his self-defense force, Khun
Sa transported opium for major traffickers. By January 1969, he
emerged as one of the most powerful ethnic Chinese self-defense
force leaders in Upper Burma and the undisputed drug king of
the Golden Triangle.
In the 1990s, the Golden Triangle, headed by drug lord
Khun Sa, found itself under attack by the Burmese Military
Junta. Khun Sa responded by shifting the trafficking of heroin
westward to make greater use of Laos, and possibly Cambodia
and Vietnam as well. The heroin was then transported to inter-
national markets by independent brokers and shippers. These
brokers provided connections to ethnic Chinese criminals acting
as wholesale distributors in the United States and Europe and to
an ancillary pool of Nigerian and West African traffickers,
Illicit Trafficking
123

smuggling Southeast Asian heroin through their own criminal
group contacts.
Two major developments combined against Khun Sa in 1994:
(1) the Thai government closed the country’s borders, thus depriv-
ing the Shan United Army of essential operational materiel, and
(2) the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, working with the
Royal Thai government, arrested thirteen of Khun Sa’s top lieu-
tenants in “Operation Tiger Trap,” thus depriving the SUA of cash
from heroin trafficking. With their heroin trafficking disabled, the
Shan United Army surrendered to the Burmese Army in December
1995, and Khun Sa stepped down from its leadership. However,
the Burmese junta of military rulers continues to enjoy the fruits of
illicit drug trafficking through sheltering Khun Sa and other drug
traffickers in Rangoon. The historical roots and modern-day tenta-
cles of Khun Sa remain deeply rooted in Southeast Asia.
In December 2004, the United States issued indictments of
eight major Southeast Asia drug barons, specifically in Burma. As
it has consistently been proven, however, the elimination of the
heads of large-scale criminal enterprises is not effective, for even-
tually a new leadership emerges, beginning a new range of nefar-
ious strategies by lower level operatives of the criminal enterprise.
As with the new-generation international law enforcement
strategies and tactics, global illicit drug production and traffick-
ing is also adapting to twenty-first-century information technol-
ogy and strategies in furthering criminal goals. Currently, Khun
Sa lives in Yangon, Burma.
Lehder-Rivas, Carlos (1949–)
Place of origin: Colombia
Carlos Lehder-Rivas, a Medellín cartel drug lord, was born in
Colombia but lived in Detroit, Michigan, for almost ten years;
there he acquired English and knowledge of American culture. In
1973, he became involved with car thieves and was arrested. He
skipped bail but was later arrested in Miami on drug possession
charges. When he was released in 1975, he was deported. By 1980,
he was smuggling cocaine into the United States; business was so
profitable that planeloads of cocaine were being shipped into the
United States, provided in part by Pablo Emilio Escobar, a leader
of the Medellín cartel.
Scoring great success in drug trafficking, Lehder moved
into Norman’s Cay in the Bahamas, where he bought a luxurious
124
Biographical Sketches

home and constructed an airport to facilitate drug-smuggling
operations into the United States. It has been alleged that
Lehder bribed the Bahamian prime minister, Lynden O. Pin-
dling, to ignore the smuggling operation. Other members of the
Medellín cartel, namely, Pablo Escobar and Jorge Luis Vasques
Ochoa, utilized the airstrip for their shipments of cocaine to
America. The close relationship among Lehder, Escobar, and
Ochoa would develop into a coalition that would rule the co-
caine trade and set the terms of organization during the period
of its greatest expansion.
In 1981, Lehder was indicted by a Jacksonville, Florida, fed-
eral grand jury for drug trafficking and income tax evasion. His
extradition was requested, but first he had to be found and ar-
rested. Lehder was obsessed by fantasies of political power and
had become violently anti-American. He founded a youth move-
ment and supported candidates for political office in Colombia.
While a fugitive in 1985, perhaps because he felt hounded by
American law enforcement pressure for his arrest and extradition
to the United States for trial, Lehder appeared on Colombian tel-
evision appealing to Colombian revolutionary organizations,
such as the Marxist group known as M-19, to provide protection
and resources for the “cocaine bonanza” as an effort to resist
American imperialism. Lehder explained to his stunned audi-
ences that marijuana and cocaine could be the weapons of revo-
lution against the power of the North American colossus.
His party newspaper printed articles condemning the DEA,
and distributed leaflets in the countryside, urging the peasants to
join the guerrillas and traffickers. In a shootout in 1987, Lehder
was finally arrested and extradited to the United States. It is ru-
mored that others in the drug cartel may have betrayed him, fear-
ing all the public attention Lehder attracted with his antics. The
following year he was convicted of cocaine trafficking and sen-
tenced to life without parole in a federal correctional facility.
“Little Pete,” a.k.a. F. C. Peters, Fung Jing
Day (1864–1897)
Place of origin: Fung Ching in Kow Gong, Canton, China
Fung Ching, “Little Pete,” a Chinese “Godfather” of considerable
reputation and prestige, was shot down by an unknown gunman
in San Francisco in 1897 in front of his home, despite the extraor-
dinary protection he had arranged for himself. A prosperous
Illicit Trafficking
125

businessman who was highly literate and fluent in English and
Cantonese, Little Pete was also the boss of Chinatown crime at
the time of his death in one of the biggest cities in the United
States—San Francisco. Little Pete was respected and yet hated.
Little Pete was born in Kow Gong, a small town ten miles out
of Canton in 1864 and arrived in San Francisco in 1874 at the age
of ten. In his early teens he worked hard as an errand boy for a
shoe factory and helped to support his family. His ambitions took
him to the Sunday School of the Methodist Chinese Mission and
its schools where he learned to speak, read, and write proficiently
in English—a rare asset among the mass of illiterate Chinese mi-
grants at that time. While still a youth, Little Pete became involved
in citywide politics. Handsome, intelligent, and always fastidious
in his clothes, he served as an interpreter for the Sam Yup Com-
pany which gave him access to all sorts of business information
which he shrewdly exploited in his own interests. With money
earned as a middleman between the white and Chinese commu-
nities, Little Pete was able to establish himself in the shoe business
with his uncle and brother. He built upon a thriving wholesale
business, and he even hired white sales employees to sell his shoes
along the entire West Coast of the United States from Puget Sound
to San Diego. Within a short time he was independently wealthy.
But he was not content. Little Pete opened gambling dens and
formed a fighting Tong, the Gee Sin Seer, to protect his activities in
gambling, opium, smuggling immigrants, and prostitution. In
time, Little Pete’s Tong went to war with the Bo Sin Seer Tongs, so
he hired Boo How Day—hatchet men and professional killers
known as “Highbinders” because of their use of wood hatchets
and meat cleavers and because of their traditional Chinese dress,
which included bound leggings worn outwardly on their pants.
In 1887, Little Pete was arrested and convicted in connection
with his criminal enterprises, including jury tampering and brib-
ing law enforcement officers. He served five years in Folsom
Prison. When he was released, he renewed his role as a criminal
entrepreneur and added fixing horse races to his criminal reper-
toire. At the time of his assassination, he was the mastermind be-
hind many extortion schemes in the Chinatowns of San Francisco
and Sacramento and held great power over the Highbinders. He
continued with his immigrant trafficking, enabling thousands of
Chinese to come to the United States and work.
In 1889, some 30,000 Chinese, mainly males, lived in San
Francisco’s Dupont Gai, as the Chinese called Grant Avenue. Al-
126
Biographical Sketches

though they constituted a whole city within a city, the Chinese
were never fully accepted during the whole of the nineteenth
century; indeed, it was not until after World War I that first-class
citizenship was extended to San Franciscans of Chinese her-
itage. The blame for the exclusion of the Chinese in “Gum San
Ta Fow” (Big City in the Land of Golden Hills), as San Francisco
was known, did not rest entirely with the host community. For
fifty years after the Gold Rush, Chinatown was the Celestial
Empire’s most far-flung political and cultural outpost. China-
town was run not exclusively by the mayor of San Francisco, but
by the consul general of Imperial China and dubious early Chi-
nese versions of “The Godfather,” among whom Little Pete was
the most distinguished.
Luciano, Charles “Lucky,” a.k.a. “Charley
Lucky” and Charles Ross (1897–1962)
Place of origin: Sicily
Charles “Lucky” Luciano was born Salvatore Luciania in Sicily on
November 24, 1897. A major La Cosa Nostra boss, he is best
known for transforming brawling gangs of thugs into smooth-
running crime syndicates. He was the original “Dapper Don” in
the New York underworld, smooth and deadly. With the possible
exception of Al Capone, Luciano was the most influential Italian
American gangster in the twentieth century. In 1931, Luciano
played an important role in “Americanizing” organized crime.
With Meyer Lansky, Owney Madden, “Moe” Dalitz, and other
underworld figures around the country, Luciano helped create a
national gambling syndicate and a Mafia Commission to resolve
disputes and conflicts among Mafiosi. He also played a signifi-
cant role in heroin trafficking, prostitution, and illegal alcohol
trafficking during Prohibition.
Luciano immigrated to the United States in 1906 with his
family. He rarely attended school, and in 1907 he was arrested for
shoplifting. Luciano began working legitimately for a hat manu-
facturer, but his life in the slums of the Lower East Side of Man-
hattan also equipped him with a set of criminal skills and values
that pushed aside the ethic of hard work to which his family and
many other immigrants were committed.
Before he was eighteen years old, Luciano had been charged
and convicted of heroin possession and served a prison term of
six months. By 1916, he was a leading member of the notorious
Illicit Trafficking
127

“Five Points Gang.” Apart from its routine criminal activities, the
Five Pointers worked for the Tammany Hall political machine
and enjoyed its protection.
By 1920, Luciano had emerged as a power in the bootlegging
rackets and was closely tied to Meyer Lansky and “Bugsy” Siegel.
Through Lansky and Siegel, Luciano expanded his network of
friends and associates to include other ethnic gangsters. Ignoring
the warning of the old-time Mafiosi about associating with non-
Italians, Luciano maintained these ties, believing instead that the
“Mustache Petes” (the Old World gangsters) were the problem.
At the same time, he became a boss in New York’s largest Mafia
crime family led by “Joe the Boss” Masseria, for whom he felt
contempt but whom he feared—at least until the Castellam-
marese War erupted between Joe the Boss and his Sicilian immi-
grant rival, Salvatore Maranzano. Masseria was the main obstacle
but was ultimately removed through a plot in which Luciano
played a central role. Luciano and his associates were seen as
threats to the Mafia kingdom that Maranzano envisioned. There-
fore, Maranzano began planning Luciano’s death as well as that
of another potential rival: Al Capone. But Maranzano failed to act
quickly enough, and Luciano learned of his murder plans. With
Lansky’s aid, Luciano arranged for Maranzano’s murder in his
office while Maranzano himself awaited the arrival of Luciano,
whom he planned to kill.
The “Old World” Mafia lost its foothold in America with the
end of the Castellammarese War. Luciano was at the pinnacle of
criminal power. Not only did he enjoy the protection and support
of La Cosa Nostra crime families (he headed one of several in
New York), but his alliance with Jews, Irish, and other ethnics en-
abled him to accumulate additional power that ensured his vir-
tual domination of American organized crime.
In 1935, Thomas E. Dewey, a rackets-busting special prose-
cutor, launched a campaign against the big crime bosses in New
York. A year later, Luciano was convicted of compulsory prosti-
tution and was sentenced to fifty years imprisonment. The sen-
tence was a cruel twist of fate for Luciano because earlier he had
saved Dewey’s life: Dewey, unknowingly, had had his life threat-
ened, and he was saved through Luciano’s intervention. Luciano
realized the infamy of such an act would bring an onslaught of at-
tention and interdiction to the crime syndicate.
During World War II, German U-boats and agents posed a
threat to the waterfront facilities on the East Coast of the United
128
Biographical Sketches

States. Shipping war supplies to the British and Russians was vital
for the Allies, and German submarine operations and espionage
activities were very active in critical port areas from Newfound-
land to the Caribbean. U.S. Naval Intelligence approached Lu-
ciano for help. Through Joseph “Socks” Lanza, Luciano instructed
his associates in the International Longshoremen’s Union to coop-
erate with the U.S. Navy in reporting incidents of sabotage and by
providing information on suspected enemy agents.
In another effort to help his adopted country in 1943, Lu-
ciano, through his underboss Vito Genovese (who left the United
States before the war to avoid a murder indictment), alerted the
Sicilian Mafia bosses to help the Allied invasion of Sicily. As a re-
sult of his services to the United States during the war, in 1946 Lu-
ciano was pardoned by Governor Thomas E. Dewey but was de-
ported to Italy with the provision that he not return to the United
States. Eight months after his departure to Naples, Luciano trav-
eled to Havana, Cuba, and set up a major syndicate meeting in
1947 where drug trafficking and the status of the mob’s invest-
ment in the Las Vegas Flamingo Hotel construction (being han-
dled by “Bugsy” Siegel) were on the agenda. When U.S. govern-
ment agents discovered Luciano’s presence, he was forced to
return to Italy, where he nonetheless continued to issue orders.
With protests from the Federal Narcotics Bureau, the Italian gov-
ernment forced Luciano to take up residence in Palermo, Sicily,
which, however, did not deter his efforts to set up a heroin
pipeline to the United States.
Minin, Leonid, a.k.a. Leon Minin, Wulf
Breslav, Leonid Bluvshtein, Leonid
Bluvstein, Igor Osols, Vladimir Abramovich
Kerler, Igor Limar (1947–)
Place of origin: Odessa, Soviet Ukraine
The arrest in 2000 of suspected arms smuggler Leonid Minin,
who is currently in Vigevano prison outside Milan, Italy, is just
one piece of a puzzle involving illicit weapons, high-level cor-
ruption, and organized crime centered in Ukraine. Minin was
charged for violating a UN arms embargo adopted by the Italian
parliament, thus becoming Italian law. It is the first such case
which does not involve a national law separate from the em-
bargo. Others have been convicted for arms deals to embargoed
Illicit Trafficking
129

countries, but the crimes generally have involved national export
laws and attempts to obscure the recipient—when the customer is
a country under UN embargo. The case is potentially precedent
setting and could encourage other prosecutors around the world
to bring more cases against embargo busters.
Even after Minin’s highly publicized arrest, the conditions for
the sales of small arms to embargoed African hot spots remain the
same: a massive supply of small arms sits stockpiled in the former
Soviet Union; extensive networks of organized gun smuggling are
formed and regroup if discovered; government corruption and
negligence is the norm in impoverished countries; the system of
controls worldwide has little defense against unscrupulous arms
brokers; and the demand for arms remains constant.
His known business activities include oil, electricity, timber,
small arms, Russian religious icons, diamonds, and gems (Russ-
ian and possibly African), consumer goods, and prefabricated
homes. He is subject to ongoing investigations in several Euro-
pean countries for money laundering and cocaine trafficking. 
A Ukrainian parliamentary inquiry concluded that between
1992 and 1998, Ukraine lost $32 billion in military assets, in part
through theft, discount arms sales, and lack of oversight. Al-
though Ukraine’s legal arms industry has boomed, the interna-
tional small arms black market may have proved far more lucra-
tive. Ukrainian arms have been linked to some of the world’s
bloodiest conflicts and most notorious governments, including the
Iraqi regime of Saddam Hussein, the Taliban in Afghanistan, and
other hot spots around the globe, from Sierra Leone to Croatia.
Noriega, Manuel Antonio (1934–)
Place of origin: Panama City, Panama
First a friend, then an enemy, of the United States, Manuel A.
Noriega, the strongman of Panama, was finally deposed by a U.S.
military invasion, captured, and brought to Miami for trial in
1989. Manuel Antonio Noriega was born on February 11, 1934, in
Panama City, Panama, the son of an accountant and his maid in a
poor barrio of Panama City in 1934. He attended the National In-
stitute, a well-regarded high school, with the intention of becom-
ing a doctor, but lack of financial resources prevented fulfillment
of this career choice. Instead, Noriega accepted a scholarship to
attend the Peruvian Military Academy. He graduated in 1962
130
Biographical Sketches

with a degree in engineering. Returning to Panama, he was com-
missioned a sublieutenant in the National Guard.
Noriega acquired the command of Chiriqui, the country’s
westernmost province. In October 1968, military conspirators
overturned the civilian government of Amulfo Arias. Noriega’s
troops seized radio and telephone stations in David, the provin-
cial capital. Omar Efraín Torrijos Herrera, the military head of the
province, emerged from the coup as the strongman. From that
moment, Noriega’s career blossomed. In 1971, he became useful
to U.S. intelligence and at the behest of the Nixon administration,
went to Havana to obtain the release of crewmen of two Ameri-
can freighters seized by Fidel Castro’s government. He was al-
ready involved in narcotics trafficking at the time. (Panama’s Na-
tional Guard had been implicated in the heroin trade from the late
1940s.) American officials learned that Noriega was the Panama
“connection,” and a high-ranking drug enforcement officer rec-
ommended that President Nixon order his assassination, but
Nixon demurred because Noriega was useful to U.S. counterin-
telligence. As head of G-2, Panama’s military intelligence com-
mand, Noriega was the second most powerful man in Panama. In
1975, G-2 agents rounded up businessmen critical of Torrijos’s
dictatorial populist style, confiscated their property, and sent
them into exile in Ecuador. Torrijos said of Noriega, “This is my
gangster.” Torrijos died in 1981 in a mysterious plane crash, and
in the ensuing two-year contest for power between civilian politi-
cians and ambitious military officers, Noriega emerged tri-
umphant. In late 1983, following his promotion to general and
commander of the National Guard, the guard was combined with
the navy and air force into the Panama Defense Forces (which
also included the national police). The following year Noriega’s
choice for president, Nicholas Arditio Barietta, won a narrow vic-
tory over Amulfo Arias. But there was widespread fraud in the
election, and Noriega forced Barietta out. The reasons for Nor-
iega’s actions had less to do with fraud or Barietta’s economic
policies than with Barietta’s alleged threat to investigate the bru-
tal slaying of Hug Spadora, who had publicly accused Noriega of
being a drug trafficker. In 1985, G-2 agents had taken Spadora
from a bus near the Costa Rican border, and in September of that
year, searchers found his tortured, decapitated body stuffed in a
U.S. mailbag on the Costa Rican side of the border. In addition, in
June 1986, New York Times investigative reporter Seymour Hersh
reported that Noriega had used his position to facilitate sale of
Illicit Trafficking
131

restricted U.S. technology to Eastern European governments. In
the process Noriega had earned $3 million.
Noriega denounced these and other allegations as a conspir-
acy of right-wing U.S. politicians looking for a way to undo the
Panama Canal treaties before the canal became Panamanian
property on December 31, 1999. Yet more allegations about Nor-
iega now surfaced. During the Reagan administration’s covert
war against the government of Nicaragua in the 1980s, Noriega
helped to supply arms to the Nicaraguan resistance called the
Contras. (The U.S. Congress had prohibited any expenditures to
bring down the Nicaraguan government.) At the same time, he
received arms from Cuba and sold them to Salvadoran leftist
guerrillas and supplied Nicaraguan leaders with intelligence re-
ports. Although Noriega was a gunrunner, money launderer,
drug trafficker, and double agent, he was still useful to the U.S.
government and its policies in Latin America.
In June 1987, a former naval officer accused Noriega in the
death of Torrijos. Middle-class Panamanians organized street
demonstrations, demanding his ouster. Noriega responded by
declaring a national emergency. He suspended constitutional
rights, shut down the newspapers and radio stations, and drove
his political enemies into exile. Church leaders, businessmen, and
students, dressed in white, organized into the National Civil Cru-
sade and went into the streets banging pots and pans. The riot
squads dispersed them. By now the Americans were outraged,
and in June 1987, the U.S. Senate called for Noriega’s removal.
Noriega retaliated by removing police protection from the U.S.
embassy; subsequently, a pro-Noriega mob attacked the building
and caused $100,000 in damages. From that day, the administra-
tion of President Ronald Regan began looking for a way to bring
Noriega down. U.S. economic and military assistance came to an
end, and Panamanian bankers began withdrawing their support
(Torrijos had transformed the country into an international bank-
ing center). As a result, Noriega rapidly lost favor everywhere ex-
cept among the Panama Defense Forces.
In October 1989, the firing on U.S. soldiers passing by the
PDF headquarters caused the United States to launch a full-scale
attack (“Operation Just Cause”) with 24,000 troops on December
20, 1989. Noriega evaded capture for a few days and ultimately
took refuge in the Papal Nunciature. Under pressure from Vatican
officials, Noriega surrendered to the Vatican Embassy in Panama
City on January 3, 1990. He was convicted of cocaine trafficking,
132
Biographical Sketches

racketeering, and money laundering and sentenced to forty years
in a federal prison. He was also ordered to pay $44 million to the
Panamanian government. The trial was not without controversy,
however; in late 1995, there were charges of bribery. The DEA was
told that the Cali drug cartel had paid a witness, Ricardo Bilonik,
to testify about Noriega’s ties to the Medellín cartel, Cali’s rival.
Since then, however, federal prosecutors have determined that
the bribery charges were not enough to justify a new trial. In 1999,
his sentence was reduced to thirty years, making Noriega eligible
for parole in 2006. He is incarcerated in a federal U.S. prison in
southern California.
Ochoa, Jorge Luis Vasquez, a.k.a. “El
Gordo” (The Fat Man) (1949–)
Place of origin: Medellín, Colombia
Along with Pablo Escobar, Jorge Luis Vasquez, known as “The Fat
Man,” was one of the original members of the Medellín cartel.
After being on the run for years, Ochoa surrendered to authorities
in Colombia in January 1991, as did his brothers Fabio and Juan
David. All pled guilty, confessed to a few narcotics-related crimes,
agreed to pay nominal fines, and went to jail. Ochoa was released
in July 1996 after serving five and a half years in custody. He is
believed to be one of the world’s wealthiest men and is probably
worth more than $10 billion. For years prior to their arrests, the
Ochoas presided over la mafia criolla, the Colombian version of La
Cosa Nostra. Medellín was the boiler room of the international
cocaine trade, and Ochoa and his family were among a handful of
families that dominated it.
Jorge Ochoa and his relatives and friends, including Pablo
Escobar and Jose Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha, controlled a loose
federation of underground corporations they called “la compa-
nia” (the company), known to the outside world as the cartel. It
was well structured and highly organized for efficient and prof-
itable international drug trafficking. With it were groups special-
izing in obtaining the raw materials needed for the production of
cocaine and delivering them to clandestine laboratories through-
out Colombia, Panama, Venezuela, Brazil, Argentina, and even
the United States. There were groups responsible for security and,
if necessary, for subverting law enforcement agents, the military,
politicians, judges, and even presidents. Yet other groups handled
transportation of the cocaine to markets around the world.
Illicit Trafficking
133

As the cartel grew in wealth and power, Ochoa wanted
more, including a stake in the U.S. distribution. In the early
phases of trafficking, the cartel wholesaled cocaine to retail dis-
tributors in the United States. In the late 1980s, the Ochoas set up
thousands of Colombians in “cells,” which were small distribut-
ing groups in key markets in U.S. and European cities, including
Madrid, Paris, London, Rome, Hamburg, Rotterdam, Los Ange-
les and Miami. The cells were organized by special envoys from
Medellín and worked under a strict code of discipline under
Ochoa’s leadership. The Medellín cartel emerged as a sophisti-
cated and ruthless multinational conglomerate dealing in dope.
Ochoa brought Colombia to its knees through violence and cor-
ruption and had an impact on other countries far beyond Colom-
bia’s borders.
In 1984, Ochoa was arrested in Spain on a charge of con-
spiracy to distribute cocaine. The DEA pressed the Spanish
government to extradite him to the United States. After a year
of legal battles, the U.S. extradition petition having been de-
nied, Ochoa was sent back to Colombia on charges of illegal
bull smuggling. The American government lost the appeal, fol-
lowing the assassination of the chief witness against Ochoa,
Barry Seal, a former air smuggler in the employ of the Medellín
cartel.
Ochoa managed to stay free in Colombia on the bull-smug-
gling charges through the shrewd manipulation of his lawyers.
On November 21, 1987, he was arrested for speeding by a traffic
cop not far from Cali. The Fat Man tried to bribe the police, offer-
ing at one point 100 million pesos ($400,000), but they would have
none of it. The government decided to hold him on the bull-
smuggling charge and then considered extradition to the United
States, but the cartel reacted to Ochoa’s capture almost immedi-
ately. Within twenty-four hours, twelve gunmen attempted to as-
sassinate Gomez Martinez, editor of Bogotá’s biggest daily news-
paper, in his home. The attempt failed, but the cartel made it clear
that it did not want Ochoa extradited to the United States and
threatened total war against the country’s political leaders. On
January 18, 1988, a candidate for mayor of Bogotá was abducted;
a week later, Carlos Mauro Hayos, attorney general of Colombia,
was attacked, abducted, and executed. After hiding out while the
war between Colombian authorities and the cartel continued,
Ochoa surrendered and served a sentence in Colombia. He was
not extradited.
134
Biographical Sketches

Ong, Benny, a.k.a. “Uncle
Seven” (1907–1994)
Place of origin: Hong Kong
Benny Ong, the Hip Sing Tong boss and Chinatown “Godfather,”
personified the two sides of life in Chinatowns throughout Amer-
ica. He lived in both the underworld and upperworld, maintain-
ing that invisible line between the legitimate and the illegitimate,
between what tourists see on the colorful streets and what goes
on behind the Chinatown storefronts. Many of the Tong leaders
who make up the legitimate power of community leaders, mer-
chant associations, district family associations, and burial soci-
eties are also sponsors of illegal gambling halls, prostitution serv-
ices, drug trafficking, and alien smuggling groups.
When Benny Ong died in 1994 there was a funeral procession
in the streets of New York’s Chinatown. Thousands of people
lined the sidewalks as his twelve-car funeral procession made its
way through the humid, narrow streets. A large photo of his smil-
ing face, decked out in white carnations and red roses, was
mounted in a flower limousine. The words “Big Bucks, Benny
Ong” were displayed on flowerpots in keeping with the Chinese
tradition of wishing the dead prosperity in the afterlife.
“Uncle Seven,” as he was known in Chinatown (because of
the number seven signifying the most lucky number and his po-
sition as a benefactor to those needing a favor), was well known
for his temper and energy even in his old age. As “adviser for
life” of the Hip Sing, a powerful Chinatown Tong, Ong was con-
sidered one of Chinatown’s most important elders. His influence
was enormous: Uncle Seven could help an immigrant get a job,
settle a dispute between businessmen, secure loans for mer-
chants, and so on. In 1991, a U.S. Senate subcommittee identified
Benny Ong as the “Godfather” of organized crime in Chinatown.
He allegedly took a percentage of gambling, loan-sharking, and
extortion money in the Hip Sing territory, which covered scores of
restaurants and retail businesses along the Bowery and Pell and
Hester streets. His real claim to power lay in his influence with
the Flying Dragons, a vicious street gang affiliated with the Hip
Sing for more than two decades. The Flying Dragons protected
the Tongs’ gambling establishments, exacted extortion payments
from businesses in the Tongs’ territory—sparing only those with
close ties to Uncle Seven—and played roles in his drug-trafficking
and alien-smuggling enterprises. The alien-smuggling enterprises
Illicit Trafficking
135

supplied “slave labor” for Chinatown’s numerous small manu-
facturing “sweatshop” industries. Anyone daring to question
Ong’s power did so at great risk.
Riina, Salvatore, a.k.a. Toto
“The Beast” (1931–)
Place of origin: Palermo, Sicily
Between 1974 and 1980, Salvatore Riina began building one of the
largest, richest, and most violent criminal empires in the world.
He ultimately became boss of the Sicilian Mafia. The corpses and
maimed bodies that began showing up all over Messina and
other parts of Sicily were testimony to his bloody rise to absolute
power. Toto Riina was for many the perfect embodiment of evil
incarnate; even his fellow Mafiosi were shocked by his willing-
ness to kill. Before his happenstance arrest on the streets of
Palermo in January 1993, Riina had been a fugitive for twenty-
three years, sentenced in absentia to nine life terms for murder.
He was believed to have personally shot or strangled at least forty
people and masterminded the liquidation of a thousand others.
With cold, relentless efficiency, Riina had eliminated any rival
who stood in his way. If the intended victim managed to escape,
the guns, knives, ropes, and bombs were turned on his family; he
would target mothers and children, bomb their churches, burn
their homes.
The murders of Judges Giovanni Falcone and Paolo
Borsellino just twenty days apart in May and June 1992 in
Palermo were among the most daring and violent in the long,
blood-soaked history of the Mafia. Falcone, a Sicilian, had
launched a major crackdown on Mafia heroin operations. Testi-
mony in the 1995 “nontrials” established that a $20 billion a year
international drug empire stretched from Southeast and South-
west Asia to Western Europe and across the Atlantic to the Amer-
icas. Riina was one of the controlling bosses on the heroin net-
work, and he tolerated no obstacles, including magistrates and
judges. Falcone and his Sicilian colleague, Paolo Borsellino (also
murdered by the Mafia in a car bombing), brought approximately
500 crime indictments that threatened the breakup of the drug
empire. Falcone had to be eliminated.
Toto Riina cleverly used the fabulous new wealth of the drug
trade to undermine his main rivals. Because members of different
136
Biographical Sketches

families were free to do drug deals together, Riina cultivated ris-
ing members of each family and pitted them against their bosses.
By 1981, he had planted his own men in all the most important
families, and then, with stunning rapidity, he had several of
Sicily’s most powerful bosses murdered, often by their own sol-
diers. Murder and internal warfare were hardly new to La Cosa
Nostra, but this was no conventional Mafia war: it was a genuine
extermination campaign, targeting not only the old bosses but
virtually everyone connected with the Mafia families. Hundreds
of friends and relatives, women, and children were hunted down
and murdered. And once the war was won, Riina had many of his
chosen assassins eliminated because they themselves had become
too powerful.
Although the great Mafia war ended with the total victory of
Toto Riina and the Corleonesi clan, the heart of the Sicilian Mafia
who were located in the village of Corleone, the war helped shat-
ter the code of silence, omerta, on which La Cosa Nostra’s power
had long relied. The survivors of the losing clans lived like cor-
nered animals waiting for their own assassination, watching
helplessly as friends and relatives were murdered. La Cosa Nos-
tra killed more than a dozen relatives of Tommaso Buscetta, in-
cluding two of his sons, even though Buscetta, who was then liv-
ing in Brazil, represented little threat to the Corleonesi. For those
men, almost the only hope of survival and revenge lay in cooper-
ation with the police.
The rise of the Corleonesi also altered the balance of power
between La Cosa Nostra and the political world. In the past, the
Mafia had accepted occasional jail terms as an occupational haz-
ard necessary to allow the government to save face with the
public. In compensation, judges rarely sent Mafia members to
jail for more than a few years. The old relationship between
Mafia and politics was one of negotiation and mediation. Be-
tween 1975 and 1978, La Cosa Nostra had killed only one pros-
ecutor; since 1978, however, it has assassinated more than
twenty-five public servants involved in the fight against the
Mafia. Those killings and the escalation of the drug trade in
Italy made it more and more difficult for Sicilian politicians to
justify maintaining friendly ties with “men of honor.” Besides,
many of the “moderate” Mafia bosses who were killed off by
Riina in the 1980s were among those who had the closest ties to
the political world.
Illicit Trafficking
137

Riina is believed to have been behind the most spectacular
political crimes of the last two decades: the assassination of the
police prefect of Palermo in broad daylight, General Carol
Alberto Dalla Chiesa, in 1982, and the Falcone and Borsellino as-
sassinations in 1992. With such an aura of power it was a shock
when after his arrest on the streets of Palermo by the Italian Cara-
binieri, a short, paunchy, sixty-two-year-old diabetic with crudely
cut short hair and inexpensive, ill-fitting clothes appeared before
the magistrate. Riina looked like what his fake identity card de-
clared: a Sicilian farmhand on a visit to the big city. The man the
Mafia referred to as “the beast” was a model of soft-spoken, Old
World courtesy; he stood whenever prosecutors entered the
courtroom, and he addressed them deferentially. Insisting he was
simply a poor, sick old man, he said he knew nothing about La
Cosa Nostra. Riina seems an anomalous, almost impossible fig-
ure. In a modern Europe with high-tech bullet trains and First
World economies, Riina is a throwback. His capture would mark
the culmination of a remarkable reversal for the Mafia, which
began after the devastating murders of Giovanni Falcone and
Paolo Borsellino.
With its Capo in jail and an ongoing avalanche of defections,
the Sicilian Mafia’s future was now open to question, In fact, Toto
Riina may not even have lost his power. Although he already had
two unserved life sentences, Riina was nonetheless tried and con-
victed of dozens of crimes over the next decade, including the
murders of Falcone and Borsellino. In 1998, Riina picked up yet
another life sentence for the high-profile murder of Salvo Lima, a
politician who had long since been suspected of being in league
with the Mafia and who had been shot dead after he had failed to
prevent the convictions of Mafiosi in the Maxi Trials of the mid-
1980s.
Riina is currently held in a maximum security prison, with
limited contact with the outside world, in order to prevent him
from running his organization from behind bars as many others
have done. Over $125,000,000 in assets were confiscated from
Riina—probably just a fraction of his illicit fortune—and his vast
mansion was also acquired by the crusading anti-Mafia mayor of
Corleone in 1997. In a move that was both practical and symbolic,
this mansion was turned into a school for the local children. One
of Riina’s close friends in the Corleonsi clan, Bernardo Proven-
zano, is believed to have taken over as head of the organization.
138
Biographical Sketches

Tijuana Cartel
Once Mexico’s deadliest drug-trafficking organization, the now
weakened Tijuana cartel merged with the so-called Gulf cartel,
led by Osiel Cardenas, in late 2004 to fend off usurpers. The Ti-
juana cartel leaders continued to manage their organizations from
prison. As another sign of intercartel cooperation, Mexican offi-
cials reported that the so-called Zetas, specially trained antinar-
cotics troops who joined the Gulf cartel as enforcers, were be-
lieved to have acted as hired killers for the Arellano Felix
Organization (AFO). Many law enforcement officials attribute the
unusual level of violence in Tijuana to the arrests of major play-
ers in 2000. Then-president Ernesto Zedillo issued an ultimatum
to the cartel on February 25, 2000. Two days later Tijuana’s police
chief was ambushed and killed. President Zedillo also dealt an-
other serious blow, sending in federal troops and Mexican sol-
diers, and federal agents nabbed Ismael “El Mayel” Higuera
Guerrero, the cartel’s chief lieutenant. Higuera Guerrero has been
blamed for forty murders, including the murder of the Tijuana
police chief and three antidrug agents. U.S. authorities in San
Diego continue to tighten the noose on the cartel. Prosecutors un-
sealed a ten-count indictment accusing the cartel leaders of ship-
ping large quantities of drugs from Mexico into Southern Califor-
nia and of using violence, intimidation, and bribery to maintain
power over its illicit operations in the United States. The virulent
forces of the Gulf cartel continue to be evident via shadow illicit
drug syndicates. Recent intelligence indicates that Mexico’s car-
tels are behind the almost daily drug-related murders from Can-
cún, an entry point for Colombian cocaine, to Reynosa and Ti-
juana, border transshipment centers. It appears that the loss of
their imprisoned leaders is invoking internal wars over control of
the lucrative drug cartel enterprises.
Illicit Trafficking
139


5
Statistics and Reference
Documents
F
or the researcher just setting out on his or her exploration of
illicit trafficking, it is useful to become familiar with the major
sources of information. As there are countless sources avail-
able, in each section of this chapter we present documents and
data from the perspective of the U.S. government, the United
Nations, and one major nongovernmental organization that con-
ducts research and monitors developments in the field. Using the
web site addresses provided, vast numbers of documents of all
types may be accessed. This chapter focuses on four types of traf-
ficking: trafficking in human beings, narcotics trafficking, traf-
ficking in small arms and light weapons, and trafficking in
nuclear materials.
Trafficking in Human Beings
Trafficking in human beings is a phenomenon with a long past.
For centuries people have been coerced, seduced, and otherwise
deceived into leaving their homelands in pursuit of greater eco-
nomic and social freedoms, only to find themselves enslaved
under inhumane conditions. With the collapse of the Berlin Wall
and the Soviet Union, this problem appears to be spiraling out of
control in Eastern Europe, while it continues unabated through-
out Asia and Africa.
141

Trafficking in human beings is a global busienss:
•
Migrant trafficking and smuggling generates huge
profits for traffickers and organized crime syndicates.
•
There are an estimated 15 to 30 million irregular
migrants worldwide at any given time.
•
Of these migrants, some 700,000 women and children
are trafficked across borders annually.
•
Illicit trafficking typically focuses on women and
children for sexual and labor exploitation; men are
sometimes trafficked for labor purposes.
Characteristics of Traffickers and
Their Victims
A variety of factors fuel the traffic in human beings. Frequently
referred to as “push” factors—that is, those factors that encourage
people, especially women, to look outside their home towns,
cities, and countries for opportunities—they focus primarily on
the desire to escape difficult socioeconomic conditions.
Some factors that fuel trafficking in human beings include:
•
poverty and general weakening of domestic economies
•
migrations caused by war
•
expansion of prostitution due to militarization
•
globalization of the economy
•
laws and policies on prostitution
•
high profits for organized crime groups
•
increasingly difficult governmental budget situations
encouraging official corruption
•
newly opened borders or increasingly weaker borders
•
development strategies (for example, tourism)
•
gender-based discrimination
Transnational trafficking of women and children frequently
involves deception, seduction, or force. Young women answer ad-
vertisements for models, dancers, or other entertainment industry
jobs. Once they arrive at their destination, their documents are con-
fiscated by the trafficker or brothel owner, for example; the girls are
essentially kept under close watch and held in captivity. Usually
with little or no knowledge of the language of their destination
country, and too afraid to approach law enforcement authorities,
142
Statistics and Reference Documents

victims have little choice but to remain in their situations. Traffick-
ers frequently tell their victims that they are illegal immigrants and
will be put in prison and deported if they approach law enforce-
ment. In retribution for attempted escapes, or simply to maintain
control, victims’ “owners” administer beatings and threats.
Most trafficking victims do not readily volunteer information
about their status because of fear and the abuse they have suf-
fered at the hands of their traffickers. They may also be reluctant
to come forward with information because of despair, discour-
agement, and a sense that there are no viable options to escape
their situation. Even if pressed, they may not identify themselves
as someone held in bondage for fear of retribution to themselves
or family members. However, there are indicators that often point
to a person held in slavery. They include:
•
malnutrition, dehydration, or poor personal hygiene
•
sexually transmitted diseases
•
signs of rape or sexual abuse
•
bruising, broken bones, or other signs of untreated
medical problems
•
critical illnesses, including diabetes, cancer, or heart
disease
•
post-traumatic stress or psychological disorders
Because trafficking in persons is usually an “underground”
crime, it can be difficult for law enforcement personnel, the pub-
lic, or service providers to readily identify a trafficking victim.
There have been cases of victims escaping and reporting the situ-
ation to the police. However, many are physically unable to leave
their worksites without an escort and are not free to contact fam-
ily, friends, or members of the public.
In addition to some of the obvious physical and mental indi-
cators of trafficking, there are other signs that an individual is
being controlled by someone else.
It is possible that a person is being held as a slave if he or she
•
does not hold his/her own identity or travel
documents
•
has very little or no pocket money (trafficker or pimp
controls the money)
•
is extremely nervous, especially if their “translator”
(who may be their trafficker) is present
Illicit Trafficking
143

•
suffers from verbal or psychological abuse designed to
intimidate, degrade, and frighten the individual
•
is subject to heavy security at the commercial
establishment, including barred windows, locked
doors, isolated location, electronic surveillance
•
lives at the same premises as the brothel or worksite or
is driven between the living quarters and work by a
guard; for labor trafficking, is often prohibited from
leaving the worksite, which may look like a guarded
compound from the outside
•
is kept under surveillance when taken to a doctor,
hospital, or clinic for treatment; trafficker may act as a
translator
Victims of Sex Trafficking
These victims are often found in the streets or working in estab-
lishments that offer commercial sex acts (e.g., brothels, strip clubs,
pornography production houses). Such establishments may oper-
ate under the guise of:
•
massage parlors
•
escort services
•
adult bookstores
•
modeling studios
•
bars/strip clubs
Victims of Labor Trafficking
These victims tend to be people forced into indentured servitude
and can be found working in:
•
sweatshops (where abusive labor standards are present)
•
commercial agricultural situations (fields, processing
plants, canneries)
•
domestic situations (maids, nannies)
•
construction sites (particularly if public access is
denied)
•
restaurant and custodial work
144
Statistics and Reference Documents

Generally speaking, traffickers are categorized into three
types:
•
In border regions, occasional traffickers provide
internal or international transportation. They are
usually owners of taxis, small boats, or trucks that can
carry individuals or small groups from a drop-off point
on the coast, across a narrow strait, or over a poorly
secured border. This type is not organized in any
sophisticated or ongoing way.
•
Small, well-organized trafficking rings often specialize
in trafficking nationals out of one specific country,
consistently using similar routing.
•
Organized, international trafficking networks are the
most sophisticated and, consequently, the most
dangerous and difficult to combat. These networks
have access to fraudulent and/or authentic, usually
stolen, documents or the capability to produce falsified
documents themselves. They can change routing and
means of transportation when a traditional route is
blocked. Members are present worldwide. Lodging and
logistical support are at their disposal in countries of
transit and destination. 
Traffickers are known to travel deep into poverty-stricken
rural areas to seduce their targets with promises of high-paying
jobs and the easy life, or pretend to fall in love with the girls and
promise to marry them. Because of the global AIDS epidemic,
traffickers frequently travel to villages in the countryside in
search of virgins to provide to high-paying clients. In some cases,
parents give little thought to the morality of selling their daugh-
ters’ virginity or of selling them into a period of prostitution;
some of the girls themselves perceive it as a normal business
transaction or a way of paying a debt to their parents.
Huge profit at relatively low risk is the primary motivating
factor for law breakers (traffickers, brothel owners, pimps). The
benefits are so great that many continue in the sex business after
being arrested and serving time in prison. Usually the traffickers
are drinkers, drug abusers, or gamblers. The traffickers are also
frequently women who were formerly the victims of trafficking
themselves and realize the profits to be made.
Illicit Trafficking
145

International Organization
for Migration
Web site: http://www.iom.int
Founded in 1951 as the Provisional Intergovernmental Commit-
tee for the Movement of Migrants from Europe (PICMME), the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) has become the
leading international organization for migration. The IOM assists
governments and nongovernmental organizations through rapid
humanitarian responses to sudden migration flows, postemer-
gency return, and reintegration programs, rendering help to mi-
grants in distress and training officials. In addition, the IOM pur-
sues extensive research and informational campaigns as well as
programs providing counseling and assistance to victims of traf-
ficking. The IOM also aids governments looking to improve their
countertrafficking capabilities. At present, the IOM has more than
ninety active projects on all continents in the area of countertraf-
ficking.
The IOM has a staff of 3,200, of whom 300 are assigned to its
Geneva headquarters; the remainder are posted in more than 160
offices throughout the world. In the United States, IOM has of-
fices in Washington D.C., New York, Miami, Chicago, San Fran-
cisco, Seattle, and Los Angeles.
In 2002, as part of its direct assistance projects, the IOM came
to the aid of more than 3,000 victims of trafficking. They were as-
sisted to return home, and once in their country of origin, IOM
and partner nongovernmental organizations provided reintegra-
tion assistance.
Documents
The IOM web site contains an extensive list of documents regarding traf-
ficking in migrants around the world. The following is a small sample of
those reports.
“Understanding and Counteracting Trafficking in Persons,” 2004, at http://
www.iom.int//DOCUMENTS/PUBLICATION/EN/manuale_finale
_cap1–7.pdf.
“Revisiting the Human Trafficking Paradigm: The Bangladesh Experi-
ence,” 2004, at http://www.iom.int//DOCUMENTS/PUBLICATION/EN/
Full_BangladeshTrafficking_Rpt.pdf.
“Trafficking in Unaccompanied Minors in Ireland,” 2004, at
http://www.iom.int/iomwebsite/Publication/ServletSearchPublication?event=d
etail&id=3594.
146
Statistics and Reference Documents

“Who Is the Next Victim? Vulnerability of Young Romanian Women to
Trafficking in Human Beings,” 2004, at http://www.iom.int/iomwebsite/
Publication/ServletSearchPublication?event=detail&id=3171.
“Psychosocial Support to Groups of Victims of Human Trafficking in
Transit Situations,” 2004, at http://www.iom.int/iomwebsite/Publication/
ServletSearchPublication?event=detail&id=3052.
“Counter-trafficking in Eastern Europe and Central Asia,” 2003, at http://
www.iom.int/iomwebsite/Publication/ServletSearchPublication?event=detail&i
d=2991.
“Trafficking for Sexual Exploitation: The Case of the Russian Federa-
tion,” 2002, at http://www.iom.int/DOCUMENTS/PUBLICATION/EN/
mrs_7_2002.pdf.
Coalition against Trafficking
in Women
Web site: www.catwinternational.org
The Coalition Against Trafficking in Women (CATW) is a non-
governmental organization that promotes women’s human rights
by working internationally to combat sexual exploitation in all its
forms. Founded in 1988, CATW was the first international non-
governmental organization to focus on human trafficking, espe-
cially sex trafficking of women and girls. CATW is composed of
regional networks and of affiliated individuals and groups. It
serves as an umbrella organization that coordinates and takes di-
rection from its regional organizations and networks in its work
against sexual exploitation and in support of women’s human
rights.
A major project of the CATW is the publication of The Fact-
book on Global Sexual Exploitation, compiled by Donna M. Hughes,
Laura Joy Sporcic, Nadine Z. Mendelsohn, and Vanessa Chirgwin
(Coalition Against Trafficking in Women, 1999).
The Factbook on Global Sexual Exploitation was compiled from
media, nongovernmental organization, and government reports
as an initial effort to collect facts, statistics, and known cases on
global sexual exploitation. The information is organized into four
categories: trafficking, prostitution, pornography, and organized
and institutionalized sexual exploitation and violence.
The idea of the book was to create a sketch of the overall sit-
uation in each country to illustrate the harm caused by sexual
Illicit Trafficking
147

violence and exploitation throughout the world. Thus, as the au-
thors indicate, sources of information were not contacted to ver-
ify the information, and close examination will reveal contradic-
tions in the information presented. All statistics are reported with
no attempt made to evaluate which numbers are more likely to be
accurate. In any event, the exact numbers in many cases are not
known, and estimates come from a variety of sources that use dif-
ferent methods to determine what they report.
As such, the report is an indispensable resource, particularly
for the researcher just becoming acquainted with trafficking in
humans, because it provides a thorough treatment of the traffick-
ing situation in countries and regions throughout the world. The
following are snapshots of the scope of this pandemic extracted
from The Factbook on Global Sexual Exploitation.
•
Bangladesh: 200,000 women and girls have been
trafficked to Pakistan in the last ten years, continuing at
the rate of 200 to 400 women monthly.
•
Burma: 20,000 to 30,000 prostituted women and girls in
Thailand, about 1,000 from Shan state, are in Chiang
Mai. As illegal immigrants in Thailand, prostitutes are
arrested, detained, and deported back to Burma, with
50 to 70 percent being HIV positive.
•
Cambodia: Unofficial estimates say that there are as
many as 15,000 prostituted people in Phnom Penh and
that up to 35 percent of them have been smuggled into
Cambodia from China or Vietnam. Brothel owners pay
traffickers from $350 to $450 for each attractive
Vietnamese virgin sixteen years or younger. Nonvirgins
and those considered less beautiful are sold from $150
to $170 each.
•
China: There is a resurgence of prostitution and
trafficking in women and girls all over China, involving
a high percentage of children and minors. In 1994, the
police handled 15,000 cases involving the sale of
women as wives or for prostitution. There are now 70
million unmarried men in China as a consequence of
the preference for sons in Chinese families. Many are
desperately seeking wives from Vietnam, although
marriage arrangements are difficult.
•
Hong Kong: Fake contracts, often for domestic work,
land women in brothels that employ Chinese minders
148
Statistics and Reference Documents

to prevent runaways. An influx of East European
women in high-priced clubs has been noted, with a
Russian mafia said to be bringing women to Macau.
•
India: A quarter of the total number of prostitutes are
minors, in over 1,000 red-light districts all over India.
Cage prostitutes are often minors, often from Nepal
and Bangladesh. In India alone, estimates range from
2.3 million to 8 million women and children involved
in prostitution.
•
Indonesia: The estimated financial turnover of the sex
industry ranges from $1.2 billion to $3.6 billion.
Estimates of 1994 were that there were 500,000
prostitutes, although only 65,582 were registered.
•
Japan: This is believed to be the largest sex industry
market for Asian women, with over 150,000 non-
Japanese women in prostitution, mostly Thai and
Filipinas. The sex industry accounts for 1 percent of
GNP and equals the country’s defense budget. One
“sex zone” in Tokyo, only 0.34 sq. km., has 3,500 sex
“facilities”: strip theaters, peep shows, “lovers’ banks,”
porno shops, sex telephone clubs, karaoke bars, clubs,
and so on.
•
Korea: Around the military bases, there are 18,000
registered and 9,000 unregistered prostitutes. Forms of
prostitution include escort and call girls, street
prostitution, and from cafes, clubs, cabarets, show
cases, massage parlors, and beauty shops.
•
Malaysia: Estimates put the number of women in
prostitution at around 142,000, with from 8,000 to
10,000 in Kuala Lumpur. The main channels are the
recreation business, that is, entertainment, fitness clubs,
and the like.
•
Nepal: Every year about 10,000 Nepali girls, mostly
between the ages of nine and sixteen, are sold to
brothels in Indian cities. According to international
social agencies, this flow of Nepali girls into Indian
brothels is probably the busiest slave traffic of its kind
anywhere in the world. Brokers, especially in rural
areas, and even family members sell girls; husbands
sometimes sell their wives to brothels.
•
New Zealand: The majority of the 6,000 to 8,000
prostituted women are Asians. In Auckland, of 4,000
Illicit Trafficking
149

prostitutes, 800 are Thai, and 400 other Asian women.
New Zealand is also used by traffickers of Thai women
as a departure point for Japan, Australia, and Cyprus.
•
Philippines: 300,000 women are involved in prostitution,
and 75,000 are prostituted children. Government
approval of “R and R” privileges for the U.S. Navy
sustains a system and infrastructure of military
prostitution. Of the 200,000 or so street children in the
Philippines, about 60,000 sell their bodies.
•
Sri Lanka: 15,000 prostitutes work in the streets and in
licensed and unlicensed massage parlors and brothels,
and 30,000 prostitutes are children; 80 percent of the
labor migration in 1994 was of women workers.
•
Taiwan: 40,000 to 60,000 children are involved in
prostitution. Forty percent of young prostitutes in the
main red-light district are aboriginal girls. Girls under
thirteen have been made to undergo hormone injections
by brothel owners to hasten their physical development.
•
Thailand: Estimates of women in prostitution range
from 300,000 to 2.8 million, of which a third are minors
and children. Thai women are also in prostitution in
many countries in Asia, Australia, Europe, and the
United States. Some 4.6 million Thai men regularly and
500,000 foreign tourists annually use prostituted
women and girls.
•
Vietnam: There are between 60,000 and 200,000 women
and girls in prostitution, with 6.3 percent under the age
of sixteen. Trafficking occurs through kidnapping for
brothels, deceptive offers for jobs or tourist trips, and
marriage matchmaking with foreigners who sell and
resell the women abroad. 
Trafficking in women plagues the United States as well. Or-
ganized prostitution networks have migrated from metropolitan
areas to small cities and suburbs. Women trafficked to the United
States have been forced to have sex with 400 to 500 men to pay off
$40,000 in debt for their passage. The following are some charac-
teristic incidents of trafficking in the United States as compiled by
The Factbook on Global Sexual Exploitation:
•
Some 14,500 to 17,500 people are trafficked into the
United States each year.
150
Statistics and Reference Documents

•
In mid-1997, in Queens, New York, police were informed
of more than sixty Mexican immigrants, including
twelve children ranging in age from six months to six
years, being held in “involuntary servitude.”
•
The United Nations lists Mexico as the number one
center for the supply of young children to North
America. Most of the children are sold to rich, childless
couples unwilling to wait for bona fide adoption
agencies to provide them with a child. Many times the
children are snatched while on errands for their
parents. Often they are drugged and raped. Most of the
children over twelve end up as prostitutes.
•
Some 5,000 women of Chinese descent are in
prostitution in Los Angeles. Traffickers force Chinese
immigrants into indentured servitude—women into
prostitution, and men into the restaurant business.
•
Traffickers in Miami receive Asian children who are
trafficked through Europe by Japanese and Chinese
criminal gangs.
CATW’s web site has extensive links to articles, documents,
reports, statements, and other resources on trafficking of women
and children around the world.
The Factbook on Global Sexual Exploitation can be found at http://
www.catwinternational.org/factbook/index.php.
U.S. Department of State
Web site: www.state.gov
The U.S. Department of State is the leading foreign affairs agency
of the U.S. government. It is responsible for leading interagency
coordination in developing and implementing foreign policy,
leading and coordinating U.S. representation abroad, and convey-
ing U.S. foreign policy to foreign governments and international
organizations through its network of embassies, consulates, and
diplomatic missions. The State Department also assists U.S. busi-
nesses in the international marketplace and works to protect and
assist U.S. citizens living or traveling abroad.
The United States maintains diplomatic relations with about
180 countries and also maintains relations with many interna-
tional organizations, adding up to a total of more than 250 posts
around the world. In the United States, about 5,000 professional,
Illicit Trafficking
151

technical, and administrative domestic employees work along-
side members of the Diplomatic Service compiling and analyzing
reports from overseas, providing logistical support to posts, con-
sulting with and keeping the Congress informed about foreign
policy initiatives and policies, communicating with the American
public, formulating and overseeing the budget, issuing passports
and travel warnings, and more.
An important part of the State Department’s mission is to
monitor and work with other governments to counter global
problems such as cross-border pollution, the spread of communi-
cable diseases, terrorism, nuclear smuggling, and humanitarian
crises. The litany of critical problems exacerbated by increasingly
weak national borders, increasingly sophisticated criminal
groups, and worsening economic conditions in many parts of the
world includes, of course, trafficking in human beings.
At the governmental level, trafficking in humans has raised
numerous challenging questions:
•
How can the United States assist and influence foreign
governments in improving their economies so as to
stem the tide of people going abroad in search of better
opportunities?
•
What should the attitude of the U.S. government be
toward victims of trafficking who arrive in the United
States illegally? How should the criminal justice system
handle victims of trafficking? Should they be arrested,
deported, or allowed to apply for citizenship?
•
What measures can the U.S. government take to
educate people in remote parts of foreign countries
about the telltale signs of overtures that frequently lead
to trafficking?
In the State Department, the Office of Global Affairs coordi-
nates U.S. foreign relations on a variety of global issues, including
democracy, human rights, and labor; environment, oceans, and
science; narcotics control and law enforcement; population,
refugees, and migration; women’s issues; and trafficking in per-
sons. Coming under the jurisdiction of the Office of Global Affairs
is the Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons
(http://www.state.gov/g/tip/), which is tasked with coordinating
U.S. government activities in the global fight against modern-day
slavery, including forced labor and sexual exploitation.
152
Statistics and Reference Documents

On its extensive web site, the State Department enumerates
the various programs administered by the Office to Monitor and
Combat Trafficking in Persons, providing brief descriptions of in-
ternational antitrafficking programs approved for funding by the
State Department, the Department of Labor, and the U.S. Agency
for International Development. Other programs dealing with do-
mestic antitrafficking are coordinated through the Department of
Justice and the Department of Health and Human Services,
among other agencies.
In the area of monitoring and fighting trafficking in persons,
the State Department is known for its annual “Trafficking in Per-
sons Report.” This document is one of the most comprehensive
reports on human trafficking around the world and on what gov-
ernments are doing to end it. The 2004 report includes analyses of
140 countries’ efforts to combat trafficking, best practices world-
wide, a summary of U.S. action to fight human trafficking at
home, and new data on the scope of this phenomenon.
An example of domestic efforts to fight trafficking in humans
is the passage of legislation to assist victims of trafficking. On Oc-
tober 28, 2000, President Clinton signed into law the Victims of
Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000. Commonly
known as the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 (TVPA),
this new law, along with the Trafficking Victims Protection Reau-
thorization Act of 2003, addresses issues of worker exploitation
resulting from trafficking in persons. This law is the culmination
of the federal government’s efforts through the Trafficking in Per-
sons and Worker Exploitation Task Force, an interagency group
that brings together the FBI, Immigration and Naturalization Ser-
vice, the Department of Labor, and other agencies to assist victims
of trafficking.
Highlights of the statute include the following:
•
It creates new laws that criminalize trafficking with
respect to slavery, involuntary servitude, peonage, or
forced labor.
•
It permits prosecution where nonviolent coercion is
used to force victims to work in the belief they would
be subject to serious harm.
•
It permits prosecution where the victim’s service was
compelled by confiscation of documents such as
passports or birth certificates.
•
It increases prison terms for all slavery violations from
Illicit Trafficking
153

ten to twenty years and adds life imprisonment where
the violation involves the death or sexual abuse of the
victim.
•
It requires courts to order restitution and forfeiture of
assets upon conviction.
•
It enables victims to seek witness protection and other
types of assistance.
•
It gives prosecutors and agents new tools to get legal
immigration status for victims of trafficking during
investigation and prosecution.
•
It created the State Department’s Office to Monitor and
Combat Trafficking in Persons.
Under the TVPA, the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, through the Administration for Children and Families,
is responsible for certifying persons as trafficking victims and
helping them access the benefits and services they need to rebuild
their lives. To this end, a nationwide network of organizations
was created to identify victims through community outreach,
provide technical assistance to service organizations, and provide
services to victims.
Documents
“The U.S. Government’s International Anti-Trafficking Programs,” 2003,
at http://www.state.gov/g/tip/rls/rpt/17858.htm.
“Pathbreaking Strategies in the Global Fight Against Sex Trafficking,”
http://www.state.gov/g/tip/c8628.htm. Documents from a conference held
February 23–26, 2003. Among available documents is “Accomplishments
in the Fight to Prevent Trafficking in Persons” at http://www.state.gov/
g/tip/rls/fs/17968.htm.
“2004 Trafficking in Persons Report,” at http://www.state.gov/g/tip/rls/
tiprpt/2004/. The web site provides the entire 2004 Report as well as 2005
updates along with other documents.
See also “International Trafficking in Women to the United States: A Con-
temporary Manifestation of Slavery and Organized Crime,” Amy O’Neill
Richard, Center for the Study of Intelligence, 2000, at http://www.cia
.gov/csi/monograph/women/trafficking.pdf.
For additional documents and extensive links on human trafficking, go
to the U.S. Department of Justice, Trafficking in Persons Information web
site at http://www.usdoj.gov/trafficking.htm.
154
Statistics and Reference Documents

See the Department of Justice’s Office on Violence Against Women at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/vawo/about.htm. The full text of the Trafficking
Victims and Protection Act of 2000 can be found at http://www.ojp.usdoj
.gov/vawo/laws/vawo2000/stitle_a.htm.
“Assessment of U.S. Government Activities to Combat Trafficking in Per-
sons, Multi-agency Report,” 2004, at http://www.state.gov/g/tip/rls/rpt/
23495.htm.
United Nations
Web site: http://www.unodc.org
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), cre-
ated in 1997, has become a leading agency against international
crime with 500 staff members located in its twenty-one field of-
fices throughout the world. The UNODC has numerous
counter–drug trafficking operations, including the Illicit Crop
Monitoring Programme (ICMP), the Alternative Development
Programme, and the Global Programme Against Money Laun-
dering (GPML). In its work against human trafficking, the
UNODC has created the Global Programme against Trafficking in
Human Beings (GPAT).
To more effectively research and monitor illicit trafficking
and other trends in the criminal world, the United Nations estab-
lished the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
Programme Network. The Network consists of a number of in-
terregional and regional institutes, as well as specialized centers,
around the world. Its components provide a variety of services
including exchange of information, research, training, and public
education. We provide this list here so that the researcher might
consult with each organization individually to examine programs
being pursued in connection with trafficking in persons.
UNODC—United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
Vienna, Austria
UNICRI—United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice
Research Institute, Turin, Italy
UNAFEI—United Nations Asia and Far East Institute for
the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
Tokyo, Japan
Illicit Trafficking
155

ILANUD—United Nations Latin American Institute for the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, San
Jose, Costa Rica
HEUNI—European Institute for Crime Prevention and
Control affiliated with the United Nations, Helsinki,
Finland
UNAFRI—United Nations African Institute for the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
United Nations
NAASS—Naif Arab Academy for Security Sciences,
Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
AIC—Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra,
Australia
ICCLR and CJP—International Centre for Criminal Law
Reform and Criminal Justice Policy, Vancouver, Canada
ISISC—International Institute of Higher Studies in
Criminal Science, Siracusa, Italy
NIJ—National Institute of Justice, Washington, D.C.,
United States
ISPAC—International Scientific and Professional Advisory
Council of the United Nations Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Programme, Milan, Italy
ICPC—International Centre for the Prevention of Crime,
Montreal, Canada
Raoul Wallenberg Institute of Human Rights and
Humanitarian Law, Lund, Sweden
Documents
The United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
at http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/crime_cicp_convention.html.
The United Nations Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and Punish Traffick-
ing in Persons, Especially Women and Children, Supplementing the UN
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime, at http://www.unodc
.org/unodc/en/crime_cicp_convention.html.
156
Statistics and Reference Documents

The United Nations Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Per-
sons and of the Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others, at http://
www.unodc.org/unodc/en/crime_cicp_convention.html.
The United Nations Protocol against Smuggling of Migrants by Land,
Sea and Air Supplementing the Convention against Transnational Orga-
nized Crime, at http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/crime_cicp_convention.html.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Principles
and Guidelines on Human Rights and Trafficking, at http://www1.umn
.edu/humanrts/instree/traffickingGuidelinesHCHR.html.
Slavery, Servitude, Forced Labor and Similar Institutions and Practices
Convention of 1926 (Slavery Convention of 1926), at http://www1.umn
.edu/humanrts/instree/f1sc.htm.
The United Nations Protocol Amending the Slavery Convention (1953),
at http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/instree/f2psc.htm.
The United Nations Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slav-
ery, the Slave Trade and Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery, at
http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/instree/f3scas.htm.
“The Relationship between Organised Crime and Trafficking in Aliens,”
International Centre for Migration Policy Development (ICMPD), 1999,
at http://www.icmpd.org/uploadimg/OcandTR.pdf.
“Organised Crime and the Business of Migrant Trafficking: An Economic
Analysis,” Andreas Schloenhardt, Australian Institute of Criminology,
1999, at http://www.aic.gov.au/conferences/occasional/schloenhardt.pdf.
“Report of the Experts Group on Trafficking in Human Beings,” Euro-
pean Commission, Directorate-General Justice, Freedom and Security,
December 2004, at http://www.antislavery.org/homepage/resources/PDF/
CAHTEH_2004_INFO6_E.pdf.
For additional United Nations documents on trafficking, see United Na-
tions Anti-Human Trafficking Unit, Global Programme against Traffick-
ing in Human Beings at http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/trafficking_projects
.html.
For additional documents and extensive links on human trafficking, see
Michigan State University’s Criminal Justice Resources: Human Traffick-
ing, at http://www.lib.msu.edu/harris23/crimjust/human.htm.
For additional documents and extensive links on human rights generally,
go to the University of Minnesota Human Rights Library, at http://www1
.umn.edu/humanrts/ or Human Rights Watch, at www .hrw.org/links.html.
Illicit Trafficking
157

Narcotics Trafficking
Trafficking in narcotics is a global business.
•
Three percent of the world’s population, or 185 million
people, consume illicit drugs annually.
•
Countless more people around the world are involved
in the production and trafficking of illicit drugs.
•
In the United States, wholesale cocaine prices range
from approximately $12,000 to $35,000 per kilogram.
•
The availability of South American heroin, produced in
Colombia, has increased dramatically in the United
States since 1993. It ranges from $50,000 to $200,000 per
kilogram.
•
Israeli and Russian drug-trafficking syndicates and
Western Europe-based drug traffickers are the principal
traffickers of methylenedioxymethamphetamine
(MDMA), commonly known as ecstasy, worldwide.
•
MDMA, primarily manufactured clandestinely in
Western Europe, is smuggled into the United States by
couriers via commercial airlines, as well as through the
use of express package carriers.
•
African nations are mainly concerned with a rise in the
use of cannabis and opiates.
•
In the People’s Republic of China, 70 percent of all HIV
cases are linked to injected drug use. 
Bureau for International Narcotics and Law
Enforcement Affairs
Web site: http://www.state.gov/g/inl/
The Bureau for International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Af-
fairs (INL) advises the president, secretary of state, other bureaus
in the Department of State, and other departments and agencies
within the U.S. government on the development of policies and
programs to combat international narcotics and crime.
INL programs support two of the Department’s strategic
goals: to reduce the entry of illegal drugs into the United States
and to minimize the impact of international crime on the United
States and its citizens. Counternarcotics and anticrime programs
158
Statistics and Reference Documents

also complement the war on terrorism, both directly and indi-
rectly, by promoting modernization of and supporting operations
by foreign criminal justice systems and law enforcement agencies
charged with the counterterrorism mission.
The International Narcotics Control element of the U.S. for-
eign assistance program enhances the institutional capabilities of
foreign governments to define and implement their strategies and
national programs to prevent the production, trafficking, and
abuse of illicit drugs. These programs focus on interdiction capa-
bilities, eradication, sustainable alternative development, and de-
mand reduction. This includes reducing drug crop cultivation
through a combination of law enforcement, eradication, and al-
ternative development programs in key source countries as well
as improving the capacity of host nation police and military
forces to attack narcotics production and trafficking centers. It
also includes strengthening the ability of law enforcement and ju-
dicial authorities in both source and transit countries to investi-
gate and prosecute major drug-trafficking organizations and their
leaders and to seize and block their assets.
The International Narcotics Control Strategy Report (INCSR)
is an annual report by the Department of State to Congress pre-
pared in accordance with the Foreign Assistance Act. It describes
the efforts of key countries to attack all aspects of the international
drug trade in the calendar year. The INCSR is a country-by-coun-
try two-volume report that describes the efforts to attack all aspects
of the international drug trade, chemical control, money launder-
ing, and financial crimes. Part I covers drug and chemical control
activities. Part II covers money laundering and financial crimes.
Office of National Drug Control Policy
Web site: http://www.whitehousedrugpolicy.gov/
The White House Office of National Drug Control Policy
(ONDCP), a component of the Executive Office of the President,
was established by the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988. The princi-
pal purpose of ONDCP is to establish policies, priorities, and ob-
jectives for the drug control program of the United States. The
goals of the program are to reduce illicit drug use, manufacturing,
and trafficking, drug-related crime and violence, and drug-
related health consequences. To achieve these goals, the director
of ONDCP is charged with producing the National Drug Control
Strategy. The Strategy directs antidrug efforts and establishes a
Illicit Trafficking
159

program, a budget, and guidelines for cooperation among fed-
eral, state, and local entities.
By law, the director of ONDCP also evaluates, coordinates,
and oversees both the international and domestic antidrug efforts
of executive branch agencies and ensures that such efforts sustain
and complement state and local antidrug activities. The director
advises the president regarding changes in the organization,
management, budgeting, and personnel of federal agencies that
could affect the nation’s antidrug efforts.
The Drug Policy Information Clearinghouse supports the
ONDCP. A component of the National Criminal Justice Reference
Service (NCJRS), the Clearinghouse is staffed by subject matter
specialists and serves as a resource for statistics, research data, and
referrals useful for developing and implementing drug policy. The
Clearinghouse disseminates ONDCP and the U.S. Department of
Justice’s Office of Justice Programs (OJP) drug-related publica-
tions. Its staff also writes and produces documents on drug-re-
lated topics, coordinates with federal, state, and local agencies to
identify data resources, and provides information to the public.
Characteristics of Traffickers
One of the most important elements in controlling the trafficking
of drugs into the U.S. is the relationship between the United
States and Mexico.
Traffickers from Mexico
•
Drug traffickers from Mexico are the primary transporters
of the major narcotics imported into the United States.
•
The U.S.-Mexico border is the entry point for a large
percentage of these drugs. Approximately 90 million
automobiles, 4.5 million trucks, and 293 million people
enter the United States from Mexico annually.
•
Traffickers utilize all these modes of transportation as
well as high-speed boats and cargo ships. These ships
carry more than 400 million tons of cargo. Another
160,000 smaller vessels visit coastal towns.
•
Criminal groups operating from Mexico smuggle
cocaine, heroin, methamphetamine, amphetamine, and
marijuana into the United States.
160
Statistics and Reference Documents

•
Approximately half of the cocaine available in the
United States enters the country along the U.S.-Mexico
border.
•
Mexican traffickers historically have both worked with
and competed against the Colombian cartels.
•
The majority of marijuana and a significant portion of
heroin consumed in the United States emanates from
Mexico.
•
Costs that the illegal drug trade imposes on the United
States have been estimated at $70 billion each year.
•
Mexican drug organizations have established
methamphetamine laboratories that have been
estimated to produce 85 percent of the
methamphetamine available in the United States.
•
Mexican drug organizations have established labs
throughout Mexico and California. 
Besides trafficking activities to the United States originating
in Mexico, a significant amount of global drug-trafficking begins
in Southeast Asia.
•
Criminal groups based in Southeast and Southwest
Asia smuggle heroin into the United States.
•
Afghanistan accounts for 76 percent of the world’s
illicit opium production as well as being a central point
in the illegal trafficking of opiates.
•
Heroin is also processed in the so-called Golden
Triangle (Burma, Laos, and Thailand).
At the wholesale trafficking level:
•
The trafficking process becomes fluid and diversified.
•
The process of moving the heroin from its point of
origin can involve any number of smuggling groups
and brokers.
•
Brokers often have close connections with particular
producers while also arranging transactions with rival
producers.
•
Traffickers form limited partnerships with different
individuals or groups for the purpose of executing
Illicit Trafficking
161

specific drug transactions. These procedures ensure
business flexibility as well as protection.
•
Southeast Asian heroin traffickers smuggle bulk
quantities of SEA heroin to international markets by the
use of commercial containerized cargo.
•
Heroin processed in the Golden Triangle (Burma, Laos,
and Thailand) is smuggled overland to seaports in
Burma, China, Thailand, Malaysia, and Vietnam for
transshipment in cargo containers through Taiwan,
Hong Kong, Singapore, Japan, and Korea. From these
transit countries in Southeast Asia, the heroin-laden
containers are shipped to consumer markets in Europe,
Australia, Canada, and the United States.
“Mexico and the United States: Neighbors Confront Drug Trafficking,”
James O. Finkenauer, Joseph R. Fuentes, George L. Ward, http://www
.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/international/trafficking.html.
“Southeast Asian Heroin Smuggling Methods: Containerized Cargo,”
Drug Intelligence Brief, 2001, http://www.usdoj.gov/dea/pubs/intel/01_022/.
National Drug Control Strategy 2004 – The White House, http://www.state
.gov/documents/organization/30228.pdf.
United Nations
Web site: www.un.org
Commission on Narcotic Drugs
The Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND) was established in
1946 by the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations.
It is the central policy-making body within the UN system for
dealing with all drug-related matters. The Commission analyses
the world drug abuse situation and develops proposals to
strengthen international drug control.
The International Narcotics Control Board
Web site: http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/incb.html
The International Narcotics Control Board (INCB) is the inde-
pendent and quasijudicial control body for the implementation of
UN drug conventions. It was created by the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs of 1961 and came into being in 1968.
The INCB is independent of governments as well as of the
United Nations; its thirteen members serve in their personal ca-
162
Statistics and Reference Documents

pacity. The Board monitors compliance with the provisions of in-
ternational drug control treaties and ensures that adequate sup-
plies of legal drugs are available for medical and scientific pur-
poses. The Board also endeavors to ensure that no leakage from
licit sources of drugs to illicit trafficking occurs. It identifies and
helps to correct weaknesses in drug control systems and deter-
mines which chemicals used to illicitly manufacture drugs should
be under international control.
Annually, the UNODC publishes an extensive report on illicit
narcotics. For the first time, the 2004 World Drug Report was is-
sued as a two-volume edition. The first volume covers market
trends and provides in-depth trend analysis; the second volume
compiles detailed statistics on all of the drug markets. Together
they provide one of the most comprehensive sources on the inter-
national drug problem. The report includes trends in production,
trafficking, abuse in the opium/heroin, coca/cocaine, cannabis,
amphetamine-type stimulants market; as well as production,
seizures, prices, and consumption in each of these areas; and it
contains numerous maps, statistics, charts, tables, and graphs.
Documents
United Nations 2004 World Drug Report, at http://www.unodc.org/
unodc/world_drug_report.html.
United Nations Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, at http://
www.unodc.org/pdf/convention_1961_en.pdf.
United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Drugs, 1971, at http://www
.unodc.org/pdf/convention_1971_en.pdf.
United Nations Convention against the Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances, 1988, at http://www.unodc.org/pdf/
convention_1988_en.pdf.
For a collection of United Nations Resolutions on Illicit Narcotics since
1946, go to http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/resolutions.html.
Trafficking in Small Arms and
Light Weapons
The proliferation of illicit small arms and light weapons
(SA/LW) in regions of the world suffering from political insta-
bility and violent conflict has proven a major obstacle to peace,
economic development, and efforts to rebuild war-torn
Illicit Trafficking
163

societies. In places like Sierra Leone, Kosovo, and Colombia,
thousands of innocent civilians have been killed and tens of
thousands more displaced by ethnic and civil conflicts perpet-
uated in large part by easy access to illicit small arms and light
weapons.
•
At least 1 million civilian firearms are lost or stolen
annually worldwide.
•
Worldwide, there are at least 200,000 annual non-war-
related firearm deaths—the vast majority of which are
homicides.
•
At least 1,249 companies in more than 90 countries are
involved in some aspect of small arms and light
weapons production.
•
The largest exporters by value are the United States,
Italy, Belgium, Germany, the Russian Federation, Brazil,
and China.
•
Countries that are known to be medium producers of
small arms include Iran, Pakistan, and Singapore.
•
Iraqi civilians may have gained control of 7 to 8 million
small arms.
•
Between 1994 and 2003, the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives responded to over
90,000 requests from foreign governments for assistance
in tracing illegal firearms.
Office of Weapons Removal
and Abatement
Web site: http://www.state.gov/t/pm/wra/
The State Department’s Office of Weapons Removal and Abate-
ment (WRA) works to curb the illicit proliferation of conven-
tional weapons of war such as light automatic weapons and
rocket-propelled grenades, and removing and destroying oth-
ers, such as persistent landmines and abandoned stocks of mu-
nitions that remain and pose hazards after the conclusion of
armed conflict.
The Office develops, implements, and monitors policy, pro-
grams, and public engagement efforts that contribute to the pre-
vention and mitigation of conflict, as well as post-conflict social
and economic recovery. The focus is threefold: to curb the illicit
164
Statistics and Reference Documents

trafficking, availability, and indiscriminate use of conventional
weapons of war that fuel regional and internal instability; to pur-
sue and help manage postconflict cleanup of such weapons in
areas needed for civilian use; and to engage civil society to
broaden support for mitigation efforts.
The Office promotes U.S. foreign policy goals through the
development and implementation of comprehensive programs to
address the security challenges and harmful humanitarian effects
caused by the illicit proliferation of conventional weapons of war,
and the existence of public hazards from such weapons following
cessation of armed conflict. The Office works to limit the access of
terrorist or criminal groups to such weapons and munitions, and
coordinates with other U.S. government agencies as well as non-
governmental organizations, international organizations, and pri-
vate enterprises.
In the document, “U.S. Measures to Fight the Illicit Small
Arms/Light Weapons (SA/LW) Trade” (http://www.state.gov/t/
pm/rls/fs/2001/3837.htm), the State Department outlines the vari-
ous approaches at its disposal for dealing with small arms and
light weapons trafficking. The various reports, documents, and
organizations mentioned in the following list provide numerous
leads for the researcher examining SA/LW issues.
•
International Diplomacy. The United States works with
many nations bilaterally, and with regional and
international organizations, to stem the flow of illicit
SA/LW trafficking.
•
Arms Brokering Legislation. U.S. legislation in 1996 was
one of the world’s first comprehensive laws on arms
brokering. The U.S. brokering law covers all U.S.
citizens in the United States and abroad as well as
foreign nationals in the United States.
•
Transparency in SA/LW. Through its Section 655
Report to Congress, the United States regulates
SA/LW exports under fully transparent procedures.
This annual report to Congress provides information
on all U.S. arms exports and is available on the
Internet.
•
Excess Weapons Destruction and Stockpile Security. The
United States earmarks funds for SA/LW destruction
and stockpile security.
Illicit Trafficking
165

•
The Organization of American States (OAS) Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms Convention.
This agreement among OAS countries strengthens their
ability to combat illicit trafficking, while facilitating
cooperation among them.
•
Embargo Enforcement. The United States observes and
enforces sanctions and embargoes established by the
United Nations Security Council.
•
Cracking Down on Financing of Illicit Arms. The United
States has been actively involved in initiatives to curb
the impact of the illegitimate diamond trade on African
conflicts.
•
Vigilance at the Borders. The United States, through the
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives
and the U.S. Customs Service, intensified interdiction
and investigative efforts to prevent illicit trafficking
across its borders.
•
UN Transnational Organized Crime Convention “Firearms
Protocol.” The United States joined consensus on a
legally binding agreement on measures to combat illicit
trade in firearms, May 31, 2001.
On November 14, 1997, the OAS adopted the Inter-American
Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related Materials.
This was the first multilateral treaty designed to prevent, combat,
and eradicate illegal transnational trafficking in firearms, ammu-
nition, and explosives. As of March 1, 2004, twenty-two OAS
member states had ratified the Convention (Antigua and Bar-
buda, Argentina, Bahamas, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Costa
Rica, Colombia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala, Mex-
ico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Saint Lucia, Trinidad
and Tobago, Uruguay, and Venezuela), and thirty-three of the
thirty-four active OAS member states (including the United
States) have signed.
The aim of the Convention is to help shut down the illicit
transnational arms market that fuels violence associated with
drug trafficking, terrorism, and international organized crime.
(See http://www.state.gov/t/ac/rls/fs/2004/30218.htm.)
Some key provisions of the Convention include:
•
requiring parties to the Convention to establish or
166
Statistics and Reference Documents

maintain an effective licensing or authorization system
for the export, import, and transit of firearms,
ammunition, explosives, and other related materials
•
obligating parties to require at the time of manufacture
the marking of firearms with the name of the
manufacturer, place of manufacture, and serial number
(similar identifying markings are required for imported
firearms)
•
requiring parties to adopt laws and regulations
criminalizing the illicit manufacture of and trafficking
in firearms, ammunition, explosives, and related
materials
•
encouraging parties to share information on legislative
practices and other national measures to combat illicit
trafficking; techniques used to combat money
laundering related to illicit transfers; routes customarily
used by criminal organizations engaged in illicit
trafficking; and the means of concealment used and
methods for detecting them
Documents
“Background Paper: The U.S. Approach to Combating the Spread of
Small Arms,” 2001, at http://www.state.gov/t/pm/rls/fs/2001/3766.htm.
“Transparency in Arms Sales,” 2001, at http://www.state.gov/t/pm/rls/fs/
2001/3780.htm.
The State Department publishes reports on arms flows to regions of con-
flict in order to raise public awareness of the illicit small arms and light
weapons trade issue. In 1999, for example, the State Department released
“Arms and Conflict in Africa,” at http://www.state.gov/www/regions/
africa/9907_africa_conflict.html.
“U.S.-EU Statement of Common Principles on Small Arms and Light
Weapons,” U.S. Mission to the European Union, Brussels, Belgium, De-
cember 17, 1999, at http://www.state.gov/p/eur/rls/or/3750.htm.
United Nations
Web site: www.un.org
The first ever United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held July 9–20,
2001, in New York, represented a step forward in facing the chal-
lenge of small arms around the world. Through the consensus
adoption of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Illicit Trafficking
167

Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects, member states expressed their collective will to es-
tablish and follow up on a set of universal norms to eradicate the
uncontrolled proliferation and misuse of illicit small arms. The
Programme of Action identified a variety of national, regional,
and global measures, including the following:
•
legislation on illegal manufacturing, possession,
stockpiling, and trade in small arms
•
stockpile management and destruction of weapons
confiscated, seized, or collected
•
identification and tracing of illicit arms
•
international cooperation and assistance to states to
strengthen their ability to identify and trace illicit
weapons
•
public awareness campaigns
The followup to this meeting was the UN Biennial Meeting
on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in July 2003.
(For a complete set of documents to the 2001 meeting, see
http://disarmament.un.org:8080/cab/smallarms/; for the 2003 meet-
ing, go to http://disarmament2.un.org/cab/salw–2003.html.)
UN Institute for Disarmament Research
Web site: www.unidir.org
The United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNI-
DIR)—an intergovernmental organization within the United Na-
tions—conducts research on disarmament and security with the
aim of assisting the international community in its disarmament
thinking, decisions, and efforts. Through its research projects,
publications, meetings, and expert networks, UNIDIR monitors a
wide array of disarmament and security-related challenges facing
the world. These include tactical nuclear weapons, refugee secu-
rity, computer warfare, regional confidence-building measures,
and small arms. Working with researchers, diplomats, govern-
ment officials, nongovernmental organizations, and other institu-
tions, UNIDIR bridges the research community with United Na-
tions member states.
168
Statistics and Reference Documents

Documents
Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Their Parts and Components and Ammunition, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, at
http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/crime_cicp_convention.html.
“National Reports by Member States to the United Nations in Prepara-
tion for the First Biennial Meeting of States on the Implementation of the
UN Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons,” 2003, at
http://disarmament.un.org:8080/cab/salw–2003.html.
The national reports are at http://disarmament.un.org:8080/cab/salw-
nationalreports.html.
For a list of United Nations publications on small arms, see United Na-
tions Publications: Small Arms at http://www.un.org/Pubs/whatsnew/small
arms.htm as well as http://www.unidir.ch/bdd/focus-search.php?onglet=5.
“Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,” 2001, at http://www.state.gov/
documents/organization/ 7494.pdf.
Small Arms Survey 
Website: www.smallarmssurvey.org
The Small Arms Survey is an independent research project located
at the Graduate Institute of International Studies, Geneva, Switzer-
land. It serves as the principal international source of public infor-
mation on all aspects of small arms, and as a resource center for
governments, policymakers, researchers, and activists. The project
has an international staff with expertise in security studies, politi-
cal science, international public policy, law, economics, develop-
ment studies, conflict resolution, and sociology. The staff works
closely with a worldwide network of researchers and partners.
The Small Arms Survey project is funded by contributions
from the governments of Switzerland, Australia, Belgium,
Canada, Finland, Denmark, France, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Sweden, and the United Kingdom.
The Small Arms Survey web site contains a wealth of infor-
mation, documents, reports, and links to organizations around
the world specializing in the study and monitoring of small
arms. For example, by clicking on “partners” at the Small Arms
Survey web site, the researcher will find links to more than
twenty organizations.
Illicit Trafficking
169

Small Arms Survey 2004: Rights at Risk (http://www.small
armssurvey.org/publications/yb_2004.htm) provides original re-
search and updated information on small arms production, stock-
piles, and trade. In focusing on the links between small arms and
the abuse of human rights, this volume explores the impact of
arms exports to areas of conflict, the role of weapons in global vi-
olence and crime, and the implementation of human rights stan-
dards by police forces worldwide.
For reports and documents on small arms from regions
around the world, go to Small Arms Survey’s site at http://www
.smallarmssurvey.org/resources/reg_docs.htm.
Trafficking in Nuclear Materials
International Atomic Energy Agency
Web site: http://www.iaea.org/index.html
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is a leading
agency for monitoring and regulating the nuclear field in the in-
ternational arena. It was established as “Atoms for Peace” in 1957
within the United Nations organizational structure. The IAEA
works with its member states and multiple partners worldwide
to promote safe, secure, and peaceful nuclear technologies.
The IAEA Secretariat is headquartered at the Vienna Interna-
tional Centre in Vienna, Austria. Operational liaison and regional
offices are located in Geneva, New York, Toronto, and Tokyo. The
IAEA runs or supports research centers and scientific laboratories
in Vienna and Seibersdorf, Austria; Monaco; and Trieste, Italy.
The Secretariat consists of 2,200 multidisciplinary professional
and support staff from more than ninety countries. Its budget for
2004 amounted to $268.5 million, and an additional $74.75 million
in voluntary contributions was expected. Three main pillars un-
derpin the IAEA’s mission: safety and security; science and tech-
nology; and safeguards and verification.
The IAEA has compiled an extensive database called “Illicit
Nuclear Trafficking Facts and Figures: Illicit Nuclear Trafficking
Statistics, January 1993 to December 2003,” tracking black-market
activities in nuclear and radioactive material. As of December 2003,
the database contained 540 confirmed incidents involving illicit
trafficking in nuclear and other radioactive materials. Several hun-
dred additional incidents that have been reported in open sources,
170
Statistics and Reference Documents

but not confirmed, are also tracked in the IAEA database but are
not included in the statistics that follow. According to the IAEA, the
majority of the confirmed incidents involved the deliberate intent
to illegally acquire, smuggle, or sell nuclear material or other ra-
dioactive material. The database also includes some incidents
where actions may have been inadvertent, such as accidental dis-
posal or the detection of radioactively contaminated products.
Of the 540 confirmed illicit trafficking incidents:
•
182 incidents involved nuclear material
•
335 incidents involved radioactive material other than
nuclear material
•
23 incidents involved both nuclear and other
radioactive materials
As of December 2003, the IAEA database included 205 con-
firmed incidents since January 1, 1993, that involved nuclear ma-
terial. Of these incidents with nuclear material, less than 10 per-
cent (seventeen incidents) involved highly enriched uranium
(HEU) or plutonium, materials that could be used for the fissile
core of a nuclear explosive device.
During the first half of the 1990s, quantities of a kilogram or
more of HEU were seized in a few cases, and in one case about 0.3
kg of plutonium was seized. By contrast, no confirmed theft or
seizure from 1995 to today has involved more than 1 or 2 percent
of what would be needed for constructing a nuclear bomb. Even
when small quantities of such material are seized, the question re-
mains whether they might have been samples of larger quantities
available for illicit sale. Trafficking in such materials, of course,
might occur undetected. This data generally corresponds with the
findings of Rensselaer Lee in his book, Smuggling Armageddon
(see Chapter 7 of the present volume).
According to the IAEA, the overwhelming majority of con-
firmed nuclear trafficking involved lower grade materials. Al-
though the quantities of these lower-grade materials that have
been stolen or seized have been too small to be significant for nu-
clear proliferation, these cases sometimes are indicative of gaps in
the control and security of nuclear material.
The IAEA database includes 358 confirmed incidents since
January 1, 1993, that involved radioactive material other than nu-
clear. In most of the cases, the trafficked radioactive material was
Illicit Trafficking
171

in the form of sealed radioactive sources, but some incidents with
unsealed radioactive samples or radioactivity-contaminated ma-
terials such as scrap metal also have been reported to the illicit
trafficking database and are included in the statistics. Some coun-
tries are more complete than others in reporting incidents, and
open-source information suggests that the actual number of cases
is significantly larger than the number confirmed to the IAEA.
Radioactive sources involved in confirmed trafficking
demonstrate a wide range of activity levels. The vast majority of
them have been too weak to cause serious health problems if used
for malicious acts.
The Center for International Security
and Cooperation
Web site: http://cisac.stanford.edu/
Another major database on the illicit trafficking in nuclear and ra-
dioactive materials has been compiled by the Center for Interna-
tional Security and Cooperation (CISAC) at the Stanford Institute
for International Studies (SIIS). Called the Database on Nuclear
Smuggling, Theft and Orphan Radiation Sources (DSTO), this re-
source was compiled from databases, technical journals, newspa-
pers, and other sources since 1999 to derive a picture of illicit traf-
ficking of nuclear material worldwide. DSTO is divided into
twenty-one categories, including type of incident, type of mate-
rial, suspected origin, perpetrators involved, reported destina-
tion, and intended use. The database also categorizes the reliabil-
ity of information used and identifies major routes of illicit
trafficking and how they have changed during the last decade.
For example, in the early 1990s, Western Europe was the place to
sell nuclear material. Now the market has apparently shifted to
Central Asia, the Caucasus, and Turkey.
DSTO combines information from the IAEA’s Illicit Traffick-
ing Database and the Newly Independent States’ Nuclear Traf-
ficking Database at the Center for Nonproliferation Studies (CNS)
in Monterey, California. The IAEA database is based on state-con-
firmed incidents, and CNS’s database is confined to incidents in
the former Soviet Union. The DSTO team also uses additional, in-
dependently obtained information. As a result, DSTO lists 830 en-
tries including:
172
Statistics and Reference Documents

•
A total of 643 nuclear smuggling incidents that include
thefts and seizures of nuclear and other radioactive
material have been documented.
•
There are 107 sources of “orphaned” radiation
(orphaned radiation sources refers to material that has
been lost intentionally or by mistake).
•
More than 80 cases involving fraud or malevolent acts
using radioactive material to commit murder, deliberate
exposure and blackmail, and poisoning of food and
water supplies have been reported.
•
Every year, the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
receives 200 reports of lost, stolen, or abandoned
radioactive sources.
•
About 40 kilograms of weapons-usable uranium and
plutonium have been stolen from poorly protected
nuclear facilities in the former Soviet Union during the
last decade; most of it has been retrieved.
•
Two kilos of highly enriched uranium stolen from a
research reactor in the Republic of Georgia are still
missing. 
Generally speaking, a few kilograms of plutonium and less
than 20 kilograms of highly enriched uranium are required to
make a nuclear bomb.
DSTO gives an example of how even relatively low-level ra-
diation exposure can risk public health and create major prob-
lems for society. In 1987, in Goiania, Brazil, scavengers disman-
tled a metal canister from a radiotherapy machine at an
abandoned cancer clinic. Soon afterward, a junkyard worker
opened the lead canister and discovered a pretty blue, glowing
dust: radioactive cesium–137. In the days following, scores of
people were exposed to the substance—some parents painted
their children with it and sold tickets to neighbors to watch them
dance. As a result, 112,000 people had to be monitored. Of those,
249 were contaminated; 28 suffered radiation burns, and 4 people
died. More than 67 square kilometers were monitored, large areas
had to be decontaminated, and 3,500 cubic meters of radioactive
waste were generated.
The Database on Nuclear Smuggling, Theft and Orphan Ra-
diation Sources is accessible only to carefully vetted researchers
cooperating with the team at Stanford.
Illicit Trafficking
173

Nuclear Threat Initiatives 
Web site: http://www.nti.org
Concerned that the threat from nuclear weapons had fallen off
most people’s radar screens after the initial period following the
collapse of the Soviet Union, CNN founder Ted Turner asked for-
mer senator Sam Nunn in the spring of 2000 to help assess the
need for a private institution to monitor the nuclear threat from
the former Soviet Union and make recommendations for action.
In January 2001, Turner and Nunn founded the Nuclear Threat
Initiative (NTI).
NTI’s goal is to strengthen global security by reducing the
risk of use and preventing the spread of nuclear, biological, and
chemical weapons. This is done primarily through programs and
research focusing on the United States and the former Soviet
Union and the various nuclear, biological, and chemical concerns
between the two countries.
The value of NTI’s web site to the researcher is its briefing
papers on a wide range of issues within the area of nuclear, bio-
logical, and chemical weapons, including the illicit trafficking of
nuclear materials. In addition, the site has extensive links to doc-
uments issued by nongovernmental organizations, the U.S. gov-
ernment, and international organizations such as the United Na-
tions, NATO, and the European Union.
Some of the data provided by NTI outlines the scope of the
problem:
•
After the Cold War, in Russia alone there were
approximately 30,000 nuclear warheads and enough
highly enriched uranium and plutonium to make
60,000 more.
•
After the Cold War, tens of thousands of scientists in
the former Soviet Union with weapons expertise no
longer had assured jobs.
•
In more than forty countries around the world, there
are more than 100 research reactors with highly
enriched uranium, some of which is inadequately
secured and vulnerable to theft.
•
Threat-reduction programs are believed to have made
progress in securing vulnerable weapons and materials
in the former Soviet Union. However, only 43 percent
174
Statistics and Reference Documents

of rapid cooperative security upgrades and 22 percent
of comprehensive cooperative security measures are in
place.
United Nations Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Mate-
rial, 1980, at http://www.unodc.org/unodc/terrorism_convention_nuclear_ma-
terial.html.
“Measures against Illicit Trafficking in Nuclear Materials and Other Ra-
dioactive Sources,” International Atomic Energy Agency, Report by the
Director General, 1997, at http://www.iaea.org/About/Policy/GC/GC41/Doc-
uments/gc41–21.html.
International Standard to Combat Nuclear Trafficking, at http://
www.standards.org.au/newsroom/tgs/2004–08/trafficking/trafficking.htm.
For extensive links to documents on nuclear security-related issues com-
piled from various sources, go to Russian American Nuclear Security
Advisory Council (RANSAC) at www.ransac.org.
Illicit Trafficking
175


6
Agencies and Organizations
Amnesty International 
1 Easton Street
London WC1X 0DW
United Kingdom
Tel: +44-20-74135500
Fax: +44-20-79561157
Web site: www.amnesty.org 
Human trafficking is one of the many abuses that Amnesty Inter-
national (AI) campaigns against in its pursuit to advance human
rights throughout the world. Founded in 1961 by British lawyer
Peter Benenson, the organization has spread to over 150 countries
and territories with the involvement of over 1.8 million people.
Politically, religiously, nationally, and economically independent,
AI conducts research, surveys, and engages in a variety of other
projects focused on preventing and ending grave abuses of the
rights to physical and mental integrity, freedom of conscience and
expression, and freedom from discrimination. Major policy deci-
sions are taken by AI’s International Council.
Historically, the main focus of AI’s campaigning has been to
free all prisoners of conscience, to ensure a prompt and fair trial
for all political prisoners; to abolish the death penalty, torture,
and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment;
and to end extrajudicial executions and “disappearances.” Over
the years, Amnesty International has expanded this mandate to
encompass human rights abuses committed by nongovernmental
177

bodies and private individuals. It opposes abuses by armed po-
litical groups (in control of territory or operating in opposition to
governments), such as hostage taking, torture, and unlawful
killings. Amnesty International sends fact-finding missions to as-
sess situations on the spot. The delegates might interview prison-
ers, relatives, lawyers, witnesses to human rights violations, and
local human rights activists. They may also observe trials and
meet government officials. The organization monitors newspa-
pers, web sites, and other media outlets.
Anti-Slavery International
Thomas Clarkson House
The Stableyard
Broomgrove Road
London SW9 9TL
United Kingdom
Tel: +44-(0)20-7501-8920
Fax: +44-(0)20-7738-4110
E-mail: info@antislavery.org
Web site: http://www.antislavery.org 
Established in 1839, Anti-Slavery International is the world’s old-
est international human rights organization. It works to eliminate
human trafficking along with child labor, forced and bonded
labor, and traditional slavery. The methods of Anti-Slavery Inter-
national include lobbying governments, supporting research, and
increasing public awareness and education. In addition, Anti-
Slavery International honors individuals or organizations for
courageous long-term campaigning against slavery with its an-
nual Anti-Slavery Award.
Some of the activities undertaken by Anti-Slavery Interna-
tional include urging governments of countries with slavery to
develop and implement measures to end it, lobbying govern-
ments and intergovernmental agencies to make slavery a priority
issue, supporting research to assess the scale of slavery in order to
fight it, and working with local organizations to raise public
awareness.
Bureau for International Narcotics and Law
Enforcement Affairs 
U.S. Department of State
2201 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20520
178
Agencies and Organizations

Tel: (202) 647-4000
Web site: http://www.state.gov/g/inl/ 
The Bureau for International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Af-
fairs (INL) develops and coordinates U.S. international drug and
crime policies and programs. To achieve its goal of disrupting in-
ternational drug trafficking, the INL has developed diplomatic
initiatives, bilateral programs, and multilateral programs that en-
hance countertrafficking efforts in over 150 countries. The INL
also advises the president, secretary of state, and U.S. govern-
ment agencies on initiatives to oppose international narcotics,
human trafficking, human rights abuses, and crime.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives 
U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Public and Governmental Affairs
650 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Room 8290
Washington, DC 20226
Tel: (202) 927-8500
Fax: (202) 927-1083
Web site: http://www.atf.gov/index.htm 
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) is
a preeminent federal law enforcement agency fighting violent
crime in the United States. In terms of fighting trafficking in
firearms on an international scale, ATF has an International Re-
sponse Team (IRT) that participates with the Diplomatic Security
Service of the U.S. Department of State to provide technical and
investigative assistance at international explosives and fire inci-
dents. There have been twenty-four IRT activations since 1991, in-
cluding responses to Peru, Macedonia, Argentina, El Salvador,
Ecuador, Pakistan, and Korea.
Coalition Against Trafficking in Women 
P.O. Box 9338
North Amherst, MA 01059
Fax: (413) 367-9262
Web site: http://www.catwinternational.org
The Coalition Against Trafficking in Women (CATW) is an NGO
that promotes women’s rights by working internationally to com-
bat sexual exploitation in all its forms. Founded in 1988, CATW
was the first international NGO to focus on human trafficking,
Illicit Trafficking
179

especially sex trafficking of women and girls. CATW is composed
of regional networks and of affiliated individuals and groups. It
serves as an umbrella that coordinates and takes direction from
its regional organizations and networks in its work against sexual
exploitation and in support of women’s human rights.
Drug Enforcement Administration 
2401 Jefferson Davis Highway
Alexandria, VA 22301
Tel: (202) 307-1000
Web site: http://www.dea.gov 
The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) has worked
against drug trafficking since its creation in 1973. Its primary re-
sponsibilities include investigation and preparation for the pros-
ecution of major violators of controlled substance laws operating
at interstate and international levels, investigation and prepara-
tion for prosecution of criminals and drug gangs, and manage-
ment of a national drug intelligence program in cooperation with
federal, state, local, and foreign officials to collect, analyze, and
disseminate strategic and operational drug intelligence informa-
tion. Regarding international drug control programs, the DEA is
the U.S. liaison with the United Nations, Interpol, and other or-
ganizations that seek to end the trafficking of drugs.
Europol
P.O. Box 90850
NL-2509 LW The Hague
The Netherlands
Tel: +31-70-302-5000
Fax: +31-70-345-5896
E-mail: info@europol.eu.int
Web site: http://www.europol.eu.int 
Established in 1992, but not fully operational until 1999, Europol is
the EU’s law enforcement organization. It serves as a support serv-
ice for the law enforcement agencies of the EU member states. Eu-
ropol focuses mainly on drug, vehicle, and human trafficking, to-
gether with forgery, money laundering, and terrorism. The agency
is becoming the center for intelligence exchange, development,
analysis, cooperation, and support in relation to the fight against
international organized crime across the Continent. Europol sup-
180
Agencies and Organizations

ports member states by facilitating the exchange of information, in
accordance with national law, between Europol liaison officers
(ELOs) who represent their home countries, by providing opera-
tional analysis in support of member states’ operations, by gener-
ating strategic reports (e.g., threat assessments) and crime analysis
on the basis of information and intelligence supplied by member
states, generated by Europol or gathered from other sources, and
by providing expertise and technical support for investigations
and operations carried out within the EU, under the supervision
and the legal responsibility of the member states concerned.
Foundation Against Trafficking in Women 
P.O. Box 1455
3500 BL Utrecht
The Netherlands 
Tel: +31-30-716044
Fax: +31-30-716084
E-mail: fe@stv.vx.xs4all.nl
Web site: http://www.bayswan.org/FoundTraf.html 
The Foundation Against Trafficking in Women (STV) was initi-
ated in the early 1980s in response to the then highly publicized
issue of prostitution tourism. Women’s organizations, develop-
ment nongovernment organizations, and various action groups,
especially in regions where mass tourism was becoming the al-
ternative for development, were awakening to the fact that not
only the natural resources but also the human resources, namely,
the young women, of their countries were being traded for for-
eign exchange. Officially set up in 1987, STV aimed its first cam-
paigns at developing and refining national legislation and litiga-
tion for addressing trafficking in women. STV is active in
advocacy and campaigning as well as conducting research and
training. In 1994, STV participated in launching the Global Al-
liance Against Traffic in Women (GAATW).
Global Alliance Against Traffic in Women 
P.O. Box 36
Bangkok Noi Post Office
Bangkok 10700
Thailand
Tel: +66-2-864-1427/8
Fax: +66-2-864-1637
Illicit Trafficking
181

E-mail: gaatw@gaatw.org
Web site: http://www.gaatw.org 
The Global Alliance Against Traffic in Women (GAATW) is a non-
governmental human rights network comprising individuals and
organizations worldwide. Since its formation in 1994 in Chiang
Mai, Thailand, GAATW has coordinated, organized, and facili-
tated work on issues related to trafficking in women and
women’s labor migration in virtually every region of the world.
GAATW advocates for the inclusion of legal protection of the
human rights of trafficking victims in domestic laws and policies
to provide direct support to those in need. One of the founding
members of the GAATW was the Foundation Against Trafficking
in Women (STV).
Human Rights Watch
350 Fifth Avenue
34th floor
New York, NY 10118-3299
Tel: (212) 290-4700
Fax: (212) 736-1300
E-mail: hrwnyc@hrw.org
Web site: http://www.hrw.org 
Originating in 1978 as Helsinki Watch, a name that reflected its
sole mission of monitoring compliance with the 1975 Helsinki Ac-
cords, Human Rights Watch has evolved into the largest human
rights organization based in the United States. The main work of
Human Rights Watch is researching and reporting human rights
abuses including human trafficking. Human Rights Watch cur-
rently conducts investigations in more than seventy countries
around the world.
International Narcotics Control Board
Vienna International Centre
Room E-1339
P.O. Box 500
A-1400 Vienna
Austria
Tel: +43-1-26060-0
Fax: +43-1-26060-5867
E-mail: secretariat@incb.org
Web site: http://www.incb.org 
182
Agencies and Organizations

The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 established the
International Narcotics Control Board (INCB), which did not be-
come operational until 1968. Although it is financed by the
United Nations and its members are elected by the United Na-
tions Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC), the INCB is an in-
dependent organization. The primary work of the INCB is to im-
plement and serve as a quasijudicial control body for the drug
conventions of the UN. The INCB also helps correct weaknesses
found in international drug trafficking control systems as well as
assessing the chemicals used to produce trafficked drugs.
International Organization for Migration 
17, Route des Morillons
CH-1211 Geneva 19
Switzerland
Tel: +41-22-717-9111
Fax: +41-22-798-6150
E-mail: info@iom.int
Web site: http://www.iom.int 
Founded in 1951 as the Provisional Intergovernmental Committee
for the Movement of Migrants from Europe (PICMME), the Inter-
national Organization for Migration (IOM) has become the leading
international organization for migration. The IOM assists govern-
ments and nongovernmental organizations through rapid human-
itarian responses to sudden migration flows, postemergency return
and reintegration programs, rendering help to migrants in distress,
and training officials. In addition, the IOM pursues extensive re-
search and informational campaigns as well as programs provid-
ing counseling and assistance to victims of trafficking. The IOM
also aids governments looking to improve their countertrafficking
capabilities. Currently, the IOM has over seventy active counter-
trafficking programs and projects throughout the world.
International Peace Research Institute, Oslo
Fuglehauggata 11
NO-0260 Oslo
Norway
Tel: +47-22-54-77-00
Tel: +47-22-54-77-10
Fax: +47-22-54-77-01
E-mail: info@prio.no
Web site: http://www.prio.no 
Illicit Trafficking
183

The International Peace Research Institute (PRIO) was founded
in 1959 and became a fully independent institute in 1966. It was
one of the first centers of peace research in the world, and it is
Norway’s only peace research institute. Its founding and early
influence were instrumental in projecting the idea of peace re-
search. Scholarly research is at the core of all Institute activities.
Research at PRIO concentrates on the driving forces behind vio-
lent conflict and on ways in which peace can be built, main-
tained, and spread. In addition to theoretical and empirical re-
search, PRIO also conducts policy-oriented activities and
engages in the search for solutions in cases of actual or potential
violent conflict, including issues surrounding human trafficking
and trafficking in weapons.
Interpol
General Secretariat
200, quai Charles de Gaulle
69006 Lyon
France
Drug trafficking e-mail: drugs@interpol.int
Human trafficking e-mail: children@interpol.int
Web site: http://www.interpol.int/ 
Since its inception in 1923 as the International Criminal Police
Commission, Interpol has become the world’s largest interna-
tional police organization with 182 member states. Interpol pro-
vides three core services to member states: a unique global police
communication system, a range of criminal databases and analyt-
ical services, and proactive support for police operations
throughout the world. Participation in Interpol is facilitated
through National Central Bureaus (NCBs), which are located in a
law enforcement agency within each member state. Interpol pri-
orities include providing information to law enforcement and
conducting research in the areas of human trafficking, drug-re-
lated crime, terrorism, financial and high-tech crime, criminal or-
ganizations, fugitive investigations, and other activities that affect
public safety.
La Strada—The Foundation Against Trafficking in Women
P.O. Box 5
PL. 00-956 Warsaw 10
Poland
Tel: (48-22) 628-3177
184
Agencies and Organizations

Fax: (48-22) 628-3177
Web site: http://free.ngo.pl/lastrada/page1.html 
La Strada—The Foundation Against Trafficking in Women, was
registered in September 1996. It grew out of a program, which
began in September 1995, for preventing trafficking in women in
Central and Eastern Europe. This program was itself founded on
the initiative of the Dutch Foundation Against Trafficking in
Women (STV). The objectives of La Strada are to distribute infor-
mation on the crime of trafficking in women, in particular young
girls, as well as to provide support in solving problems of the vic-
tims who return to Poland. La Strada works in Belarus, Hungary,
Moldova, Romania, Bulgaria, Poland, Russian Federation, Czech
Republic, Slovakia, and Ukraine.
National Institute of Justice 
810 Seventh Street, NW
Washington, DC 20531
Tel: (202) 307-2942
Fax: (202) 307-6394
National Criminal Justice Reference Service:
(301) 519-5500, (800) 851-3420
Office of Justice Programs Online Research Information
Center: (202) 307-6742
Web site: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/ 
The National Institute of Justice (NIJ) is the research, develop-
ment, and evaluation agency of the U.S. Department of Justice
and is dedicated to researching crime control and justice issues.
NIJ provides independent, evidence-based knowledge and tools
to meet the challenges of crime and justice, particularly at the
state and local levels.
The NIJ director, appointed by the president and confirmed
by the Senate, establishes the Institute’s objectives, guided by the
priorities of the Office of Justice Programs (OJP), the U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice, and the needs of the field. The Institute actively
solicits the views of criminal justice and other professionals and
researchers to inform its search for the knowledge and tools to
guide policy and practice. NIJ also sponsors the National Crimi-
nal Justice Reference Service (NCJRS), an international clearing-
house of criminal justice information.
In 1997, NIJ established the International Center in response to
the rapid globalization of crime. The mission of the International
Illicit Trafficking
185

Center is fourfold: to stimulate, facilitate, evaluate, and dissemi-
nate both national and international criminal justice research and
information. Areas of research of particular interest to the Interna-
tional Center are trafficking in humans and transnational organ-
ized crime. NIJ works closely with the U.S. State Department and
the Criminal Division of the Department of Justice. NIJ and Inter-
national Center staff also participate in United Nations committees,
panels, and expert working groups on the subject, including the
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime.
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe 
Headquarters
Karntner Ring 5-7
4th Floor
1010, Vienna
Austria
Tel: +43-1-514-36-0
Fax: +43-1-514-36-96
E-mail: info@osce.org
Web site: http://www.osce.org
OSCE’s Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights
Aleje Ujazdowskie 19
00-557 Warsaw
Poland
Tel: +48-22-520-06-00
Fax: +48-22-520-06-05
E-mail: trafficking@odihr.pl
Web site: http://www.osce.org/odihr 
The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE) is the largest regional security organization in the world
with fifty-five participating states from Europe, Central Asia, and
North America. It is active in early warning, conflict prevention,
crisis management, and postconflict rehabilitation. The OSCE ap-
proach to security is comprehensive and cooperative: compre-
hensive in dealing with a wide range of security-related issues in-
cluding arms control, preventive diplomacy, confidence- and
security-building measures, human rights, democratization, elec-
tion monitoring and economic and environmental security; coop-
erative in the sense that all OSCE participating states have equal
status, and decisions are based on consensus.
186
Agencies and Organizations

The OSCE operates the Office for Democratic Institutions
and Human Rights (ODIHR). Created in 1990, the ODIHR is the
principal institution of the OSCE responsible for the security of
the individual human being. To this end, the ODIHR runs nu-
merous programs including an antitrafficking program that em-
phasizes victims’ rights. The program also focuses on awareness-
raising as well as legislative review and reform.
Organization of American States 
17th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20006
Tel: (202) 458-3000
Human trafficking e-mail: spcim@oas.org
Drug trafficking e-mail: oidcicad@oas.org
Web site: www.oas.org 
The Organization of American States (OAS), chartered in 1948,
consists of thirty-five independent countries of the Western
Hemisphere. The OAS has two antitrafficking commissions. The
Inter-American Commission of Women (CIM), which works
against human trafficking, was established in 1928 and has be-
come an OAS specialized organization. The Inter-American Drug
Abuse Control Commission (CICAD), established in 1948, is an
OAS agency committed to reducing the trafficking of illicit drugs
and related firearms.
Through the OAS Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Com-
mission (CICAD), the nations of the hemisphere are strengthen-
ing antidrug laws, enhancing prevention programs, and taking
other steps to stem the trafficking of illegal narcotics, related
chemicals, and firearms. The Multilateral Evaluation Mechanism
(MEM), which monitors progress against drugs in each country
and the region as a whole, has significantly increased cooperation
on this issue. By sharing knowledge on accomplishments, obsta-
cles, and strategies, the countries develop a clearer picture of
needs and weaknesses and identify areas that warrant closer co-
ordination, better legislation, more research, or additional re-
sources.
Polaris Project
P.O. Box 77892
Washington, DC 20013
Tel: (202) 547-7909
Fax: (202) 547-6654
Illicit Trafficking
187

E-mail: info@PolarisProject.org
Web site: http://www.polarisproject.org 
Polaris Project is a multicultural grassroots nonprofit agency
combating sex trafficking and modern-day slavery. Based in the
United States and Japan, Polaris Project works closely with sur-
vivors and community members to identify victims, provide
services, conduct advocacy and technical training, and raise
awareness. Polaris Project was founded in 2002 to address the
vital need for direct intervention, grassroots advocacy, and sur-
vivor support to combat human trafficking. It is one of the largest
grassroots antitrafficking organizations in the United States and
Japan. The organization has approximately 3,000 members and
supporters in the United States and around the world.
The Protection Project
Johns Hopkins University-SAIS
1717 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Suite 515
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: (202) 663-5896
Fax: (202) 663-5899
E-mail: Protection_Project@jhu.edu
Web site: http://www.protectionproject.org 
Located at the Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced In-
ternational Studies, the Protection Project is a legal institute that
conducts research on human trafficking. The Project documents
and disseminates information about the scope of the problem of
trafficking in persons, especially women and children, with a
focus on national and international laws, case law, and implica-
tions of trafficking on U.S. and international foreign policy. The
Project educates and advises the public and government officials
through research, participation in conferences, publications, and
raising awareness. Along with a comprehensive trafficking data-
base, which includes a collection of trafficking laws from over 190
countries, the Protection Project provides an annual trafficking re-
port, a law enforcement survey, and model countertrafficking leg-
islation.
United Nations
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
Vienna International Centre
188
Agencies and Organizations

P.O. Box 500
A-1400 Vienna
Austria
Tel: +43-1-26060-0
Fax: +43-1-26060-5866
E-mail: unodc@unodc.org
Web site: http://www.unodc.org 
The name “United Nations,” coined by U.S. president Franklin D.
Roosevelt, was first used in the “Declaration by United Nations”
of January 1, 1942, during World War II, when representatives of
twenty-six nations pledged their governments to continue fight-
ing together against the Axis powers.
In 1945, representatives of fifty countries met in San Fran-
cisco at the United Nations Conference on International Organi-
zation to draw up the United Nations Charter. Those delegates
deliberated on the basis of proposals worked out by the repre-
sentatives of China, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and
the United States at Dumbarton Oaks in August–October 1944.
The Charter was signed on June 26, 1945, by the representatives
of the fifty countries. Poland, which was not represented at the
Conference, signed it later and became one of the original fifty-
one member states. The United Nations officially came into exis-
tence on October 24, 1945.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
created in 1997, has become a global leader against international
crime with 500 staff members located in its twenty-one field of-
fices throughout the world. The UNODC has numerous counter-
drug-trafficking operations, including the Illicit Crop Monitor-
ing Programme (ICMP), the Alternative Development
Programme, and the Global Programme Against Money Laun-
dering (GPML). In its work against human trafficking, the
UNODC created the Global Programme against Trafficking in
Human Beings (GPAT).
Witness
353 Broadway
New York, NY 10013
Tel: (212) 274-1664
Fax: (212) 274-1262
E-mail: orders@witness.org
Web site: http://www.witness.org 
Illicit Trafficking
189

Witness is a human rights program that encourages the pursuit
of equality and fairness through the production of provocative
video documentary material. Witness strengthens local activists
by giving them video cameras and training in production and
advocacy. The organization uses an arsenal of computers, imag-
ing and editing software, satellite phones, and e-mail in the
struggle for justice. Witness has worked with over 150 partner
groups from fifty countries to use video to overcome political,
economic, and physical barriers, and to expose human rights
abuses to the world via television, grassroots advocacy, and In-
ternet broadcasting.
190
Agencies and Organizations

7
Print and Nonprint
Resources 
Print Resources
Books and Articles
Setting the Stage: Trafficking Issues in a
Global Context 
Edwards, Adam, and Peter Gill (eds.). 2003. Transnational Or-
ganised Crime: Perspectives on Global Security. London: Rout-
ledge. 290 pages.
In the 1990s, transnational organized crime rose rapidly up the
policy-making agenda, including becoming the subject of a spe-
cial UN Conference convened in Naples in 1994. The initial sense
was that transnational organized crime might most simply be ex-
plained by the demise of the USSR and the search by security
agencies for a new threat by which to justify their existence. It has
since been accepted that transnational crime was developing for
decades in various parts of the world, particularly as pertains to
narcotics trafficking. This volume argues that the various security
threats must be examined in the context in which they occur and
that policy measures must follow suit. Many of the collected ma-
terials concern themselves with enforcement measures. For ex-
ample, one paper presents transnational organized crime as seen
191

from a police perspective. Other chapters address controlling
drug trafficking and sex trafficking in the European Union. Coun-
tering money laundering, including terrorist financing, is ad-
dressed, and a general discussion of the legal regulation of
transnational organized crime is presented.
Farer, Tom (ed.). 1999. Transnational Crime in the Americas. New
York: Routledge. 311 pages.
The first half of this volume of collected works provides a frame-
work through which to consider criminal organizations and nar-
cotics trafficking in Latin America. It begins with a broad
overview of transnational organized crime in the global arena,
outlining the threats of criminal organizations, the actors in-
volved, and the preconditions that allowed for their rise. Other
critical topics presented in the first five articles include money
laundering’s central role in fueling global crime, law enforcement
concerns regarding countering a rapidly growing and diffuse
threat, and the European perspective on transnational groups as
national borders continue to fall with the expansion of the Euro-
pean Union. The second half of the volume concentrates on nar-
cotics trafficking issues primarily in Mexico, Colombia, and Bo-
livia. The editor maintains that, with the exception of the former
Soviet Union, nowhere has the salience of organized crime been
as high as in the Americas and nowhere else has it so complicated
interstate relations.
Friman, H. Richard, and Peter Andreas (eds.) 1999. The Illicit
Global Economy and State Power. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Lit-
tlefield. 207 pages.
This volume puts transnational crime issues in a context of creat-
ing a challenge to state power. A critical question that any re-
searcher will have to consider is: How does transnational crime
erode the ability of nations to maintain effective governance? The
illegal flow of goods and services across borders—trafficking of
drugs, migrants, weapons, toxic waste, and dirty money—is in-
creasingly fueling both conflict and cooperation among states and
nonstate actors. The editors note that, in a sea of writing on
transnational crime, relatively little remains to be said of turf
wars, increasing firepower of criminals, attacks on state enforce-
ment agencies, corruption of political officials, and so on, in the
context of the illicit global economy. Whereas some contributors
192
Print and Nonprint Resources

claim that the retreat of the state is selective and at times strategic
(in control over tax evasion and capital flight versus money laun-
dering), others believe that transnational crime groups have
coopted or displaced the state to the extreme point of facilitating
the emergence of a new form of nonstate authoritarianism. The
last three of the seven chapters are detailed considerations of
criminal activity and its impact on market dynamics in three
countries: Mexico, Colombia, and Japan.
Godson, Roy (ed.). 2003. Menace to Society: Political-Criminal
Collaboration Around the World. New Brunswick, NJ: Transac-
tion Publishers. 301 pages.
Corruption is the fuel of organized crime and many of the traf-
ficking activities engaged in, whether on the domestic or interna-
tional scale. Trafficking of all types is made possible by the ex-
change of money and favors in return for turning a blind eye.
Godson has gathered leading scholars in the study of transna-
tional crime to comment on the state of crime and corruption in
countries that are in many ways centers of trafficking activities.
These countries include the United States, Colombia, Nigeria,
Mexico, Russia, Ukraine, China (including Hong Kong), and Tai-
wan. The collaboration of the political establishment with the
criminal underworld increasingly undermines the rule of law,
human rights, and economic development in many parts of the
world. Godson calls this the political-criminal nexus (PCN). As he
notes, it is a problem in many parts of the world, in some coun-
tries a chronic problem, in other places more acute and violent,
and it often dominates political, economic, and social life. In his
introduction, Godson lays out the significance of the problem and
explains why it has now become of major importance in regional
and global trends. He goes on to diagnose contemporary factors
or causes that facilitate and exacerbate the problem.
Liddick, Donald R. 2004. The Global Underworld: Transnational
Crime and the United States. Westport, CT: Praeger. 159 pages.
In what is essentially a brief introduction to transnational crime
issues, the author gives a bird’s-eye view of the threat facing the
United States and Canada. He starts with a brief discussion of
transnational crime, providing a useful conceptualization of the
problem. From there, various criminal organizations are con-
sidered, including Yakuza, Triads, outlaw motorcycle gangs,
Illicit Trafficking 193

Colombian and Mexican drug cartels, Italian-based groups, as
well as groups that have emerged from the former Soviet Union.
In Chapter Three, titled “Smuggling, Transnational Theft, and
‘Eco-Crime,’” Liddick provides brief overviews of drug traffick-
ing, arms trafficking, alien smuggling and trafficking in people,
trafficking human organs, transnational theft, and environmental
crimes. Money laundering, identified as the most critical element
making transnational crime possible, is summarized in terms of
actual cases and mechanisms for its control. The author concludes
with a summary of legal tools and organizations in place to
counter transnational crime.
Martin, John M., and Anne T. Romano. 1992. Multinational
Crime: Terrorism, Espionage, Drug and Arms Trafficking. Thou-
sand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 162 pages.
This book considers multinational systemic crime—crimes by
various kinds of organizations that operate across national
boundaries and in two or more countries simultaneously. This
concept refers to a variety of criminal behavior systems including,
but not limited to, the four crimes examined in this volume: ter-
rorism, espionage, drug trafficking, and arms trafficking. These
offenses carry strong connotations of evil, and yet outrage quickly
becomes justification when, for example, espionage is carried out
in the name of national security.
Reichel, Philip (ed.). 2005. Handbook of Transnational Crime and
Justice. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. 512 pages.
Editor Philip Reichel, well respected for his work on compara-
tive criminal justice and transnational crime issues, has brought
together renowned scholars from around the world to offer var-
ious perspectives providing global coverage of the increasingly
transnational nature of crime and the attempts to provide coop-
erative cross-national responses. This volume not only has a
comprehensive introduction to the topic of transnational crime
but also provides specific examples such as international terror-
ism, drug trafficking, and money laundering to illustrate this
ever expanding phenomenon. The handbook also examines
cross-national and international efforts by police, courts, inter-
national agencies, and correctional authorities to deal with
transnational crime. Part IV concludes the book by addressing
emerging issues in transnational crime and justice, with partic-
194
Print and Nonprint Resources

ular attention given to transnational organized crime in all re-
gions of the world.
Seita, Alex Y. 1997. “The Role of Market Forces in Transnational
Violence.” Albany Law Review, 60: 635–651.
Seita analyzes how the market forces of supply and demand can
lead to transnational violence. Globalization and the lowering of
trade barriers have made it easier to move market commodities
across national boundaries. However, this has also had a strong
impact on the increase in transnational violence. Using the exam-
ple of child sexual exploitation, he describes trafficking in per-
sons as an example of a “violence commodity,” concluding that
the price and output for such trafficking are market driven.
Human Trafficking and Smuggling Issues
General 
Bales, Kevin. 1999. Disposable People: New Slavery in the Global
Economy. Berkeley: University of California Press. 298 pages.
The author, a lecturer at the University of Surrey in England, has
traveled the world examining various conditions that enslave
vast numbers of people in the twenty-first century. His journey
took him to Thailand, Mauritania, Brazil, Pakistan, and India.
Within the larger context of slavery, he considers trafficking in
prostitutes and trafficking in slaves, as well as key issues that
make trafficking possible such as false passports, extensive
bribery of border guards, false work contracts, and fraudulent
visas. Bales cites a 1993 Human Rights Watch report on traffick-
ing, saying that the trafficking of Burmese women and girls into
Thailand is appalling in its efficiency and ruthlessness. As
HIV/AIDS becomes an even larger problem in the region, he
says, traffickers search deeper into the country as virgins bring a
higher price and pose less threat of exposure to sexually trans-
mitted disease. He reaches the disturbing conclusion that national
laws on trafficking are vague, punishments are slight, coopera-
tion between countries is rare, and criminal gangs find it easier to
transport women than drugs.
Campagna, Daniel I. S., and Donald L. Poffenberger. 1987. The Sex-
ual Trafficking in Children. Westport, CT: Auburn House. 264 pages.
Illicit Trafficking 195

This text investigates the components of the child sex trade, vic-
tims, victimizers, and the business aspects, using information ob-
tained from five years of field research. Case studies, interviews
with pimps, child sex workers, and personnel from various agen-
cies charged with stopping the child sex trade, as well as field ob-
servations of the sex trade at work are included to provide multi-
ple perspectives. The division of the book allows for a detailed
discussion of the various areas encompassed by the child sex
trade, including pedophilia, sex tourism, indenturing, hustling,
and child pornography. One unique aspect of this book is that it
takes a multidisciplinary approach to the topic, combining psy-
chological considerations, law enforcement concerns, victims’ as-
sistance concerns, and judicial concerns.
Demleitner, Nora V. 1994. “Forced Prostitution: Naming an Inter-
national Offense.”Fordham International Law Journal 18:
163–197.
According to Demleitner, the difficulty in prosecuting and pun-
ishing the traffickers of women and children derives from a “gen-
eral unwillingness to recognize forced prostitution as an offence
in its own right.” In fact, the acts that comprise the crime of forced
prostitution are labeled as individual offenses instead of being ac-
knowledged as a composite crime. Demleitner suggests attaching
the label “forced prostitution” to the whole range of abuses it en-
compasses and recognizing the procurer or financier as well as
the customer as offenders. This will make it easier to prosecute
the offense domestically, she argues.
Hotaling, Norma, and Leslie Levitas-Martin. 2002. “Increased De-
mand Resulting in the Flourishing Recruitment and Trafficking of
Women and Girls: Related Child Sexual Abuse and Violence
Against Women.” Hastings Women’s Law Journal 13: 117–125.
This article discusses the demand for women and children in the
international sex trade and the prevalence of child sexual abuse in
the commercial sex industry. Hotaling and Levitas-Martin specif-
ically examine the decriminalization of trafficked women forced
into prostitution, the consequences of criminalizing forced prosti-
tution, aftercare needs for victims of trafficking, and the demand
for the commercial sex industry.
196
Print and Nonprint Resources

Kyle, David, and Rey Koslowski. 2001. Global Human Smug-
gling: Comparative Perspectives. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
University Press. 374 pages.
This volume explores the global dimensions of human smuggling
in several forms and regions, examining its deep social, economic,
and cultural roots and its broad political consequences. Part I dis-
cusses the sociohistorical context and the contemporary diversity
of human smuggling of migrants, asylum seekers, and those who
are tricked into slavery, including the conflicting role of states and
corrupt state officials as contributing to the problem. In Part II,
the authors present high-profile case studies that include U.S.-
Mexican border smuggling, the international business of traffick-
ing women from the former Soviet Union, and the origins and so-
cial organization of human smuggling as a global business from
China and Southeast Asia. In Part III, contributors examine the
politics of human smuggling, looking more closely at the legal
construction of victimized women trafficked into slavery, the so-
cial construction of smuggled immigrants as threats to the social
order, and the sanctioning of unauthorized employment of illegal
immigrants.
Williams, Phil (ed.). 1999. Illegal Immigration and Commercial
Sex: The New Slave Trade. London: Frank Cass. 241 pages.
During the 1990s illegal immigration became a global problem of
immense proportions. South Africa, for example, is host to be-
tween 1 and 2 million illegal immigrants, while it is believed that
over 100,000 Chinese citizens illegally enter the United States
every year. With migration flows from the developing world to
the developed, many countries have become both transshipment
centers and unwilling hosts for migrants en route to their final
destinations. During their travel, illegal immigrants are easily vic-
timized, and, even when they arrive, many are forced into a life
of hardship and crime. This volume studies the role of criminal
organizations in human commodity trafficking, examining the
problem from a global vantage point and from a variety of re-
gional perspectives. It also assesses the adequacy of existing pol-
icy responses and identifies additional measures that need to be
taken.
Illicit Trafficking 197

Historical
Cordasco, Francesco. 1981. The White Slave Trade and the Immi-
grants. Detroit: Blaine Ethridge Books. 118 pages.
On the afternoon of November 21, 1902, New York newspapers
carried the story of large-scale vice raids in Philadelphia that had
revealed the existence of an international ring trafficking in
young girls. It was said that the ring had its headquarters in Ger-
many, with branches in Philadelphia and New York, and that its
business was to supply girls for public houses in those two cities,
in Baltimore, Chicago, and elsewhere. As with the Janney book
(described later), the reader is reminded that international traf-
ficking in women is not a new phenomenon. Other sources have
shown that the white slave trade was an integral part of America
in the period of the great migrations of the nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries. The white slave trade was, if anything, an in-
digenous enterprise; the immigrants and their women were only
peripherally related to the criminal activity. There had been a fed-
eral law on the statute books since 1875 that prohibited the im-
portation of women for purposes of prostitution and provided
penalties for such importation. Cordasco presents all of the major
areas of interest, including recruiting, methods of importation,
the system of exploitation, and profits derived from trafficking
activity. His introduction lays out the context including the rea-
sons for the business and the extent of trafficking activity. The sec-
ond half of the book presents a 1909 report prepared by the U.S.
Senate’s Immigration Commission on the Importation and Har-
boring of Women for Immoral Purposes.
Dunbar, Michelle O. P. 1999–2000. “The Past, Present, and Future
of International Trafficking in Women for Prostitution.” Buffalo
Women’s Law Journal 8: 103–128.
In addition to reviewing the history of trafficking in women for
prostitution, Dunbar emphasizes that more effort must be exerted
on the domestic level in order to put a dent in the thriving busi-
ness of trafficking in women. International conventions must be
evaluated in terms of the difference between international traf-
ficking and forced prostitution, and enforced to a greater degree
in order to change the global sex industry. Traffickers must be
prosecuted and brought to justice by the proposed international
criminal court.
198
Print and Nonprint Resources

Janney, O. Edward. 1911. The White Slave Traffic in America. Bal-
timore, MD: Lord Baltimore Press. 201 pages.
The initial attraction of this book is that it was written almost 100
years ago, reminding the reader that while the scope of human
trafficking may be far greater today, the trade in human beings to
the United States is not a new challenge by any means. The au-
thor was chairman of the National Vigilance Committee for the
Suppression of the White Slave Traffic. Dr. Janney outlines the
three major players in the traffic of humans—the procurer, the im-
porter or exporter, and the so-called keeper of the house. Janney
reports in detail the process by which the victim—most often
women for the purposes of prostitution—were lured into a life of
slavery, frequently attracted to the procurer by promises of high
incomes and a better life, a common motive in human trafficking
today. Janney also discusses the traffic in women on the Pacific
Coast, particularly Japanese and Chinese women. The last part of
the book is dedicated to a discussion of the suppression and pre-
vention of the white slave traffic.
Regional
Altink, Sietske. 1996. Stolen Lives: Trading Women into Sex and
Slavery. Binghamton, NY: Haworth Press. 180 pages.
Although human trafficking is a global issue, a regional divide is
usually seen in the discussion of this topic. However, this book
seems to touch on most of the trafficking hot spots including the
Netherlands, Thailand, Colombia, Greece, Belgium, and the for-
mer Yugoslavia, to name a few. Altink peers into the gritty world
of trafficking, looking at how young women in search of a better
life are persuaded to leave their countries only to end up stranded
and forced into prostitution and/or domestic slavery once they
reach their destination. These girls are placed in a desperate situ-
ation: they are denied the better life they sought but are keenly
aware that they are alone and illegal aliens in a foreign country
with little or no recourse. Also addressed are smuggling routes
and ways that human traffickers avoid the law.
Chin, Ko-lin. 1999. Smuggled Chinese: Clandestine Immigration
to the United States. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 221
pages.
Illicit Trafficking 199

Chin presents an extensive study of the smuggling process, con-
ducting interviews at points of origin in China as well as destina-
tions in the United States. The first three chapters that make up
Part I lay the groundwork, explaining the push-pull factors influ-
encing the decisions of those smuggled, as well as the character-
istics of groups involved in the activity. Although, strictly speak-
ing, smuggling and trafficking differ, it is important to include
Chin’s work in a discussion of transnational crime and the mech-
anisms by which the smuggling process is undertaken. Part II
consists of three chapters that undertake a discussion of how
people are actually moved from China to the United States, de-
tailing air, sea, and land routes and the logistics involved. Finally,
in Part III, the author looks at the last major stage of the process—
at the destination point—including conditions of safe houses and
the payment of smuggling debts. The last chapter presents policy
issues and recommendations for stemming the tide of Chinese
human smuggling.
Guinn, David E., and Elissa Steglich. 2003. In Modern Bondage:
Sex Trafficking in the Americas. Ardsley, NY: Transnational Pub-
lishers. 460 pages.
Researched by staffers at the International Human Rights Law In-
stitute at DePaul University College of Law in Chicago, this vol-
ume provides an overview of Central America, including the so-
cioeconomic context of poverty and migration as well as a look at
legislation and other response mechanisms to the problem of sex
trafficking. Countries examined are Belize, Costa Rica, Domini-
can Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and
Panama. National reports submitted by these countries detail the
types of trafficking, means of recruiting, transferring, and har-
boring victims, and conditions they are kept under, and they also
provide examples of cases. There is a section on the enforcement
mechanisms currently in place as well as shortcomings in the
governmental apparatus. An extensive appendix includes a list of
the institutions and organizations in each country that were con-
sulted for the project, including government and nongovernment
organizations. An index of the 200 United Nations reports that
were used in the study is provided.
Hauber, Laurie. 1998. “The Trafficking of Women for Prostitution:
A Growing Problem within the European Union.” Boston College
International and Comparative Law Review 21: 183–199.
200
Print and Nonprint Resources

Hauber examines the problem of trafficking in women for the
purpose of sexual exploitation within the European Union, not-
ing that it is either directly or indirectly addressed in EU resolu-
tions and by individual member states. The EU suggested formu-
lating a common strategy for combating trafficking as early as
1989 and continues to address the problem within the commu-
nity. Hauber concludes that the EU must develop a comprehen-
sive response that includes both legal and nonlegal measures. She
suggests that the necessary provisions in laws should include law
enforcement cooperation, witness protection, victim assistance,
and victim rehabilitation.
Human Rights Watch. 2000. Owed Justice: Thai Women Traf-
ficked into Debt Bondage in Japan. New York: Human Rights
Watch. 227 pages.
The trafficking of women from Thailand to Japan occurs within
the context of large-scale regional migration in Asia, which has
grown dramatically over the last two decades. The vast majority
of this migration is illegal, as Japan accepts only a very limited
number of legal migrants each year. In practice, the high demand
for foreign workers in Japan has fostered the growth of large
transnational networks able to bypass legal barriers and facilitate
illegal migration into Japan. Three chapters deal with responses
to trafficking in persons: one section on the response of the Japan-
ese government, one on that of the Thai government, and one on
the international response to the Thai-Japanese traffic problem.
The book offers profiles of trafficking victims and details the re-
cruitment and export process from Thailand to Japan and the con-
ditions of servitude under which the women are held in Japan.
Human Rights Watch. 1995. Rape for Profit: Trafficking of Nepali
Girls and Women to India’s Brothels. New York: Human Rights
Watch. 90 pages.
Human Rights Watch uses this book to describe the conditions of
Nepali girls who are either deceived or simply kidnapped into a
world of forced prostitution. The abuse these women suffer, in-
cluding rape, physical abuse, emotional abuse, and exposure to
the AIDS virus, are chronicled in the text. Aggravating the already
desperate situation of these girls is the complicit role the Nepali
and Indian governments play in the sex/slave trade. The volume
concludes with policy suggestions aimed at both governments to
Illicit Trafficking 201

try to curb their silent support of the trafficking of Nepalese girls
into the sex trade, to help end the abuse these women face, and to
enforce legal ramifications on those who perpetuate the cycle.
Malarek, Victor. 2004. The Natashas: Inside the New Global Sex
Trade. New York: Arcade Publishing. 320 pages.
After the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, human trafficking in
young girls and women expanded as the social structure eroded
and organized crime gained more power. The author looks at
how young women, believing that they will be employed as wait-
resses, models, and nannies, are deceived into a life of forced
prostitution where they are considered “expendable.” Malarek
often uses personal testimony from girls who have lived through
this nightmare to further his explanation. He also discusses cur-
rent efforts to curb the problem but is well aware that one of the
reasons for the perpetuation of the problem is a high level of com-
plicity and corruption found in various institutions.
Smith, Paul J. (ed.) 1997. Human Smuggling: Chinese Migrant
Trafficking and the Challenge to America’s Immigration Tradi-
tion. Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and International
Studies. 207 pages.
Despite the amount of press that has exposed the smuggling of
Chinese migrants into the United States, the situation persists.
This text examines how this problem continues, utilizing a com-
plex and intricate network of smugglers that spans across more
than thirty countries and generates hundreds of millions of dol-
lars annually. Also discussed are influencing factors, such as un-
employment rates and the overwhelming pressures that exist in
the most populous country in the world.
Stoecker, Sally, and Louise I. Shelley (eds.) 2004. Human Traffic
and Transnational Crime: Eurasian and American Perspectives.
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. 161 pages.
A conservative estimate of the extent of human trafficking places
the number of annual global victims somewhere around 2 million
people. Trafficking in people is believed to be the third largest
trafficking concern, after drugs and arms. The present volume fo-
cuses on the trafficking hot spots of Russia and Ukraine. Seeking
to further understand the motivations as well as how the problem
is commonly understood and conceptualized, the editors com-
202
Print and Nonprint Resources

piled a collection that not only discusses trafficking as a crime in
general, but identifies its elements, examines trends, compares
smuggling between regions, and attempts to decipher the fact
and fiction of human trafficking in this region. Policy implica-
tions and legislative attempts to curb human trafficking are also
addressed.
Narcotics Trafficking
Bagley, Bruce Michael. 1997. Drug Trafficking Research in the
Americas: An Annotated Bibliography. Miami, FL: North-South
Center Press. 455 pages.
This volume provides a guide to the ever-expanding drug-
related literature, concentrating on the most important, relevant
sources chosen by a collection of scholars, analysts, and practi-
tioners from a variety of disciplines. This multidisciplinary,
multinational approach critically assesses the current social sci-
ence literature on a complex and highly contentious issue in
U.S.–Latin American relations. It is the second in a series of three
volumes resulting from the North-South Center Drug Trafficking
Task Force, cosponsored by the North-South Center and the
Graduate School of International Studies, University of Miami,
and the Centro de Estudios Internacionales, Universidad de los
Andes, Bogotá.
Clawson, Patrick, and Rensselaer W. Lee, III. 1998. The Andean
Cocaine Industry. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 292 pages.
Basing their findings largely on field research, economist Claw-
son and political analyst Lee offer a thorough overview and
analysis of the cocaine industry in Colombia, Peru, and Bolivia.
Convinced that the United States cannot stop the Andean co-
caine trade and that what ultimately happens will depend more
on local politics than on U.S. intervention, they examine cocaine
use; cocaine trafficking; the effects of the industry on Andean so-
cieties, economies, and politics; and realistic policy options for
shrinking the industry. Among some of their interesting find-
ings: cocaine revenues in Peru and Bolivia are less than 6 percent
of gross national product; for every $100 of drugs sold in the
United States, the federal government spends $60 trying to con-
trol distribution.
Illicit Trafficking 203

Fazey, C. S. J. 2003. “The Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the
United Nations International Drug Control Programme: Politics,
Policies and Prospect for Change.” International Journal of Drug
Policy 14 (2):155–169.
The author, a former senior officer of the United Nations Interna-
tional Drug Control Programme (UNDCP), shows how Commis-
sion on Narcotic Drugs (CND) meetings are manipulated in the
interests of seventeen developed countries that largely fund the
UNDCP. However, these major donors are not united on policy or
on how to apply the UN drug Conventions, so CND decisions re-
flect the lowest level of disagreement, with major splits on policy
ignored. The paper shows how inherent conflict between special-
ists and generalists plus an eclectic mixture of nationalities and
abilities have compounded problems of leadership and manage-
ment.
Fowler, Thomas B. 1996, June. “The International Narcotics Trade:
Can It Be Stopped by Interdiction?” Journal of Policy Modeling
18 (3): 233–270.
A dynamic model of the illegal drug business indicates that feed-
back mechanisms exist that will thwart interdiction efforts by sta-
bilizing price and street supply. The model suggests that efforts to
control drug traffic and disrupt international drug cartel opera-
tions should concentrate on money flows and reduction of de-
mand. It also suggests ways to maximize the effect of interdiction,
should that still be used as a strategy.
Green, Penny. 1998. Drugs, Trafficking and Criminal Policy: The
Scapegoat Strategy. Winchester, UK: Waterside Press. 208 pages.
Green explores the context of drug trafficking and its crucial place
within international trade and the global economy. Demonizing
couriers, often desperate and tragic people from the poorest re-
gions of the world, gets in the way of rational analysis, and Dr.
Green insists that it is underlying geopolitical issues that ulti-
mately must be addressed. She draws on a large sample of people
imprisoned for trafficking and on the interviews she conducted
within prisons in England and Wales. Dr. Green’s analysis leads
her to conclude that contemporary policy must be freed from the
“scapegoat strategy” of blaming the small-fry dealers; complex is-
sues such as developmental politics and Third World debt need
to be at the forefront of the debate, Green asserts.
204
Print and Nonprint Resources

Jamieson, Alison (ed.). 1994. Terrorism and Drug Trafficking in
the 1990s. Aldershot, UK: Dartmouth Publishing Company. 285
pages.
Jamieson’s work is an important reminder that illicit trafficking
activities serve not only to fulfill the goals of organized crime
groups; they are undertaken by terrorist organizations needing to
fund their own activities. Indeed, the connection between organ-
ized criminal activities and terrorist financing has in recent years
become increasingly important. This volume, compiled by a lead-
ing researcher in the field, brings under one cover a collection of
articles published by the Research Institute for the Study of Con-
flict and Terrorism. The discussion moves from a review of the
development of the modern Mafia and its significant involve-
ment in drug trafficking in the late 1970s to a detailed overview
of the development of narcotics trafficking as an industry. Chap-
ters 3 and 4 are most useful overviews of the development, scope,
and characteristics of global drug trafficking from the 1970s up to
1994.
Krajewski, K. 2003. “Drugs, Markets and Criminal Justice in
Poland.” Crime, Law & Social Change 40 (2/3): 273–293.
Since 1989, the drug situation in Poland has changed consider-
ably. First, Poland has become a major European producer of syn-
thetic drugs. Second, it has become a major transit country for
smuggling drugs. Third, while its drug markets are not yet fully
developed, they now offer a much broader selection of drugs than
the pre-1989 staple drug, the home-made “Polish heroin.” Despite
some alarm about a growing drug problem, Polish drug policies
for many years remained primarily public health oriented. The
recent drug law reform, however, may signify a shift toward a
more punitive approach. This paper explores the conditions sur-
rounding the emergence of both new markets and new control
strategies.
Stares, Paul. 1996. Global Habit: The Drug Problem in a Border-
less World. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. 171 pages.
Stares traces the rise of the global drug market since 1900, demon-
strating that it is no longer a marginal area of criminal activity.
From the 1970s to the mid-1990s it developed into a major global
enterprise, which, Stares contends, means that a fundamental
reorientation of current international drug control policies is
Illicit Trafficking 205

necessary so that they may better meet the challenge ahead. The
author calls for better, broader information about the characteris-
tics and dynamics of global narcotics trafficking, saying that pre-
vious studies are too narrow in their focus. He says that the pri-
mary emphasis of international drug control should be on
positive rather than negative controls: development of interna-
tional law enforcement programs to combat drug trafficking
needs to be continued, organized crime groups must be targeted
to prevent the accumulation of threatening levels of wealth and
power, and, generally, nations’ attitudes toward sovereignty in a
borderless world (for the criminal) must be reoriented. Success,
he says, will ultimately depend on the international community’s
willingness to address the larger concerns that drug abuse is at-
tached to: overpopulation, environmental degradation, poverty,
illiteracy, ethnic strife, and disease.
Tullis, LaMond. 1991. Handbook of Research on the Illicit Drug
Traffic: Socioeconomic and Political Consequences. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press. 672 pages.
Tullis provides a survey of the social and economic consequences
of the production and consumption of narcotic drugs. The volume
is divided into two parts. The first half provides an overview of the
subject, consisting of three sections that survey the published liter-
ature on the production and consumption of illicit drugs. Chapters
are devoted to the global patterns of production and consumption
of cocaine, heroin, and cannabis, consequences of drug consump-
tion and production, and policy measures that have been adopted
in both consuming and producing countries. The second half pro-
vides an annotated bibliography of over 2,000 entries. This refer-
ence book is an extremely useful resource for researchers as well as
general readers. The book is organized so that the main text raises
relevant issues, which are then referenced to the literature and dis-
cussed in further detail in the endnotes. The period examined—the
1970s and 1980s—is the critical period in the growth of drug traf-
ficking, dramatically expanding from cottage export production to
highly organized, international economic exchanges employing
hundreds of thousands of people and earning billions of dollars.
Willoughby, R. 2003. “Crouching Fox, Hidden Eagle: Drug Traf-
ficking and Transnational Security: A Perspective from the Ti-
juana-San Diego Border.” Crime, Law & Social Change 40 (1):
113–142.
206
Print and Nonprint Resources

The combination of mobilizing for homeland protection and con-
ducting a major military campaign in Afghanistan underscores
the profound security implications of drug trafficking. In the case
of Mexico, drug smuggling has evolved under the influence of
several dynamics and has become particularly threatening to the
state and society in the last ten to twenty years with the cocaine
boom. The historic ability of the Mexican political system to man-
age corruption has diminished, if not collapsed, as cartels have
largely moved from a relationship of symbiosis with and subor-
dination to the authorities to one of dominance and intimidation
of them.
Zabludoff, Sidney Jay. 1998, Summer. “Colombian Narcotics Or-
ganizations as Business Enterprises.” Transnational Organized
Crime 3 (2): 20–49.
Zabludoff examines how the narcotics industry as a whole and
Colombian drug trafficking enterprises in particular function as a
business. Much of the study is based on discussions with law en-
forcement officers who have acquired insights into the operations
of Colombian traffickers. The discussion notes that narcotics traf-
ficking organizations clearly are businesses and that the structure
of the cocaine, heroin, and marijuana industries closely resembles
that of agribusiness. The Colombian cocaine industry has a trian-
gular structure. The dominating firms at the top of the pyramid
directly employ a relatively small number of people. The num-
bers increase through several layers of support entities.
Trafficking in Small Arms
Alves, Pericles G., and Diana B. Cipollone (eds.). 1998, March.
Curbing Illicit Trafficking in Small Arms and Sensitive Technolo-
gies: An Action-Oriented Agenda, United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research (UNIDIR), Geneva, Brief No. 2/1998.
The contributors make a link between crime, small-arms traffick-
ing, and sensitive technologies on the premise that illicit traffick-
ing in drugs and small arms can lead to trafficking in sensitive
technologies, creating ever-greater problems of national and in-
ternational proportions. The authors examine the role of terror-
ism in illicit trafficking, posing the question: “How and when did
drug cartels start supporting terrorist groups?” The report em-
phasizes that any agreement(s) will become mere paper tigers if
Illicit Trafficking 207

those whose job it is to actually counter trafficking (customs, po-
lice, and intelligence) do not receive adequate means to enforce
the law.
Dyer, Susannah, and Geraldine O’Callaghan. 1998, January.
“Combating Illicit Light Weapons Trafficking: Developments and
Opportunities.” British American Security Information Council.
36 pages.
This report provides a comparative analysis of the efforts to con-
trol illicit light weapons trafficking being pursued by the OAS,
the EU, the UN, and the G8. Recommendations include improv-
ing national enforcement of existing laws; adopting codes of con-
duct to establish stricter criteria for weapons transfers; improving
domestic legislation in postconflict societies, and strengthening
overall domestic gun control; registering and marking weapons;
improving recordkeeping; developing a “security first” approach;
supporting capacity building; involving NATO in controlling il-
licit weapons trafficking, and developing international legal
mechanisms.
Graduate Institute of International Studies. 2003. Small Arms
Survey 2003: Development Denied. New York: Oxford University
Press. 336 pages.
This is the third annual report on the global production, use,
and control of small arms. This edition documents evidence that
small-arms availability and misuse can undermine develop-
ment. It features chapters on production, stockpiles, transfers,
and weapons collection, providing comparative data for a range
of regions and countries. One chapter considers the emergence
of new international norms in efforts to control small arms
specifically against the backdrop of the United Nations Pro-
gramme of Action. The final chapter provides a comparative
analysis of peace negotiations to argue that disarmament and
weapons disposal should be spelled out in agreements to cease
hostilities.
ICPO-Interpol. 2001. “International Criminal Police Review. Spe-
cial Issue: Combating the Traffic in Human Beings.” Interpol No.
487–488. 64 pages.
This special issue of Interpol’s publication presents a number of
articles on smuggling and trafficking issues around the world.
208
Print and Nonprint Resources

Countries explored include Australia, Canada, China, Italy,
Spain, Nigeria, and the Russian Federation. The second half of the
publication features the point of view of international organiza-
tions including Europol, the Council of Europe, and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Jaramillo, Daniel Garcia-Pefia. 1998, November 18–20. “Linkages
between Drug and Illicit Arms Trafficking: Issues of Current Con-
cern to Colombia.” United Nations Department for Disarmament
Affairs.
The author of this conference paper, using Colombia as a point of
reference, analyzes the links between drugs and guns, asserting
that they are so interrelated it is practically impossible to deal
with either in an isolated manner. The author claims that most of
the weaponry demanded by those directly involved in the drug
business is bought in the United States. That said, the author
suggests supply patterns may change as drug cartels extend
their reach to Europe.
Lumpe, Lora. 2000. Running Guns: The Global Black Market in
Small Arms. London: Zed Books. 256 pages.
This collection of nine papers examines aspects of illegal traffick-
ing of small arms beginning with the definition of “legal” and “il-
legal” in the context of international humanitarian law. The book
examines the movement of weapons from governments to guer-
rilla or insurgent forces during the Cold War and the shape of
several major weapons “pipelines.” Lumpe looks at military
small-arms production trends as well as the links between do-
mestic firearms markets and international illicit markets. The
book examines the mechanics of illicit trafficking in considerable
detail, including the role of brokers and shippers, which are often
outside of the scope of existing regulations and the financing of
the illicit trade. Finally, it reviews a number of proposals to ad-
dress aspects of the illicit trade.
McShane, James P. 1999. “Light Weapons and International Law
Enforcement.” In Jeffrey Boutwell and Michael T. Klare, (eds.),
Light Weapons and Civil Conflict, pp. 173–182. New York:
Carnegie Commission on Preventing Deadly Conflict.
A former U.S. Customs criminal investigator stationed in the
United States and Europe, McShane writes from the perspective
Illicit Trafficking 209

of an expert with thirty years of first-hand experience in combat-
ing the illicit movement of firearms. He stresses the importance of
having both international agreements and effective law-enforce-
ment activities, and argues that these two measures must work in
concert. He also raises concerns about the recent proliferation of
international agreements on the illicit movement of firearms and
the danger that these initiatives are not sufficiently coordinated in
their goals and are sometimes working at cross-purposes.
Organization of American States Permanent Council. 1997, No-
vember 13. “Inter-American Convention Against the Illicit Manu-
facturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explo-
sives, and Other Related Materials.” OAS General Assembly
AG/RES.1 (XXIV-E/97).
The stated purpose of this comprehensive document containing
thirty sections is “to prevent, combat, and eradicate the illicit
manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms, ammunition, explo-
sives, and other related materials” and “to promote and facilitate
cooperation and exchange of information and experience among
States Parties to prevent, combat, and eradicate the illicit manu-
facturing of and trafficking in firearms, ammunition, explosives,
and other related materials.”
Rahman, Reaz. 1997. “The Illicit Flow of Small Arms in South
Asia.” Disarmament: A Periodical by the United Nations 10 (2
and 3): 79–102.
Rahman argues that, since the end of the Cold War, most of the
conflict in South Asia has been cross-border in nature and that
small arms are the preferred weapons. The author reviews recent
developments in the small-arms trade and examines the routes
through which weapons arrive in South Asia. Particular focus is
placed on Bangladesh and northeast India. Rahman is not opti-
mistic that the illicit small-arms trade will be addressed in this re-
gion, owing largely to a lack of governmental will. He concludes
by offering a number of suggestions the international community
should pursue in tackling the problem.
Revilla, Antonio Garcia. 1998. “Interrelationship Between Small
Arms Trafficking, Drug Trafficking and Terrorism.” In Pericles
Gasparini Alves and Diana Belinda Cipollone (eds.), Curbing Il-
licit Trafficking in Small Arms and Sensitive Technologies: An
210
Print and Nonprint Resources

Action-Oriented Agenda, pp. 85–92. UNIDIR/98/16. New York:
United Nations.
According to the author, the relationship between the firearms
trade and the drug trade is complicated by the vast increase in the
number of small arms available since the end of the Cold War.
Tackling the scourge of the illicit small-arms trade will require
governmental will, increased information sharing among mem-
ber states of the United Nations, and creation of complementary
internal legislation.
Williams, Phil. 1999, January–February. “Drugs and Guns.” Bul-
letin of the Atomic Scientists 55 (1): 46–48. 
According to Williams, the black market in arms involves partic-
ipants who do not think of themselves as criminals, including
governments and intelligence agencies. This article uses case
studies to illustrate the drugs/firearms link. For example, an Ital-
ian magistrate described how much of the profit in drug traffick-
ing was used by the Mafia to purchase arms, most of which were
subsequently exported through a Syrian connection to various
Arab countries; Tamil Tigers trafficked in drugs to fund their sep-
aratist struggle in Sri Lanka; and there were frequent reports of
drugs-for-arms swaps in the conflicts in the Balkans.
Trafficking in Nuclear Materials
Allison, Graham. 2004. Nuclear Terrorism: The Ultimate Pre-
ventable Catastrophe. New York: Henry Holt and Company. 263
pages.
Allison’s book is a natural extension of Rensselaer Lee’s work (see
below) outlining the consequences of trafficking in nuclear mate-
rial and weapons components. Allison focuses on the use of nu-
clear weapons by terrorists, addressing key questions such as:
Who could be planning a nuclear terrorist attack? What nuclear
weapons could terrorists use? Where could terrorists acquire a
nuclear bomb? When could terrorists launch the first nuclear at-
tack? And how could terrorists deliver a nuclear weapon to its
target? The answers to these questions constitute the first five
chapters of the book. The ultimate danger of trafficking is illus-
trated by an incident Allison relates in the opening pages of the
book. On October 11, 2001, one month to the day of the 9/11 at-
tacks, the director of the CIA told President Bush that one of his
Illicit Trafficking 211

agents reported that al-Qaeda terrorists had a 10-kiloton nuclear
bomb which was stolen from the Russian arsenal and that the
bomb was now located in New York City. Allison concludes that
a nuclear terrorist attack on the United States by 2014 is more
likely than not. However, he holds that nuclear terrorism is pre-
ventable, largely through generating the will to monitor and con-
trol trafficking efforts.
Lee, Rensselaer W. III. 1998. Smuggling Armageddon: The Nuclear
Black Market in the Former Soviet Union and Europe. New York:
St. Martin’s Press. 200 pages.
In this slim volume, Lee addresses a crucial international con-
cern—the illegal trade in nuclear materials that grew in the for-
mer Soviet Union and Europe after the collapse of the USSR. He
raises the central issue of whether such traffic poses a threat of
consequence to international security and stability. Lee notes that
the subject matter itself is surrounded by considerable ambiguity
and that quantifying the significance of illegal trafficking in nu-
clear materials is all but impossible. The first two chapters outline
in general terms the scope, setting, and principal characteristics of
the illegal nuclear trade. Chapter 3 identifies and analyzes the
principal economic and environmental factors that facilitate the
theft of nuclear materials. Chapter 4 describes the overall crimi-
nal environment in Russia and its possible influence on nuclear
smuggling dynamics. Chapters 5 and 6 detail reported theft and
smuggling cases in Central Europe and the former Soviet Union.
The final chapter assesses the implications of these findings for
U.S. policy and offers insights on the future of the nuclear smug-
gling business in the former Soviet Union.
Zaitseva, Lyudmila, and Kevin Hand. 2003, February. “Nuclear
Smuggling Chains: Suppliers, Intermediaries, and End-Users.”
American Behavioral Scientist 46 (6): 822–844.
This article analyzes the supply and demand sides in nuclear
smuggling, as well as intermediaries between them, based on the
700 illicit trafficking incidents collected by the Stanford Database
on Nuclear Smuggling, Theft and Orphan Radiation Sources
(DSTO) for the period 1991 to 2002. The supply side consists of
people with access to nuclear and other radioactive material. It is
subdivided into civilian employees at source facilities, ranging
from technicians to top managers; military personnel; and secu-
212
Print and Nonprint Resources

rity guards. Intermediaries—traffickers and middlemen—are
usually amateurs, opportunist businessmen and firms, and or-
ganized crime groups. The demand side is represented by prolif-
erating nation-states, terrorist organizations, religious sects, sep-
aratist movements, and criminal groups or individuals
interested in using nuclear and other radioactive material for
malevolent purposes, such as murder, deliberate exposure,
blackmail, and extortion.
Combating Illicit Trafficking Activity
Berkman, Eric Thomas. 1996. “Responses to the International
Child Sex Tourism Trade.” Boston College International and
Comparative Law Review 19: 397–422.
Berkman’s article examines the parties involved in the child sex
industry and measures taken against their activities in those
countries where it thrives. He also describes the actions that con-
sumer countries have taken or could take to stop child sex
tourism. He concludes that, although countries that host child sex
industries have passed laws forbidding such activities, without
the cooperation and involvement of industrialized consumer
countries those industries will continue to thrive.
Corrigan, Katrin. 2001. “Putting the Brakes on the Global Traf-
ficking of Women for the Sex Trade: An Analysis of Existing Reg-
ulatory Schemes to Stop the Flow of Traffic.” Fordham Interna-
tional Law Journal 25: 151–214.
Corrigan provides a general overview of trafficking in women
and its patterns, describes and analyzes existing laws and their
shortcomings, and details what remains unaccomplished in order
to combat trafficking worldwide. She focuses on the existing laws
of the United States and the European Union, as well as on rele-
vant international treaties. She concludes with several sugges-
tions for combating trafficking.
Hyland, Kelly E. 2001. “Protecting Human Victims of Trafficking:
An American Framework.” Berkeley Women’s Law Journal 16:
29–71.
Hyland explores the adequacy of U.S. legislation in protecting
and assisting trafficking victims. After discussing the nature of
trafficking and the experiences of its victims, she addresses the
Illicit Trafficking 213

needs of victims and suggests possible U.S. responses to such
needs through legislation and provision of services to meet indi-
vidual needs. She analyzes the Trafficking Victims Protection Act
of 2000, concluding that its worldwide impact cannot be assessed
until it is properly implemented.
Jensen, Troy R. 2000. “Organ Procurement: Various Legal Systems
and Their Effectiveness.” Houston Journal of International Law
22: 555–584.
Jensen begins by stating that the disparity between the supply
and demand for human organs available for transplantation often
leads to illegal methods of procuring needed organs. Conse-
quently, governments throughout the world are now adopting
laws to protect the exploited organ donors. Similarly, interna-
tional organizations, including the World Health Organization
and the United Nations, have condemned trafficking in human
organs. Jensen then explores the advantages and disadvantages
of the Brazilian law on organ donation, as well as approaches
adopted by other countries for regulating organ donation and
curbing the illegal trade in human organs.
Kennard, Holly C. 1994. “Curtailing the Sale and Trafficking of
Children: A Discussion of the Hague Conference Convention in
Respect of Inter-country Adoptions.” University of Pennsylvania
Journal of International Economic Law 14: 623–649.
Kennard begins by discussing the growth of black markets along-
side the practice of intercountry adoptions, noting that before 1993
there was no applicable international convention, just national
laws that banned this practice. In 1993, the Convention on Protec-
tion of Children and Cooperation in Respect of Inter-Country
Adoption was adopted for this purpose. Kennard critically ana-
lyzes the convention and offers proposals for federal implement-
ing legislation that would ensure that gray markets or independ-
ent agencies would not illegally profit from these adoptions.
McDonald, William F. (ed.) 1997. Crime and Law Enforcement in
the Global Village. Cincinnati, OH: Anderson Publishing. 245
pages.
Much has been written about the rapid rise of transnational crime
and trafficking issues in the 1990s, but comparatively little mate-
rial has been presented on the internationalization of policing or
214
Print and Nonprint Resources

how it might be pursued. McDonald’s volume of collected arti-
cles is a welcome addition to the discussion. Stated most simply,
this book argues that the emergence and significance of crime and
justice issues that span national boundaries require global re-
sponses. The first four chapters provide an overview of the
transnational crime problem. The five chapters comprising the
second section undertake a discussion of law enforcement re-
sponses to transnational crime. International police cooperation is
discussed from a number of perspectives including Interpol, the
development of a system of police cooperation in the European
Union, the approach to transnational crime taken by the United
States and the spread of those tactics around the globe, and fight-
ing the Mafia and organized crime in Italy and Europe. This vol-
ume is rounded out by a discussion of the political and ethical di-
mensions of fighting transnational crime, a particularly difficult
area to confront given issues of sovereignty, considerations of na-
tional interest, and questions about the extraterritorial reach of
the U.S. Constitution.
Nadelmann, Ethan A. 1993. Cops Across Borders: The Interna-
tionalization of U.S. Criminal Law Enforcement. University
Park: Pennsylvania State University. 524 pages.
Nadelmann discusses the challenges facing international law en-
forcement. A major theme is the impact that U.S. pursuit of en-
forcement goals has had on internationalizing policing. The U.S.
influence has occurred in large part as a result of drug policy and
the rapid globalization of narcotics trafficking. The author notes
that the complexity and scale of contemporary international crim-
inal investigation have increased and are becoming ever more in-
tertwined with foreign policy considerations. Traditional con-
cerns of statehood such as maintaining sovereignty, controlling
the nation’s borders, and suppressing smuggling are discussed in
the context of law enforcement efforts. Nadelmann, an expert on
the Drug Enforcement Administration and narcotics issues, pres-
ents an analysis of the DEA and the challenges it faces in investi-
gating drug cases overseas.
Occhipinti, John. 2003. The Politics of EU Police Cooperation: To-
ward a European FBI? Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner. 286 pages.
Understanding law enforcement agencies, their mandates, struc-
tures, and jurisdictions is critical in analyzing the means and
Illicit Trafficking 215

methods to be employed in countering trafficking activities in an
increasingly global world. Occhipinti draws from competing the-
ories of European integration to explain the development of
supranationalism in European police cooperation. Considering
forces stemming from both within and outside of the European
Union and reflecting concerns over international terrorism and
transnational organized crime, he explores the roles played by
key actors and events at every stage of Europol’s development,
from the initial creation of the Trevi Group in 1975 to mid-2002.
Raviv, Tal. 2003. “International Trafficking in Persons: A Focus on
Women and Children—The Current Situation and the Recent In-
ternational Legal Response.” Cardozo Women’s Law Journal 9:
659–868.
Raviv notes that trafficking in persons as a grave violation of
human rights has drawn the renewed attention of the interna-
tional community in recent years. A number of international laws
to combat trafficking have been in place since the early twentieth
century, but their lack of effective enforcement mechanisms has
made them essentially useless. A modern comprehensive interna-
tional tool to combat trafficking did not exist until 2000, when the
United Nations Protocol to Prevent and Punish Trafficking in Per-
sons, Especially Women and Children was adopted. Raviv ana-
lyzes the UN Protocol in greater detail, focusing particularly on
its victim protection provisions, and points out that a state, by as-
senting to a human rights convention, undertakes a dual obliga-
tion: not to act in a way that results in a human rights violation
and to prevent private actors present in its territory from acting in
such a way.
Report of the Expert Group on Strategies for Combating the
Trafficking of Women and Children. 2003. London: Common-
wealth Secretariat. 55 pages.
This 2003 report, published in book form by the Commonwealth
Secretariat, claims that trafficking in persons is the third largest
source of profits for organized crime, behind drugs and guns,
generating billions of dollars annually. As in most other criminal
enterprises, profits are reinvested in illicit activity, frequently
being pumped into the trade in drugs and guns. Groups in-
volved in trafficking take advantage of the freer flow of people,
216
Print and Nonprint Resources

increasingly weaker borders, the enormous profits to be rein-
vested, and the weakening of domestic economies, thus provid-
ing an endless reserve of potential victims. The report notes that
trafficking in human beings is not a new problem but is marked
by its growing scale and magnitude, newer source and destina-
tion sites, and diverse and sophisticated mechanisms. The pre-
vention strategies cited include economic empowerment, educa-
tion, legal intervention, advocacy and awareness raising,
reduction in demand in destination countries, and the creation of
systems of victim assistance.
Rijken, Conny. 2003. Trafficking in Persons: Prosecution from a
European Perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
345 pages.
One of the most important barriers to effective legislation and
policy formation against human trafficking is the global nature of
the problem. This text examines the impact of sovereignty on
prosecuting trafficking offenses. Emerging primarily from a
study conducted in the Netherlands, the book emphasizes the no-
tion that the nature of trafficking, as a transnational crime often
involving multiple jurisdictions, can hinder prosecution. The au-
thor suggests that this crime needs to be approached on an inter-
national level, through a body such as the European Union. Until
a truly international approach is developed, the author suggests
maintaining a dual system, considering the jurisdiction of inde-
pendent sovereignties and that of the EU.
Smith, Linda, and Mohamed Mattar. 2004. “Creating Interna-
tional Consensus on Combating Trafficking in Persons: U.S. Pol-
icy, the Role of the UN, and Global Responses and Challenges.”
Fletcher Forum of World Affairs 28: 155–178.
Smith and Mattar address the seriousness of the United States’ ef-
forts in combating international trafficking in persons. They
argue that the United States Trafficking Victims Protection Act of
2000 (TVPA) has had a significant impact on how the government
perceives and fights the practice of trafficking in persons. Estab-
lishing the Interagency Task Force to Monitor and Combat Traf-
ficking in Persons, providing financial and economic support to
countries that reform their actions in order to curb trafficking,
and recognizing the link between HIV/AIDS and trafficking have
Illicit Trafficking 217

made the TVPA an important legal mechanism to monitor the sta-
tus of the trafficking in persons. The authors suggest, however,
that only through diligence and international cooperation will
trafficking be eliminated.
Williams, Phil, and Ernesto U. Savona (eds.). 1996. The United
Nations and Transnational Organized Crime. London: Frank
Cass. 194 pages.
This volume is compiled from papers presented at the World
Ministerial Conference on Transnational Organized Crime held in
Naples from November 21 to 23, 1994, convened by the United
Nations to discuss the dangers posed by transnational organized
crime and to identify various forms of international cooperation
for its prevention and control. Ministers of justice and ministers
of interior from 142 countries attended the meetings. The book
begins with an overview of the challenge posed by transnational
organized crime in terms of information collection, intelligence
analysis, penetrating groups, and measures to be taken to create
greater transparency in the banking and financial sectors. The Po-
litical Declaration and Action Plan adopted at the conference em-
phasizes the need for efforts to achieve a more reliable knowledge
base about transnational criminal organizations and methods
most effective in combating them.
Periodicals and Publications
Crime and Justice International
Office of International Criminal Justice
Sam Houston State University
College of Criminal Justice
Box 2296
Huntsville, TX 77341-2296
Tel: (936) 294-1688
Fax: (936) 294-1638
E-mail: subscriber@oicj.org
Web site: www.oicj.org
Published six times a year by the Office of International Criminal
Justice at Sam Houston State University, Crime and Justice Interna-
tional reaches an audience of academics and practitioners in crim-
inal justice and law enforcement in more than twenty-five coun-
218
Print and Nonprint Resources

tries. Articles address a wide variety of issues, including transna-
tional crime, trafficking issues, and terrorism. Subscription fee for
United States: $59.00; International: $89.00.
Antonopoulos, Georgios A. 2003, November–December. “Alban-
ian Organized Crime: A View from Greece.” 19 (77): 5–9.
———. 2004, November–December. “The Financial Exploitation
of the Sexuality of Migrant Children in Greece.” 20 (83): 19–22.
Klychnikov, Daniil, Vladyslav Smelik, and Volodymyr Smelik.
2004, May–June. “Combating Transnational Crime: The View
from Ukraine.” 20 (80): 9–13.
Mabrey, Daniel. 2003, March. “Human Smuggling from China.”
19 (71): 5–11.
Crime, Law and Social Change
Kluwer Academic Publishers
P.O. Box 358
Accord Station
Hingham, MA 02018-0358
Web site: www.kluweronline.com
Crime, Law and Social Change is a peer-reviewed journal that pub-
lishes essays and reviews dealing with the political economy of
organized crime whether at the transnational, national, regional,
or local levels anywhere in the world. In addition, the journal
publishes work on financial crime, political corruption, environ-
mental crime, and the expropriation of resources from developing
nations. Subscription fee for United States: institutional $679.00,
individuals $291.00; for Europe: institutional EUR678.00, individ-
uals EUR291.00.
Mameli, P. A. 2002. “Stopping the Illegal Trafficking in Human
Beings.” 38: 67–80.
Morrison, Shana. 1997. “The Dynamics of Illicit Drugs Produc-
tion: Future Sources and Threats.” 27: 21–138.
Shelley, Louise. 2003. “The Trade in People in and from the For-
mer Soviet Union.” 40: 231–249.
Zhang, S. X., and M. S. Gaylord. 1996. “Bound for the Golden
Mountain: The Social Organization of Chinese Alien Smuggling.”
25 (1): 1–16.
Illicit Trafficking 219

International Journal of the Sociology of Law
Elsevier
6277 Sea Harbor Drive
Orlando, FL 32887-4800
Tel: (877) 839-7126
Fax: (407) 363-1354
E-mail: usjcs@elsevier.com 
The International Journal of the Sociology of Law, produced by the In-
stitute of Criminal Justice Studies at the University of Portsmouth
(UK), provides a forum for high-quality research and debate on
the social context and social implications of law, law enforcement,
and the legal process. The refereed journal accepts contributions
from all areas of sociolegal study, particularly those that address
comparative issues and questions of development, change, and
reform in sociolegal processes. In addition to academic research
papers, the journal invites contributions from practitioners and
those concerned with policy formation and implementation in the
fields of legal process and law enforcement. Subscription fee for
United States: institutional $323.00, individual $83.00; for Europe:
institutional EUR 363.00, individual EUR 94.00.
Ruggiero, Vincent. 1997. “Trafficking in Human Beings: Slaves in
Contemporary Europe.” 25 (3): 231–244.
———. 2000. “Transnational Crime: Official and Alternative
Fears.” 28 (3): 187–199.
Schloenhardt, Andreas. “Trafficking in Migrants: Illegal Migra-
tion and Organized Crime in Australia and the Asia Pacific Re-
gion.” 29 (4): 331–378.
Transnational Organized Crime/Global Crime
Taylor & Francis Group/Routledge
325 Chestnut Street
Suite 800
Philadelphia, PA 19106
Tel: (800) 354-1420
Fax: (215) 625-8914
Web site: http://www.routledge.com
With a new name, focus, and editorial team, Global Crime builds
upon the foundations laid by Transnational Organized Crime to
220
Print and Nonprint Resources

consider serious and organized crime, from its origins to the pres-
ent, as well as a wide range of other transnational crime issues. Its
focus is deliberately broad and multidisciplinary, aiming to make
the best scholarship on organized, serious, and transnational
crime available to specialists and nonspecialists alike. It endorses
no particular orthodoxy and draws on authors from a variety of
disciplines, including history, sociology, economics, political sci-
ence, anthropology, and area studies. Published four times a year,
Global Crime is a peer-reviewed journal. Subscription fee for
United States: institutional $364.00, individual $78.00; for Europe:
institutional £224, individual £49.
Albanese, Jay S. “North American Organized Crime.” 6 (1): 8–18.
Galeotti, Mark. “The Russian ‘Mafiya’: Consolidation and Glob-
alisation.” 6 (1): 54–69.
Perl, Raphael F. “State Crime: The North Korean Drug Trade.” 6
(1): 117–128.
Zabludoff, Sidney Jay. 1998, Summer. “Colombian Narcotics Or-
ganizations as Business Enterprises.” 3 (2): 20–49.
Trends in Organized Crime
Transaction Periodicals Consortium
Rutgers University
35 Berrue Circle
Piscataway, NJ 08854-8042
Tel: 732-445–2280
Web site: http://www.transactionpub.com
Trends in Organized Crime (TOC) provides information and analy-
sis about organized crime that is sometimes difficult to access.
Focusing on crime’s linkage to organized agencies of the state
and its affiliated agencies, TOC draws on research from interna-
tional organizations, public policy institutes, law enforcement
organizations, intelligence agencies, and independent scholars.
TOC reports on international efforts to anticipate the develop-
ment of organized criminal activities and to devise strategies to
counter them. Trends in Organized Crime is the official journal of
the International Association for the Study of Organized Crime
(IASOC). Subscription fee for United States: institutions $260.00,
individuals $80.00.
Illicit Trafficking 221

Denisova, Tatyana. 2001. “Trafficking in Women and Children for
Purposes of Sexual Exploitation: The Criminological Aspect.” 6
(3–4): 30–36.
Layne, Mary, Scott Decker, Meg Townsend, et al. 2001. “Measur-
ing the Deterrent Effect of Enforcement Operations on Drug
Smuggling, 1991–1999.” 7 (3): 66–87.
Layne, Mary, Mykola S. Khruppa, and Anatoly A. Muzyka. 2001.
“The Growing Importance of Ukraine as Transit Country for Heroin
Trafficking: U.S.-Ukraine Research Partnerships.” 6 (3–4): 77–93.
Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons. 2004. “Traf-
ficking in Persons Report.” 8 (1): 38–66.
Bibliographies 
There are numerous extensive bibliographies online regarding traf-
ficking issues that will prove invaluable to the researcher. Listed here
are several collections that address various aspects of trafficking.
An Annotated Bibliography: How Narcotics Trafficking Organi-
zations Operate as Businesses. 2002, September. Compiled by
John N. Gibbs. Library of Congress.
http://www.loc.gov/rr/frd/pdf-files/Bibliography-Narcotics.pdf
Bibliography of Trafficking. 2004, August. Compiled by Yukiko
Nakajima, Violence Against Women—Online Resources.
http://www.vaw.umn.edu/documents/traffickbib/traffickbib.html
Bibliography on Narco-terrorism. 2003, July. Compiled by Ron
Fuller, Air University Library, Maxwell Air Force Base.
http://www.au.af.mil/au/aul/bibs/narco/narco.htm
Bibliography on the Effects of Organized Crime on Women and
Children. 1995, April. The International Centre for Criminal Law
Reform and Criminal Justice Policy. 
http://www.icclr.law.ubc.ca/Publications/Reports/Bibilio.PDF
Coalition Against Trafficking in Women (CATW) Resource Li-
brary. 2004.
http://www.catwinternational.org/resources.php
222
Print and Nonprint Resources

Cork Bibliography: Drug Trade and Trafficking. 
http://www.projectcork.org/bibliographies/data/Bibliography_Drug_
Trade_and_Trafficking.html
Detection of Illicit Trafficking in Nuclear and Other Radioactive
Materials. International Atomic Energy Agency.
http://www-ns.iaea.org/security/detection.htm
Human Trafficking: A Bibliographical Search of the NCJRS Ab-
stracts Database. Office for Victims of Crime Resource Center,
Office of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice.
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/ovc/ovcres/human_trafficking_abstracts.pdf
Organized Crime in North America and the World: A Bibliogra-
phy. 2003, December. Compiled by Stephen Schneider, Nathan-
son Centre for the Study of Organized Crime and Corruption.
http://www.yorku.ca/nathanson/bibliography/contents.htm
Resources and Contacts on Human Trafficking. 2002. Compiled
by The Initiative against Trafficking in Persons, The International
Human Rights Law Group.
http://usmex.ucsd.edu/justice/documents/richard_trafficking_biblio.pdf
SAFER-Net Annotated Bibliography on Small Arms. 2000, De-
cember.
http://www.research.ryerson.ca/SAFER-Net/resources/ABibJE03.html
Trafficking in Human Beings and Organized Crime: A Literature
Review. 2002, June. Compiled by Christine Bruckert and Colette
Parent.
http://www.rcmp-grc.gc.ca/pdfs/traffick_e.pdf
Trafficking in Persons: An Annotated Legal Bibliography. 2004.
Compiled by Mohamed Y. Mattar. Johns Hopkins University
School of Advanced International Studies.
http://www.aallnet.org/products/2004–47.pdf
UNESCO Trafficking Project Bibliography. 2003. 
Illicit Trafficking 223

http://www.unescobkk.org/culture/trafficking/publication.htm
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR)
Light Weapons Bibliography and Resource List. 2000. Compiled
by Joshua Margolin.
http://www.unidir.ch/pdf/articles/pdf-art157.pdf
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR)
Selection of Publications Focusing on Small Arms. 2004.
http://www.unidir.ch/bdd/focus-search.php?onglet=5
Nonprint Resources
Videos
Armed to the Teeth: The Worldwide Plague of Small Arms
Length: 56 minutes
Date: 2000
Cost: $149.95
Source: Films for the Humanities and Sciences
P.O. Box 2053
Princeton, NJ 08543–2053
Tel: (800) 257-5126
Fax: (609) 671-0266
E-mail: custserve@films.com
Web site: http://www.films.com
With one gun for every ten people, the United Nations considers
the small-arms crisis one of the gravest challenges facing the
world. As well as investigating the proliferation of firearms and
the economic, political, and cultural reasons why people carry
them, this award-winning program shows what is being done to
curb a human-made pestilence. Both devastation and successful
disarmament are seen in case studies from Albania, Mozambique,
South Africa, Colombia, El Salvador, and the world’s largest
small-arms manufacturer, the United States. Discussing these is-
sues are Kofi Annan, secretary general of the United Nations;
Jayantha Dhanapala, under secretary general for disarmament;
224
Print and Nonprint Resources

Carol Bellamy, executive director of UNICEF; and Robert Wall of
the Firearms and Explosives Unit at Interpol. This program was
produced by the United Nations.
Bought & Sold: An Investigative Documentary about the
International Trade in Women
Length: 42 minutes
Date: 1997
Cost: $50.00 domestic; $60.00 international; $150.00
institutional
Source: Witness
353 Broadway
New York, NY 10013
Tel: (212) 274-1664
Fax: (212) 274-1262
E-mail: orders@witness.org
Web site: www.witness.org
This documentary was produced and directed by the current di-
rector of Witness, Gillian Caldwell, while she was codirector of
the Global Survival Network (GSN). It is based on a two-year un-
dercover investigation conducted by GSN into the illegal traffick-
ing in women from the former Soviet Union, and it features in-
terviews with traffickers, Russian mafia, trafficked women, and
groups working to provide services to trafficked women. Bought
& Sold is available in English and in Russian, and it comes with
two complementary reports: “Crime & Servitude: An Expose on
the Trafficking of Russian Women” which is also available in
Russian and English, and “Trapped,” a report on trafficking and
forced labor in the Marianas Island.
Child Sex Trade
Length: 50 minutes
Date: 2000
Cost: $24.95
Source: A&E Investigative Reports
Tel: (800) 423-1212
Web site: http://store.aetv.com
Child Sex Trade reports that each year more than 300,000 children
are bought, sold, exploited, and enslaved by child sex rings from
California to New York, from Canada to the Midwest. On the
Illicit Trafficking 225

street, a thirteen-year-old girl can earn up to $200,000 a year for
her pimp. Worldwide last year these child prostitutes earned
more than a billion dollars. Fifty-one percent of the teenagers
working the streets are boys. Their greatest danger comes from
their customers, who pay them money for sex and then introduce
them to a lifestyle of degradation and pederasty. Child Sex Trade
focuses on how pimp organizations operate and why they are
able to reach into middle-class America for their victims. The
video traces the largest pipelines for the child sex trade, from
Kansas and Minnesota to the Las Vegas strip.
Human Traffic
Length: 11 minutes
Date: 2002
Cost: £10
Source: Anti-Slavery International
Thomas Clarkson House
The Stableyard
Broomgrove Road
London SW9 9TL
Tel: 44-(0)20-7501-8920
Fax: 44 (0)20-7738-4110
E-mail: info@antislavery.org
Web site: www.antislavery.org/index.htm
This campaign video exposes the booming trade in women, chil-
dren, and men, from the prostitution rackets in Europe to child
trafficking in West Africa. It contains footage from Ghana, Nige-
ria, Italy, and England with interviews from those trafficked, ac-
tivists, social workers, and the police.
NARCs
Length: 50 minutes
Cost: $29.95
Source: American Justice
Web site: http://store.aetv.com
From the small-time user to the large-scale producer, the DEA is
charged with eliminating illegal drugs in America. It is an uphill
battle against powerful criminal cabals, the temptation of corrup-
tion, and America’s seemingly insatiable appetite for drugs. From
the origins of the Federal Bureau of Dangerous Drugs to the
226
Print and Nonprint Resources

modern-day DEA, this documentary provides a look at the “war
on drugs” and the men at the heart of the battle. Travel deep into
South American jungles, where the DEA is taking the fight to the
source, literally attacking the cocaine epidemic at the root. DEA
operatives offer an up-close look at the tactics they employ and
the dangers they face.
Nuclear Materials: Russia’s New Export
Length: 27 minutes
Date: 1995
Cost: $129.95
Source: Films for the Humanities and Sciences
P.O. Box 2053
Princeton, NJ 08543–2053
Tel: (800) 257-5126
Fax: (609) 671-0266
E-mail: custserve@films.com
Web site: http://www.films.com
This program explores how the breakdown of the Soviet Union
resulted in the emergence of a new and dangerous practice: the
sale of plutonium and uranium from Russia’s nuclear factories on
the international market. At Moscow’s Stock Exchange, every-
thing, including nuclear material, can be bought “over the
counter.” Middle-management workers at nuclear factories dis-
cuss the economic changes wrought by the dissolution of the So-
viet Union that are fueling the temptation to profit from the sale
of these dangerous materials.
Out of Sight, Out of Mind
Length: 15 minutes
Date: 1999
Cost: £10
Source: Anti-Slavery International
Thomas Clarkson House
The Stableyard
Broomgrove Road
London SW9 9TL
Tel: 44 (0)20-7501-8920
Fax: 44 (0)20-7738-4110
E-mail: info@antislavery.org
Web site: www.antislavery.org/index.htm
Illicit Trafficking 227

This video was produced by Anti-Slavery as part of their cam-
paign on child domestic workers in the Philippines. Made with a
local Philippine nongovernmental organization, Visayan Forum,
this video was shown on television and in Congress in the Philip-
pines. This has led to the drafting of a new law that will protect
child domestic workers.
Pizza Connection
Length: 50 minutes
Cost: $29.95
Source: American Justice
Web site: http://store.aetv.com
On July 12, 1979, Carmine Galante, notorious boss of the Bonanno
crime family, was ambushed and killed in a Brooklyn restaurant.
Federal officers investigating the hit soon found a link to a previ-
ously unknown, billion-dollar drug pipeline. Pizza Connection
shows how the case soon expanded to include the Italian govern-
ment and federal agents all across America. This documentary
traces the network of crime that converted tons of Sicilian-made
heroin to billions of dollars in cash using small businesses
throughout America, from New York pizzerias to Midwest strip
mall stores.
R & R in Southeast Asia
Length: 15 minutes
Date: 1996
Cost: $29.95
Source: 60 Minutes
524 West 57th Street
New York, NY 10019
Tel: (800) 848-3256
E-mail: 60m@cbsnews.com
Web site: http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/1998/07/08
/60minutes/ main13504.shtml
In this short segment, the interviewer confronts an individual
who advertises sex tours to Southeast Asia. 60 Minutes sent a
reporter to follow up on what such tours entail; it includes
footage of meetings with a “tour guide” and a very young
prostitute and her pimp. It is a clear indictment of the practice
of sex tourism. The confrontation with the American organ-
228
Print and Nonprint Resources

izer is interesting; he comes across as nervous, deceitful, and
immoral.
Sacrifice: The Story of Child Prostitutes from Burma
Length: 50 minutes
Date: 1998
Cost: $45.00 rental; $150.00 purchase (discount for
nonprofit organizations)
Source: Ellen Bruno Film Library
P.O. Box 1084
190 Route 17M
Harriman, NY 10926
Tel: (800) 343-5540
Fax: (845) 774-2945
E-mail: ellen@brunofilms.com
Web site: www.brunofilms.com
The trafficking of Burmese girls has soared in recent years as a di-
rect result of political repression in Burma. Human rights abuses,
war, and ethnic discrimination have displaced hundreds of thou-
sands of families, leaving families with no means of livelihood.
An offer of employment in Thailand is a rare chance for many
families to escape extreme poverty. Sacrifice examines the social,
cultural, and economic forces at work in the trafficking of
Burmese girls into prostitution. It is the story of the valuation and
sale of human beings, and the efforts of teenage girls to survive a
crisis born of economic and political repression. This documen-
tary chronicles the horrors faced by young girls trafficked from
Burma to work in the Thai sex industry.
Secret Passages
Length: 50 minutes
Cost: $24.95
Source: History Channel
Web site: http://store.aetv.com
The twin border towns of Nogales in Arizona and Mexico share
an elaborate system of storm runoff drains that drug lords ap-
propriated in the 1990s to great effect. Adding hand-dug tunnels
to the existing network, they smuggled thousands of pounds of
narcotics into America. But not every delivery went as planned,
as footage of a customs raid shows. On the Mexican border in
Illicit Trafficking 229

Douglas, Arizona, DEA agents discovered the most sophisticated
smuggling tunnel to date, complete with hatches, elevators, rail
carts and more. In one bust alone, 2,300 pounds of cocaine were
seized there.
The Agony of Ecstasy
Length: 50 minutes
Cost: $24.95
Source: A&E Investigative Reports
Tel: (800) 423-1212
Web site: http://store.aetv.com
The latest “in” drug is not really that new—it has been around
since the 1980s. But ecstasy did not really start to attract attention
until the late 1990s when it became the drug of choice at the all-
night dance parties known as raves. Before long it broke out of the
club scene. This video ventures from clandestine manufacturing
labs in the Netherlands to the floors of New York City’s nightclubs,
meeting with users, law enforcement professionals, and doctors to
explore every aspect of the drug. Find out why the international
distribution of ecstasy is dominated by Israeli organized crime and
hear from users why they are drawn to the drug. Footage from a
U.S. Customs investigation highlights the effort to halt its spread,
while medical experts detail the long-term risks for users.
The Day My God Died
Length: Feature-length film
Date: 2002
Cost: n/a
Source: Andrew Levine Productions
Tel: (435) 655-8319
E-mail: Levine@xmission.com
Web site: http://www.thedaymygoddied.com/contact.html
The Day My God Died is a feature-length documentary that pres-
ents the stories of young girls whose lives have been shattered by
the child sex trade. They describe the day they were abducted
from their village and sold into sexual servitude as “The Day My
God Died.” The film provides actual footage from the brothels of
Bombay, known even to tourists as “The Cages,” captured with
spy camera technology. It weaves the stories of girls and their
stolen hopes and dreams into an unforgettable examination of the
growing plague of child sex slavery.
230
Print and Nonprint Resources

The Global Arms Market: Mayhem for Sale
Length: 20 minutes
Date: 2003
Cost: $69.95
Source: Films for the Humanities and Sciences
P.O. Box 2053
Princeton, NJ 08543–2053
Tel: (800) 257-5126
Fax: (609) 671-0266
E-mail: custserve@films.com
Web site: http://www.films.com
Assault rifles, heavy machine guns, artillery, tanks, planes, mis-
siles—with money and the right connections, practically any mil-
itary weapon can be bought in the global arms market. Where do
all those weapons come from? Who is selling them? And how
should the United States go about defending itself from trigger-
happy “customers” looking for American targets? These and
other questions are on the table as this timely ABC News program
considers the booming business of weapon trafficking.
The War on Drugs: Winners and Losers
Length: 93 minutes
Date: 1999
Cost: $129.95
Source: Films for the Humanities and Sciences
P.O. Box 2053
Princeton, NJ 08543–2053
Tel: (800) 257-5126
Fax: (609) 671-0266
E-mail: custserve@films.com
Web site: http://www.films.com
Is the war on drugs in the United States causing greater societal
harm than the problem of drug abuse itself? This provocative pro-
gram features interviews with Bruce Benson and David Ras-
mussen, coauthors of Illicit Drugs and Crime; Eric Sterling, former
counsel to the House Judiciary Committee; Joanne Page, director
of the Fortune Society; and others. Together they indict flawed
initiatives that have made criminal forfeitures into a cash cow,
private corrections into a highly profitable industry, social work-
ers and doctors into informants, and children of convicted moth-
ers into wards of the state.
Illicit Trafficking 231

Trading Women
Length: 60 minutes
Date: 2003
Cost: $29.95
Source: Documentary Educational Resources
101 Morse Street
Watertown, MA 02472
Tel: (800) 569-6621 or (617) 926-0491
Fax: (617) 926-9519
E-mail: docued@der.org
Web site: www.der.org
The culmination of five years of field research, Trading Women is
the first film to demonstrate to viewers the relationship of the
trade in drugs to the trade of women. The film dispels common
beliefs about the sex trade, such as: “The problem is the parents—
it’s part of their culture to sell their daughters”; “the sex trade ex-
ists because of Western sex tours”; and “they sell their girls for
TVs.” Directed and written by David A. Feingold and narrated by
Angelina Jolie.
Warlord
Length: 50 minutes
Cost: $24.95
Source: A&E Investigative Reports
Tel: (800) 423-1212
Web site: http://store.aetv.com
The Golden Triangle at the border of Burma, China, and Thailand
has long been a world center of opium production. This video is
a rare inside look at one of the world’s drug hot spots, though lo-
cals claim that they are systematically destroying the opium crops
with alternative plantings over a five-year period. Whether or not
this is actually happening, the U.S. DEA claims that 20 percent of
the world’s supply of opium currently originates in Myanmar.
From its source in a remote Southeast Asian outpost, the video
follows the trail of drugs to its end in America.
232
Print and Nonprint Resources

8
Summary
Illicit Trafficking—Trends and Issues
This book is, in an important sense, about unintended conse-
quences. Nations diligently work to build markets and jobs for
their people; they seek to create an infrastructure of political and
economic institutions, as well as technological organizations that
make the global marketplace possible. The expectation is that by
seeking technology and encouraging foreign investments into
their societies, a nation’s economic development and prosperity
will increase. Similarly, developed states (especially in the West)
promote openness in order to expand investment and trade op-
portunities. The belief is that democratic states are more stable
trade and investment partners and are less likely to go to war or
to experience chronic internal unrest.
States cannot be blamed, however, for creating an infra-
structure in which transnational problems occur. What was not,
and indeed could not, be anticipated was that the dynamics set
in motion by the frenzy of change after 1991 when Perestroika
and Glasnost dissolved the communist states in Eastern Europe
might deprive nations of their freedom of action. The newly
emancipated nations rising out of the ashes of totalitarian po-
lice states produced new actors whose prosperity and power
did not depend or derive legitimacy and authority solely from
territory. These new economies are technologically sophisti-
cated; markets are broader and more expansive, operate in cy-
berspace, and are not easily constrained by territorial bound-
aries, borders, and laws. Thus, many of the new economic
233

entrepreneurs are not beholden to nations. Managing these new
economic possibilities and realities requires new law enforce-
ment approaches that transcend the historic parameters of na-
tion-state structures.
It is becoming increasingly clear that the war on drugs is
going badly because the control and eradication policies rest al-
most entirely on the coercive institutions and organizations of the
state. Most of the world’s illicit drug supply is cultivated within
weak or failing states that lack effective enforcement capacities.
However, even in strong states the drug trade operates in a legal
context where government is least able to directly intercede. Po-
lice cannot infringe on a people’s civil liberties and randomly
break into homes to seize drugs and arrest users. 
Given these limitations on drug control and efforts to dis-
courage consumption, the trade flourishes. Perhaps nonstate
groups—NGOs—are best situated and positioned to combat the
demand and supply of illicit drugs. Unfortunately, the strong, de-
veloped states (in particular the United States) have been cutting
resources to treatment facilities, clinics, hospitals, and centers for
rehabilitation, and have increased resources for enforcement and
interdiction of supply. In underdeveloped states, the root causes
of the burgeoning drug trade are mainly economic. Consequently,
a drug control policy in states where drugs are cash crops should
incorporate attractive alternative economic development pro-
grams that promote nondrug agricultural plans. Some observers
believe that regional drug crime task forces could facilitate the
implementation of a comprehensive response in which economic
investments could be spurred to deter drug crop cultivation and
smuggling (Kelly 2001).
In contrast, responses to nuclear weapons trafficking need to
be state controlled. IGOs and NGOs are limited in what they can
bring to bear on these issues. An unintended consequence of pri-
vate sector (NGOs) involvement in nuclear nonproliferation
could actually promote proliferation by allowing nonnuclear
powers in NGOs and IGOs access to nuclear information they
otherwise would not have. Thus, bilateral efforts by existing nu-
clear powers may be the more efficient process to be used to stem
the threat from weapons growth. Indeed, the problem of traffick-
ing in nuclear weapons and materials reached a danger point
when the Soviet Union collapsed. Clearly, Russian law enforce-
ment and security need to be strengthened and stabilized if its
weapons (now spread out among armed forces that are inopera-
234
Summary

tive and destitute) are not to become part of a supermarket of
weapons auctions.
There is another dire problem associated with nuclear
weapons and trafficking. While India and Pakistan have made
public their status as nuclear states, Iran and North Korea are
moving toward advanced development of nuclear weapons.
More importantly, nonstate actors, terrorist groups such as al-
Qaeda, Aum Shinrikyo, and the Chechens have been seeking nu-
clear weapons
Like drug traffickers, nuclear smugglers, and international
crime cartels, terrorist groups exploit open societies. People,
money, and goods move easily across borders that are compara-
tively open and unguarded; modern telecommunications enables
such groups to publicize their actions and events that spread fear
and inspire hate. For example, when Peru’s Revolutionary Tupac
Amaru Movement took over the Japanese ambassador’s resi-
dence in Lima in 1996 and held 500 hostages at gunpoint for a
month, the terrorist group communicated via CNN and the Inter-
net. This dramatically expanded their reach and added to their
notorious celebrity. A good base of operations for a terrorist
group is a weak state (such as Afghanistan, Peru, or the Philip-
pines) from which to strike Western targets. Al-Qaeda, initially
based in Afghanistan and Pakistan, has also operated in Nairobi,
Kenya; Yemen; and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. With terrorists mak-
ing full use of the structures of the international system of mar-
kets, technologies, and open societies, much like international
businesspeople do, individual states cannot effectively combat
terrorism alone. Clearly, multilateral approaches to the problem
are essential if the violence is to be contained.
A distinctive feature of organized crime is that it lacks a po-
litical ideology (Sullivan 1996). Organized crime groups have a
structured hierarchy of statuses, accompanied by ranks with spe-
cific roles and levels of authority. Organized crime groups are also
defined by their continuity over time; their capacity and willing-
ness to threaten or to use force; their restrictive membership; their
profit making through racketeering, extortion, and other types of
criminal activity; their provision of illegal goods and services to
the general population; and their activities that through corrup-
tion and intimidation neutralize and nullify the anticrime efforts
of public officials and politicians (Kelly et al. 1994).
The power of international criminal organizations has been
increased and broadened by the rise in global drug trafficking,
Illicit Trafficking
235

smuggling persons, weapons, and virtually anything of commer-
cial value and utility—in short, by the rise and expansion of illicit
trafficking. Globalization, with its open markets, advanced tech-
nologies, and borderless societies, has facilitated the business of
legal multinational corporations and has also expanded opportu-
nities and activities of international criminal organizations (Kelly
et al. 2003).
Post-Perestroika and Rise of the
Oligarchs: Examples of State Decay and
Illicit Trafficking Opportunities
Between 1991 and 1999, new elites emerged from the old com-
munist nomenklatura and the Mafia-ridden world of post-Soviet
capitalism and seized precious national assets, including the
country’s gas and oil. They compromised the banks, press, and
electronic media, and even threatened the primacy of the state it-
self as happened in Colombia when the cocaine cartels were at the
peak of their power (Conquest 2003).
The nature of the political system that developed following
the collapse of communism and the Soviet Union involved pow-
erful and corrupt business managers, along with senior politi-
cians who worked together to secure their mutual interests. Huge
cash funds and support from the media were provided for Presi-
dent Boris Yeltsin’s post-Soviet government in exchange for tax
exemptions. For example, a powerful entrepreneur used his posi-
tion in the old Soviet gas authority to set up a private company,
Gazprom, the largest gas supplier in the world, to which Yeltsin
then gave tax exemptions when he moved on to become the
prime minister.
Between 1992 and 1998, the rise of the oligarchs—business ty-
coons with vast conglomerates in banking, gas and oil, precious
metals, and the media—represented the most serious threat to
Russia’s fledgling democracy. A real danger arose that the entire
state sphere would become corrupted and criminalized, as a
small handful of magnates (and the Mafia gangs who protected
their interests) moved into the seat of government. Within a short
span of time, these economic “godfathers” gave a convincing im-
pression that they were dictating policy. With the help of privi-
236
Summary

leged, corrupted, criminally linked political and economic bosses,
the new Russia may continue to squander its resources.
Russia has enormous social problems, notably, a huge gap
between rich and poor, corruption and criminality, a crumbling
housing stock, a rundown health system, alcoholism, and the
highest rates of HIV outside of Africa. It is critical that the politi-
cal establishment shake off its greed and mandate a larger social
role for the state rather than merely servicing the wealthy.
Through legislation that will ensure the transparency of the polit-
ical process, accountability can emerge; police and members of
the judiciary must stop taking bribes; and more taxes must be col-
lected from the rich and powerful. Successful implementation of
internal reforms designed to build the foundation of a stable new
society will take decades (Figes 2000).
Another urgent consideration is the  accelerated pace of
movement of peoples across borders created by globalization.
Adding to the dramatic increases in refugee numbers has been
the collapse of states through internal violence and chronic polit-
ical conflicts. Refugees can overwhelm and drain the energies and
resources of already fragile institutions and infrastructures of
states, whether the hosts are willing or unwilling, by increasing
competition for scarce economic resources and jobs (as became
evident in the United States, when opposition was raised to ad-
mission of refugees from Haiti and Cuba). Moreover, refugees can
destabilize delicate ethnic or political balances (as Palestinian
refugees did in Jordan and Lebanon and as Rwandan refugees
did in Burundi). For these reasons among others, the United Na-
tions High Commissioner on Refugees (UNHCR) in the
post–Cold War period has not only worked to aid displaced per-
sons but also to contain the movement of refugees that can inun-
date an unwitting host state and engender a political crisis.
As a further consequence of refugee and alien smuggling,
state militaries have been used to directly contain the flow of
refugees, as when the Italian military contained the flow of Al-
banian refugees into Italy in 1995–1996, or when the U.S. military
interdicted Haitians and Cubans at sea and settled them at Guan-
tánamo naval base in Cuba in 1994–1995. Strategic, more than hu-
manitarian, concerns drive these activities.
The pressures of world politics, the ebb and flow of liveli-
hoods, the adequacy or poverty of resources at hand, and the
wars and conflicts that result constitute some of the driving
forces of demographic change that set people in motion. The
Illicit Trafficking
237

movement of people has become an unexceptional activity, but
the process has also been affected by criminal organizations that
have organized refugees seeking new opportunities in a rapidly
changing world.
Perhaps the most notorious trafficking organization in re-
cent history was “Odessa,”an efficient smuggling machine capa-
ble of extreme violence that now serves as a prototype for traf-
ficking groups that handle people.  In the immediate aftermath
of World War II, the Nazis put together this smuggling organiza-
tion in order to enable thousands of war criminals to escape to
South America, the Middle East, and elsewhere. Monies and doc-
uments, transit locales, transport, housing, and new identities
were provided former SS members. When the organization was
exposed by Israeli intelligence services and the work of NGOs
such as Simon Wiesenthal’s Vienna-based anti-Nazi organiza-
tion, Adolph Eichmann, a former SS officer who organized trans-
portation for the millions of Holocaust victims to the death
camps, was captured by the Israelis, tried, convicted, and exe-
cuted in Israel. Similarly, Klaus Barbie, an SS chief in Lyons,
France, was uncovered in Venezuela. He was extradited and
tried in France for war crimes. Certain economic conditions, cou-
pled with demographic and social trends, have contributed to
the rise of illegal immigration and trafficking. International eco-
nomic activity through interstate policy mechanisms such as
NAFTA has generated competitive environments that depress
wage levels. In certain service sectors, low pay and the growth of
temporary work appear to make indigenous labor forces reluc-
tant to accept such work and to rely instead on unemployment
benefits. These sorts of economic and occupational situations
create a demand for cheap foreign labor. For those without work
in impoverished communities in developing states or transit
countries, the possibilities of earnings even in the low-pay sec-
tors of the Western economies are comparably attractive. Thus,
many workers in the poorer states respond to the call of the em-
ployment markets in the more developed Western nations
through either legal or illegal channels.
As women tend to be overrepresented in low-wage sectors
where migrants are increasingly needed, this factor also favors
the “feminization” of illegal migration. Women are preferred in
the sex trade sector, which, in the past several years, has ex-
panded in Southeast Asia, the Balkans, the Nordic states, and
238
Summary

Latin America. And with the expanded marketing of sexual and
entertainment services, a reciprocal increase has taken place in
criminal enterprises operating directly in the industry and in the
ancillary services that accompany the sex services, including
pornography and child prostitution.
After the dissolution of communism in East Central Europe,
the region became as much a corridor for undocumented flows of
migrants as an area of emigration targeting Western Europe and
elsewhere. The territories through which the corridor zone exists
include Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Poland, Hungary, the Balkans,
and the countries comprising the Transcaucasus region. The
Baltic States are situated in the northwestern borders of the corri-
dor zone (Askola et al. 2001).
A common obstacle in combating trafficking in persons,
products, and services (licit or illicit) is the lack of adequate re-
sources for police and law enforcement services in the countries
that experience the drain of migrants and those that become tran-
sit and staging areas for people on the move. Migration manage-
ment is not only a law enforcement problem: the issues require
the implementation of a broad array of facilities, institution
knowledge bases, and policy development to cope with the phe-
nomenon of trafficking. This entails aid and assistance from the
Euro-Atlantic states, the European Union, the Asian/Pacific
Council of States, and the Organization of American States in the
Western Hemisphere. Fortunately, trafficking in persons and il-
licit trafficking in general are being widely acknowledged and
discussed. Every country in Central America and many other
countries worldwide have passed laws against the smuggling of
persons and proscribed commodities.
Finally, it is important to recognize the key differences be-
tween “smuggling” and “trafficking.” In smuggling persons, for
example, people usually come to, and illegally cross, a border and
then are released by the smugglers. They pay for the privilege of
clandestine travel and perhaps use false documents to facilitate
their passage to their destinations. Trafficked migrants, on the
other hand, typically find themselves unable to escape the control
of the people who brought them into a country illegally. For ex-
ample, traffickers promising their clients jobs as dancers, hair-
dressers, or factory workers frequently lure Eastern European
and Asian women to the United States where, tragically, the
women find themselves coerced into the sex industries.
Illicit Trafficking
239

Trafficking constitutes a challenge to nation-state institutions
in profound ways. The Cold War shaped the United Nations, the
Organization of American States, the North Atlantic Treaty Orga-
nization, the World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund—
and even governmental bureaucracies such as the U.S. Depart-
ment of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency. Although
many of these organizations implicitly promoted globalization,
the architects could not have imagined a world in which commu-
nism was dead and in which Russia was open and an ally of sorts,
crippled by a chaotic society riddled with crime and corruption.
The question is: What new institutions must emerge to meet the
challenges of the future? The world is increasingly open, and the
trafficking problems appear to be beyond the scope of existing in-
stitutions and organizations. The obsolescence and threats to the
capacities of world-level organizations created decades ago ren-
der them ineffective in protecting peoples and resources from the
clutches of international crime in the form of illicit trafficking.
Though still unclear, solutions to illicit trafficking may ne-
cessitate the formation of networks of nation-state coordination
and communication. In addition, although the creation of new
state regional agencies is being debated and is designed to cope
with illicit trafficking, existing institutions may continue to de-
velop new integrative mechanisms that cross public/private sec-
tor boundaries. The tsunami crisis of December 2004 in Asia is a
good example of regional cooperation and public/private sector
aid coordination. The threat of trafficking in women and children
in the disaster zones was immediately recognized.
By systematizing interagency and public/private sector con-
tacts, trafficking problems may be deterred. Differences in cul-
ture, communication capacities, assets, and social organizations
make interstate, public/private sector networking difficult but
not impossible.
References
Askola, Heli, Marels Olsolski, Jujri Saar, and Andis Alven. 2001. Traffick-
ing in Women and Prostitution in the Baltic States: Social and Legal Aspects.
Helsinki: International Office of Migration.
Conquest, Robert. 2003. Russia: Experiment with a People. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Figes, Orlando. 2000. Natasha’s Dance: A Cultural History of Russia. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
240
Summary

Kelly, Robert J. 2001. “Twelve Years After: The Berlin Wall as Will and
Idea.” Journal of Social Distress 10 (3). 217-233.
Kelly, Robert J., and Robert Rieber. 2003. Terrorism, Organized Crime and
Social Distress: The New World Order. New York: Psyche-Logo Press. 
Kelly, Robert J., Rufus Schatzberg, and Ko-lin Chin (eds.). 1994. A Hand-
book of Organized Crime Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing.
Sullivan, Brian. 1996. “International Organized Crime: A Growing Secu-
rity Threat,” in Strategic Forum. Washington, DC: Institute for National
Strategic Studies, National Defense University.
Illicit Trafficking
241


Abu Nidal, 109
Accountability: state-centric
responses to
trafficking, 91
Achille Lauro incident, 109, 110
Afghanistan
arms trafficking, 75–76, 130
drug traffic as result of
political instability, 14–15
opium production, 60–62
Osama bin Laden, 110
political power of crime
organizations, 16
Soviet departure from, 103
Soviet invasion of, 102, 111
Taliban cooperation with
crime groups, 23–24
U.S. attacks on, 107
African Americans, 34–35
Air transport
Bout, Victor, 112–113
increasing trafficking
opportunities, 6
Lehder’s cocaine
smuggling, 125
Al Kassar, Monzar, 109–110
Al-Qaeda, 111–112
Albania, 52
Alcohol use and abuse. See
Prohibition
Alien smuggling
factors contributing to
growth of, 37–38
history of, 84–86
“Little Pete,” 126
Ong, Benny, 135–136
South America and Central
America, 26
See also Human trafficking
Amnesty International, 177–178
Andean Pact, 102–103
Andean Regulation, 100,
102–103
Anthrax, 68
Anti-Drug Abuse Act of
1988, 103
Anti-Slavery International, 178
Arms embargoes
inadequacy of, 114
Minin’s violation of, 129–130
Arms trafficking
Al Kassar, Monzar, 109–110
Bout, Victor, 112–113
China, 24
ethnic conflicts fueling, 13–14
Minin, Leonid, 129–130
networks and market
structure, 70–77
nuclear materials and arms,
62–66
resource information,
163–170, 179
243
Index

Arms Trafficking (cont.)
Russia and the Newly
Independent States, 23
Art and cultural objects, 82
Asia
drug-trafficking networks,
57–58
Human Organ
Transplantation Act, 80
women and sexual
exploitation, 87–88
See also specific countries
Assassinations, 119, 120, 134
Aum Shinrikyo, 62
Balkans, 76
Bank of Commerce and Credit
International (BCCI),
52–53
Banking industry
control by Russian groups, 22
freezing Al Kassar’s
accounts, 109–110
Mafia control of, 17
Barbie, Klaus, 238
Barietta, Nicholas Arditio, 131
Berlin Wall, 103
Bilateral trade agreements,
26–27
Bilonik, Ricardo, 133
bin Laden, Osama, 23–24, 107,
110–112
Biological weapons, 66–69
Biological Weapons
Convention, 66
Bioterrorism, 69
Bloods (street gang), 35
Bolivia, 16, 59
Bootlegging, 114
Border issues. See Migration
Borsellino, Paolo, 9, 20, 136, 138
Bosnia, 14
Botulism, 68
Bout, Victor, 112–114
Brusca, Giovanni, 10
Bulgaria, 21
Bull smuggling, 134
Bureau for International
Narcotics and Law
Enforcement Affairs
(INL), 178–179
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
Firearms and Explosives
(ATF), 179
Burma
drug market structure, 60–61
drug networks, 24
Khun Sa, 123–124
sexual exploitation statistics,
148
Buscetta, Tommaso, 137
Cali cartel
Clinton’s efforts against, 105
drug market structure, 59
Herrera-Buitrago, Helmer,
121–122
resistance to anti-drug
efforts, 120
Cambodia
precious gem smuggling, 78
sexual exploitation
statistics, 148
Camorra, 9
Capital, mobility of, 7–8
Capone, Al, 12, 114–117
Capone, Frank, 115–116
Cardenas, Osiel, 139
Cartels. See Cali cartel; Medellín
cartel
Carter, Jimmy, 52
Castellammarese War, 32, 128
Cayman Islands, 53
Cellular phones, 101–102
Center for International
Security and Cooperation
(CISAC), 172–173
Central America, 26–27
244
Index

Chang Chi Fu, 123–124
Chechen separatists, 62
Chemical weapons, 66–69
Children
increased trafficking as result
of tsunami, 107–108
victims of sex trade industry,
142–144
China
alien smuggling, 86
economic policies
encouraging crime, 24–25
IPR violations, 83
“Little Pete,” 125–127
opium industry, 61
sex trade industry, 88
sexual exploitation
statistics, 148
Chinese boat people, 105
Civilian sector, drug market
structure and, 59–60
Clifford, Clark, 52
Clinton, Bill, 37–38,
104–105, 153
Coalition Against Trafficking in
Women (CATW), 147–154,
179–180
Coca production, 58–59
Cocaine trafficking
crack, 35
drug market structure, 58–59
drug production, 57
Eastern and Central
Europe, 21
factors contributing to
growth of, 37–38
Herrera-Buitrago, Helmer,
121–122
Lehder-Rivas, Carlos, 124–25
Ochoa, Jorge Luis Vasquez,
133–134
origins of the Medellín cartel,
102
Western Europe, 19
See also Drug trafficking
Cold War arms trafficking,
70–73. See also Soviet
Union, collapse of
Colombia
anti-drug activities with the
DEA, 104
art and cultural objects, 82
Clinton’s anti-cartel
activities, 105
drug lords cultivating gang
cooperation, 15–16
drug market structure, 58–59
Escobar, Pablo, 117–121
government corruption
allowing organized
crime, 11
history of illicit activities, 26
Ochoa, Jorge Luis Vasquez,
133–134
See also Cali cartel; Medellín
cartel
Commission, The, 9, 30, 32–33
Commission on Narcotic Drugs
(CND), 162
Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS), 106
Communications
cell phones, 101–102
impact of worldwide
communication
technologies on illicit
trafficking, 8
Compact discs (CDs), 21, 25, 83
Conflict
arms trafficking supporting,
70, 73–75
drug trafficking
supporting, 123
peace research, 183–184
resources on arms
trafficking, 163–164
Sicilian Mafia’s domination,
136–137
Illicit Trafficking
245

Congress, U.S., 103
Conspiracy, 28
Consumers, drug market
structure and, 58–62
Convention for the Suppression of
Traffic in Persons and the
Exploitation of the
Prostitution of Others, 99
Copyright industry products, 83
Corleonesi clan, 137
Corruption, 12–13, 24
Corsican Mafia, 100. See also
Mafia; Sicilian Mafia
Cosa Nostra. See Mafia
Council of Europe, 81
Council of the Cartagena
Agreement (JUNAC), 100
Counterfeiting
currency, 26
IPR violations, 83
Coups and coup attempts,
104, 131
Crack cocaine, 119
Crips (street gang), 35
Croatia, 14
Cultural objects, 82
Cuntera crime family, 5–6
Cyber technologies
drug trafficking networks, 58
money-laundering
techniques, 50–51
Dalla Chiesa, Carol Alberto, 138
Database on Nuclear
Smuggling, Theft and
Orphan Radiation Sources
(DSTO), 172–173
Department of Homeland
Security (DHS), 107
Deutch, John, 62–63
Dewey, Thomas E., 128, 129
Diamonds, 78
Disease
associated with human
trafficking, 88
radiation exposure, 173
Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA)
Colombian operations, 104,
105, 106, 132
establishment of, 101
Herrera-Buitrago, Helmer,
121–122
Lehder, Carlos, 125
Noriega’s trial, 133
pursuit of Ochoa, 134
resource information, 180
targeting Khun Sa, 124
Drug trafficking
Al Kassar, Monzar, 109–110
Asia, 23–25
characteristics of drug
traffickers, 160–162
co-opting street gangs, 15–16
Colombia’s government
corruption allowing, 11
Escobar, Pablo, 117–121
establishment of DEA, 101
establishment of HIDTA, 103
ethnic enclaves, 5–6
evolution of the Mafia, 9
French Connection, 100, 101
growth of American ethnic
gangs, 33–34
growth of industry, 54–56
inadequacy of anti-drug
efforts, 234
Lehder’s purchase of
Norman’s Cay, 102
marijuana smuggling,
118–119
market structure, 58–62
money laundering, 7–8
networks, 57–58
Noriega, Manuel, 130–133
organized crime meeting, 100
Palermo Connection, 101
246
Index

Pizza Connection, 103
resource information,
155–156, 158–163, 178–179,
180, 182–183, 187, 189
as result of political
instability, 14–15
Russia and the Newly
Independent States, 22–23
similarities to biochemical-
trafficking markets, 69
social consequences of, 56–57
South and Central America,
26–27
Tijuana cartel, 139
weak states’ role in, 90
Western Europe, 19
East Asia, 83.  See also specific
countries
Eastern and Central Europe
increasing crime
participation, 20–21
IPR violations, 83
Economic issues
anti-drug trafficking
efforts, 234
effects of money laundering
on national economies,
51–52
globalization, 1–2
impact of drug trafficking,
56–57
sanctions against Colombia,
104–105
Ecstasy, 57
Eichmann, Adolph, 238
Energy resources, 22
Enterprise, 28
Escobar, Pablo Emilio Gaviria,
12, 60, 117–121,
124–125, 133
Ethnicity
Capone’s crossing ethnic
barriers, 117
Chinese crime groups, 25
crime bases in Western
Europe, 19–20
drug-trafficking networks,
57–58
ethnic conflicts and state
dissolution, 13–14
growth of American gangs,
33–35
migration and illicit
trafficking, 5–6
organized crime hierarchies,
10, 28–29
European Union (EU)
combating unauthorized
immigration, 106
contributing to transnational
crime, 4–5
Europol, 20, 180–181
forbidding trafficking in
organs, 81
law enforcement challenges,
18–20
Europol, 20, 180–181
Export licenses, 72
Extradition
Escobar, Pablo, 120
Ochoa, Jorge, 134
treaties, 102
The Factbook on Global Sexual
Exploitation (Hughes,
Sporcic, Mendelsohn, and
Chirgwin), 147–151
Failed states, 236–240
Falcone, Giovanni, 9, 20, 136, 138
Family, organized crime and, 10
Federal Act on the Prevention
of Money Laundering in
the Financial Sector, 54
Financial Action Task Force on
Money Laundering
(FATF) standards, 19
Five Points Gang, 128
Illicit Trafficking
247

Flying Dragons, 135
Foundation Against Trafficking
in Women (STV), 181
Fraud, 16
French Connection, 100, 101
Fung Jing Day, 125–127
Gangs
Capone, Al, 115–116
funding through
counterfeiting, 84
growth of American ethnic
gangs, 33–35
“Little Pete,” 126–127
partnerships with drug
cartels, 15–16
use by legitimate
businesses, 27
Gems, 22
Genovese, Vito, 129
Giuliani, Rudolph, 30
Global Alliance Against Traffic in
Women (GAATW), 181–182
Globalization
alien smuggling, 86
ethnic conflicts and state
dissolution, 13–14
illicit arms trafficking, 70–71
impact of global finance on
illicit trafficking, 7–8
impact on volume of illicit
trafficking, 7
ineffectiveness of state-
centric policies, 90–92
law enforcement and, 17–18
processes and effects of, 1–2
Godfather. See Escobar, Pablo
Emilio Gaviria
Gold, 78
Golden Triangle, 123
Governments and government
structures
allowing arms production
and trafficking, 75–77
Capone’s control of Chicago,
115–117
consequences of
development and
affluence, 233–234
eradicating Burma’s opium
industry, 61
Escobar’s government within
a government, 118
impact of drug trafficking
on, 56
ineffectiveness of state-
centric policies, 90–92
money laundering, 50–51
Noriega’s involvement with
U.S. intelligence, 131–132
organized crime and, 11–13
state dissolution, 13–14
state militaries containing
refugee flow, 237
Gray arms market, 76–77
Guerrillas, 119–120, 125
Guided missiles, 67
Gulf cartel, 139
Hawala, 51
Helsinki Watch, 182
Heroin trafficking
Eastern and Central
Europe, 21
factors contributing to
growth of, 37–38
Khun Sa, 123–124
market structure, 60–61
Palermo Connection, 101
Riina, Salvatore, 136–138
Western Europe, 19–20
See also Drug trafficking
Herrera-Buitrago, Helmer,
121–122
Hersh, Seymour, 131–132
Hezbollah, 52
High Intensity Drug Trafficking
Act (HIDTA) program, 103
248
Index

High-level Political Signing
Conference for the United
Nations Convention
against Transnational
Organized Crime,
106–107
Highbinders, 126
Hip Sing Tong, 135
History of American organized
crime, 27–36
HIV/AIDS, 88
Hong Kong
IPR violations, 83
Ong, Benny, 135–136
role in Asian crime, 25
sexual exploitation statistics,
148–149
smuggling immigrants and
heroin, 61
Hostage situation, 235
Housing programs, 12
Hui Kwan, 51
Human body parts, 78–81
Human Organ Transplantation
Act (HOTA), 80
Human rights violations
Bout, Victor, 113
Human Rights Watch, 182
resource information, 187
sex trade industry, 88
Witness program, 189–190
Human trafficking
Amnesty International,
177–178
Anti-Slavery
International, 178
Central America, 26
Chinese boat people, 105
Coalition Against Trafficking
in Women, 179–180
history of, 84–86
human body parts, 78–81
obstacles in combating,
238–239
resource information,
141–154, 181–182, 184–185,
187–188
smuggling versus trafficking,
239–240
Western Europe, 19
See also Alien smuggling
Humanitarian aid
arms sales disguised as, 76
Capone, Al, 116
organizations, 12
Hundi, 51
Hungary, 21
Ideology
of globalization, 2
lack of political ideology, 235
Illegal Immigration Reform and
Immigration Responsibility
Act (1996), 105
“Illicit Nuclear Trafficking Facts
and Figures” (IAEA),
170–171
Illicit trafficking described, 2–3
Immigration. See Migration
Immigration and Naturalization
Service (INS), 85
Indentured servitude, 144
India
nuclear capability, 62
sexual exploitation
statistics, 149
Indian Ocean tsunami, 107–108
Indonesia, 107–108
Industrial secrets, 83
Intellectual property rights
(IPR), 83
Inter-American Convention
against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives,
and Other Related
Materials, 166–167
Illicit Trafficking
249

Inter-American Drug Abuse
Control Commission
(CICAD), 187
Intergovernmental
organizations (IGOs), 99
International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), 64–65,
170–172
International Bank for Credit
and Commerce (BCCI),
109–110
International Center, 185–186
International Crime Control Act
(ICCA), 105–106
International Criminal Police
Commission (IPC), 99
International Emergency
Economic Powers Act
(IEEPA), 104–105
International Monetary Fund
(IMF), 51
International Narcotics Control
Board (INCB), 162–163,
182–183
International Organization for
Migration (IOM), 106,
146, 183
International Peace Research
Institute, Oslo (PRIO),
183–184
Internet, 2–3
Interpol (International Criminal
Police Organization), 99,
114, 184
IPR. See Intellectual property
rights
Iran’s nuclear capability, 62
Iraq
anthrax use, 68
arms supplies, 130
weapons acquisition, 67
Irish immigrants, 31
Irish Republican Army (IRA), 84
Islamists, 110–112
Italy
anti-Mafia campaign, 9
Sicilian Mafia, 20, 100,
126–129
See also Mafia
Japan
sexual exploitation
statistics, 149
terrorism and nuclear
capability, 62
Yakuza, 12, 25
Johns Hopkins University
School of Advanced
International Studies, 188
JUNAC. See Council of the
Cartagena Agreement
Justice Department, U.S., 38,
185–186
Kaliningrad Yard Sale, 74
Kefauver Committee, 29–30
Khan, Abdul Qadeer, 122–123
Khun Sa, 52, 123–124
Kidnappings, 119–120
Kidney transplants, 78–79
Klinghoffer, Leon, 110
Kosovo, 14
La Cosa Nostra. See Mafia
La Strada—The Foundation
Against Trafficking in
Women, 184–185
Labor trafficking, 144
Labor unions, 27
Lansky, Meyer, 128
Lanza, Joseph “Socks,” 129
Law enforcement
Anti-Drug Abuse Act of
1988, 103
Clinton’s plea for global
cooperation, 37–38
250
Index

Cold War-era arms
trafficking, 72
control of biochemical
weapons, 69–70
difficulties in identifying
victims of human
trafficking, 143
drug control failure, 55–56
Europol, 180–181
globalization and, 17–18
goals of bilateral and
international
cooperation, 39
inadequacy of arms
trafficking policy, 114
ineffectiveness of state-
centric policies, 90–92
intellectual property theft, 83
IPC and Interpol, 99, 114, 184
money laundering, 54
Organization for Security
and Cooperation in
Europe, 186–187
resource information,
185–186
RICO Act, 28, 30, 100–101, 121
selling organs, 80
sex trade industry, 88
See also Drug Enforcement
Administration
Lebanon, 74
Legislation. See Law
enforcement
Legitimate business interests
Bout’s use of, 113
drug industry’s similarities
to, 60
masking chemical weapons
acquisition, 66–68
money laundering, 49
Ong’s pursuit of, 135–136
Russia and the Newly
Independent States, 22–23
use of criminal
organizations, 27
Lehder-Rivas, Carlos, 60, 102,
119, 124–25
Lima, Salvo, 138
“Little Pete,” 125–127
Luciano, Charles “Lucky,” 32,
127–129
Mafia
art and cultural objects, 82
control of political power,
16–17
defining characteristics of
transnational crime
groups, 8–11
foreign connections, 36
French Connection, 100, 101
globalization and, 4–5, 6
history of American
organized crime, 27–33
Luciano, Charles “Lucky,”
127–129
Pizza Connection, 103
RICO passage defining
organized crime, 30
Maranzano, Salvatore, 32, 128
Marijuana smuggling, 118–119
Market fundamentalism, 2
Marshall Plan, 72
Martinez, Gomez, 134
Masseria, “Joe the Boss,”
32, 128
McClellan Committee, 29–30
Medellín cartel, 52, 102
drug market structure, 60
Escobar, Pablo, 117–121
Lehder-Rivas, Carlos, 124–25
Ochoa, Jorge Luis Vasquez,
133–134
origins of, 102
Medicare/Medicaid fraud, 16
Mediterranean countries, 19–20
Illicit Trafficking
251

Mexico
characteristics of drug
traffickers, 160–161
diversification of illicit
activities, 26–27
drug production, 57
Operation Zorro II, 105
Tijuana cartel, 139
Migration
alien smuggling, 84–86
American history of
organized crime, 31
Andean Pact, 102–103
Andean Regulation, 100
fostering illicit trafficking,
5–6
government measures
against, 106
JUNAC formation, 100
resource information, 183
See also Human trafficking
Military activity, 14–15, 23
Minin, Leonid, 129–130
Missile technology, 67, 109–110
Mobile telephones, 101–102
Money laundering
BCCI, 52–53
Cali cartel, 121
growth of global finance, 7–8
Mexico, 27
political control, 17
Presidential Directive
against, 104–105
Russian control of banking
industry, 22
structure and characteristics
of, 48–54
Western Europe, 18–19
Money Laundering Act, 54
Motorcycle gangs, 36
Muerte a Secuestradores, 120
Mujahideen groups, 102, 103
Multilateral Evaluation
Mechanism (MEM), 187
Multinational corporations
globalization as the origin of,
1–2
Russian criminal
organizations, 22
supporting transnational
crime, 5
Mutual assistance, 99
Najibullah, 103
Nation-states’ failure to combat
illicit trafficking, 90–92.
See also Governments and
government structures
National Institute of Justice
(NIJ), 185–186
Nationalism, 14
Natural disasters
crime groups masquerading
as humanitarian
organizations, 12
tsunami, 107–108
Nazis, 238
Netherlands, 19
Network organizations, 10–11
Newly Independent States
(NIS). See Russia and the
Newly Independent States
Nicaragua, 132
Nidal, Abu, 52
Nixon, Richard Milhous,
101, 131
Nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs), 91
Noriega, Manuel Antonio, 104,
119, 130–133
Norman’s Cay, Bahamas, 102,
119, 124–25
North American Free Trade Act
(NAFTA), 26
North Korea
arms acquisition, 77
nuclear capability, 62, 63
Nuclear materials
252
Index

Khan, Abdul Qadeer,
122–123
organized crime trafficking
and, 62–63
post–Cold War threat, 65–66
resource information,
170–175
responsibility for combating
trafficking, 234–235
threat of theft and
smuggling, 64–65
Ukraine’s manipulation
of, 113
weapons of mass
destruction, 63–64
Nuclear Threat Initiatives (NTI),
174–175
Nunn, Sam, 174
Ochoa, Jorge Luis Vasquez, 125,
133–134
Odessa, 238
Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human
Rights (ODIHR), 187
Office of National Drug Control
Policy (ONDCP), 159–160
Office of Weapons Removal and
Abatement (WRA),
164–167
Offshore banking, 50–51, 53
Oligarchs, 236–240
Ong, Benny, 135–136
Operation Just Cause, 104, 132
Operation Marathon
Pacific/Prompt
Return, 105
Operation Odysseus, 106
Operation Selva Verde, 104
Operation Steady State, 104
Operation Zorro II, 105
Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), 106, 186–187
Organization of American
States (OAS), 166–167, 187
Organized crime
Capone, Al, 114–117
defining and describing, 29
French Connection, 100, 101
international convention
against, 106–107
IPR violations, 84
lack of political ideology,
235–236
Luciano, Charles “Lucky,”
127–129
Minin, Leonid, 129–130
Ong, Benny, 135–136
profiting from
globalization, 3
relationships among
governments, social
structures and, 11–13
RICO Act, 28, 30,
100–101, 121
Riina, Salvatore, 126–128
role in illicit trafficking, 4–5
See also Mafia; specific crimes
Organized Crime Control Act
(1970), 30
Organs, trafficking in, 78–81
Outlaw states, 16
Pacific Ocean tsunami, 107–108
Pakistan
heroin addiction, 23
Khan, Abdul Qadeer,
122–123
nuclear capability, 62
opium refining, 62
Palermo Connection, 101
Palestine
Al Kassar’s connection
to, 109
nuclear capability, 62
Panama, 104, 130–133
Peace research, 183–184
Illicit Trafficking
253

Peniti (informers), 9
People, trafficking and
smuggling. See Alien
smuggling; Human
trafficking
Peru, 59
Peters, F. C., 125–127
Petroleum resources, 22
Philippines, organ trafficking
in, 80–81
Pindling, Lynden, 119, 125
Pizza Connection, 9, 13, 103
Polaris Project, 187–188
Police organizations, 99
Europol, 180–181
Interpol, 99, 114, 184
See also Law enforcement
Politics
American gangs as political
merchants, 27–28
Capone’s involvement in,
115–117
Little Pete’s involvement in,
125–127
Mexico’s political power, 27
political instability, 14–15
rise of the Corleonesi,
137–138
Post–Cold War era. See Soviet
Union, collapse of
Pouscetta, Tommaso, 103
Poverty and crime, 34–35
Precious stones, 78
Precursor chemicals, 66–67
Presidential Decision Directive
42, 38, 104–105, 106
President’s Commission on
Organized Crime, 34
Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its
Aspects, 167
Prohibition, 31–32, 114–117
Prostitution, 99, 128.  See also
Sex trade industry
The Protection Project, 188
Protection selling, 9
Provenzano, Bernardo, 10, 138
Provisional Intergovernmental
Committee for the
Movement of Migrants
from Europe (PICMME),
146
Push factors in migration,
142–144
Racketeer Influenced and
Corrupt Organizations
(RICO) Act. See RICO
Act
Racketeering
“Little Pete,” 125–127
Noriega, Manuel, 132–133
RICO Act, 28, 30,
100–101, 121
Rastafarian Posses, 34
Reagan administration, 132
Refugees, 237
Religious conflict, 14–15
Religious radicalism, 111
RICO Act
goals and terms of, 30,
100–101
Herrera-Buitrago,
Helmer, 121
white-collar crime, 28
Riina, Salvatore “Toto,” 9–10,
136–138
Rodriguez Gacha, Jose
Gonzalo, 133
Rodriguez-Orejuela,
Gilberto, 121
Rodriguez-Orejuela,
Miguel, 121
Rogue states, 64, 235
Ross, Charles, 127–129
254
Index

Russia and the Newly
Independent States
arms sales from, 129–130
Chechen separatists’
threat, 62
criminal society arising in
nuclear materials
trafficking, 65–66
diamond and gold
trafficking, 78
expansion of organized
crime, 16, 21–23
money laundering, 51
nuclear threat, 174–175
post-Cold War availability of
arms, 74
post-Perestroika
opportunities for
trafficking, 236–240
responsibility for
combating nuclear
materials trafficking,
234–235
See also Soviet Union,
collapse of
Safe haven countries, 15, 23–24
Sanctions against Colombia,
104–105
Santacruz-Londono, Jose, 121
Savings and loan scandal, 29
Scarface. See Capone, Al
Seal, Barry, 134
Secret cities, 65
Securities industry, 50
September 11, 2001, 6, 107, 110.
See also Terrorism
Serbia, 14
Sex trade industry
Coalition against Trafficking
in Women, 147–154,
179–180
global growth of, 87–88,
107–108
identifying businesses
involved in, 144
Japan, 25
and tsunami, 107–108
UN Convention on
exploitation of
persons, 99
Sicilian Diaspora, 5
Sicilian Mafia, 20, 100, 126–128,
129. See also Mafia
Siegel, “Bugsy,” 128, 129
Singapore, organ trafficking
in, 80
Slave trade, 84–85, 187–188
Small Arms Survey, 169–170
Smuggling, defined, 239–240
Smurfs, 53
Snakeheads, 86, 88
Social structure, 11–13
South America, 26–27, 57–58,
100. See also Colombia
South Asia, 23–25
Southeast Asia
characteristics of drug
traffickers, 161–162
crime networks, 24
IPR violations, 83
Khun Sa, 123–124
precious gem smuggling, 78
Soviet Union
and Afghanistan, 102, 103
Bout, Victor, 112–114
Cold War arms trafficking,
70–73
collapse of (See Soviet Union,
collapse of)
disintegration of, 103
political power of crime
organizations, 16–17
Soviet Union, collapse of,
2–3, 103
Bout’s exploitation of
weapons trafficking,
112–113
Illicit Trafficking
255

Soviet Union, Collapse of (cont.)
fostering organized crime in
Eastern and Central
Europe, 20–21
global consequences, 233–234
growth of terrorist threat, 89
increasing international
mobility leading to
increased trafficking, 6
nuclear materials availability
and trafficking, 64–66
Nuclear Threat Initiative,
174–175
post-Cold War availability of
arms, 64–65, 74
relationship between
governments and
organized crime, 12
stimulating illegal
migration, 85
Spadora, Hug, 131
Stanford Institute for
International Studies
(SIIS), 172
State Department, U.S.,
151–153, 158–159
State failure, 13–14, 236–240
Sudan, nuclear capability of, 62
Sweatshops, 136, 144
Symington, Stuart, 52
Syria, nuclear capability of, 62
Taiwan, 25
Taliban, 23–24, 107, 130
Tax evasion
Capone’s conviction, 117
increasing sophistication of
money laundering, 49
Lehder-Rivas, Carlos, 125
white-collar crime and, 16
Technology
cell phones, 101–102
chemical weapons
manufacturing, 67
cyber-technologies, 2–5
enhancing state-centric
enforcement, 90–91
Khan’s transfer of nuclear
technology, 122–123
Noriega’s sale of U.S.
technology, 131–132
sales of missile technology,
109–110
WMD capability, 63–64
Terrorism
Afghanistan’s safe haven,
23–24
Afghanistan’s weapons
supply, 75–76
Al Kassar, Monzar, 109–110
BCCI, 52–53
biological weapons, 69
Colombian terrorists
threatening Escobar’s
industry, 119–120
funding through
counterfeiting, 84
nuclear capability, 235
Osama bin Laden, 110–112
post-Cold War threat, 89
September 11, 2001, 6,
107, 110
Western Europe, 18–19
Thailand
closing border with
Burma, 124
drug market structure, 24, 61
organ trafficking, 79–80
sexual exploitation
statistics, 150
tsunami damage, 107–108
Tijuana cartel, 139
Tongs, 126, 135–136
Torrijos Herrera, Omar Efraín,
131, 132
Torrio, Johnny, 114–115
Tourism, 6
Trafficking, defined, 239–240
256
Index

“Trafficking in Persons
Report,” 153
Transnational crime groups
art and cultural objects, 82
Asia, 23–25
defining characteristics of
groups, 8–11
growth of networks, 91–92
illicit trafficking and, 4–5,
37–38
money laundering, 48–54
proliferation in the U.S.,
34–36
South and Central America,
26–27
trends among crime groups,
15–17
Transportation. See Air
transport
Treasury Department, U.S., 106
Treaties, 99, 102
Triads, 4–5, 24, 25, 61
Tsunami, 107–108
Tupac Amaru movement, 235
Turkey, heroin smuggling
in, 62
Turkish/Armenian conflict,
14–15
Turner, Ted, 174
Ukraine, 112–114, 129–130
“Uncle Seven,” 135–136
Undocumented aliens, 85. See
also Migration
United Nations
alien smuggling, 86
arms trafficking resource
information, 167–169
Clinton’s plea for global
cooperation, 37–38
Convention for the Suppression
of the Traffic in Persons and
the Exploitation of the
Prostitution of Others, 99
drug trafficking resource
information, 162–163
International Atomic Energy
Agency, 170–172
resource information,
155–157, 188–189
United Nations High
Commission on Refugees
(UNHCR), 237
United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research
(UNIDIR), 168–169
United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC),
155, 189
United States
attacks on Afghanistan, 103
Congress, 103
Justice Department, 185–186
State Department, 151–153,
158–159
Treasury Department, 106
Valachi, Joseph, 29
Venezuela, 5–6
Victims of Trafficking and
Violence Protection Act
(2000), 153–154
Vietnam War, 73–74
Volstead Act (1920), 31–32
Wake Island, 105
War criminals, 238
War of the Cartels, 120
War on drugs, 55–56
Weapons. See also Arms
trafficking
Weapons of mass destruction, 7,
19, 63–64
Weapons Removal and
Abatement (WRA),
164–167
Weiss, Earl “Hymie,” 116
White-collar crime, 16, 28
Illicit Trafficking
257

White slavery. See Sex trade
industry
Witness, 189–190
Women
Coalition Against Trafficking
in Women, 147–154,
179–180
feminization of migration,
86–88, 238–239
Global Alliance Against
Traffic in Women, 181–182
Inter-American Commission
of Women, 187
La Strada—The Foundation
Against Trafficking in
Women, 184–185
sex trade industry and,
142–145
UN Convention on
exploitation of
persons, 99
women migrants, 86–88
World Trade Center, 6, 107
World War II, 128–129
Yakuza, 12, 25
Yale, Frankie, 115
Zedillo, Ernesto, 139
Zetas, 139
258
Index

Robert J. Kelly is Broeklundian Professor Emeritus at Brooklyn
College and the Graduate School of The City University of New
York. He served on the Manhattan Terrorism Task Force after
9/11 and consulted with the Department of Homeland Security
(Northeast Region) and the National Institute of Justice on Ter-
rorism and Organized Crime; he also teaches a seminar at the
United Nations in the Permanent Delegate Seminar on National-
ism. Kelly has published numerous articles and books on terror-
ism, organized crime, and social distress.
Jess Maghan, Professor and Director of the Forum for Com-
parative Correction, is a specialist in justice operations and orga-
nizational development with a specific focus on incarcerated rad-
icals and intelligence-led penology. He has an extensive
background in corrections and police operations internationally.
Maghan is a recipient of the Peter P. Lejins Research Award of the
American Correctional Association and a recipient of the Elmer
and Carol Johnson Criminology Award. Along with Robert J.
Kelly, Dr. Maghan is co-editor of Hate Crime: The Global Politics of
Polarization, published by Southern Illinois University Press
(1998). Dr. Maghan served as the first Director of Training for the
New York City Police Department and Commissioner for Train-
ing, New York City Department of Correction.
Joseph D. Serio was the only American to work in the Orga-
nized Crime Control Department of the Ministry of Internal Af-
fairs of the USSR (1990–1991). Spending a total of seven years in
the former Soviet Union, he was a consultant to the international
corporate investigative and business intelligence firm, Kroll As-
sociates. He became the director of its Moscow office in 1997.
While in Russia, he served as consultant to CNN, The New York
259
About the Authors

Times, The Washington Post, and other media outlets. In addition
to his experience in the former Soviet Union, he has studied crim-
inal justice issues at police academies in China, Poland, Spain,
and England. He is currently Editor-in-Chief of Crime and Justice
International, published by the Office of International Criminal
Justice, and co-coordinator of the U.S. Department of State’s In-
ternational Law Enforcement Academy (ILEA) in Roswell, New
Mexico. Mr. Serio is a third-year doctoral student at Sam Houston
State University in Huntsville, Texas.
260
About the Authors

