
Image Science


IMAGE 
SCIENCE
ICONOLOGY,  
VISUAL CULTURE, AND  
MEDIA AESTHETICS
W. J. T. Mitchell
The University of Chicago Press
Chicago and London

W. J. T. MITCHELL is the Gaylord Donnelley 
Distinguished Service Professor of English and Art 
History at the University of Chicago and editor of 
Critical Inquiry.
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637
The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London
© 2015 by The University of Chicago
All rights reserved. Published 2015.
Printed in the United States of America
24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15  1 2 3 4 5
ISBN- 13: 978- 0- 226- 23133- 4 (cloth)
ISBN- 13: 978- 0- 226- 23150- 1 (e- book)
DOI: 10.7208/chicago/9780226231501.001.0001
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Mitchell, W. J. T. (William John Thomas), 1942– 
author.
Image science : iconology, visual culture, and 
media aesthetics / W. J. T. Mitchell.
pages  cm
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-226-23133-4 (cloth : alkaline paper)
ISBN 978-0-226-23150-1 (ebook)
1. Image (Philosophy). 2. Pictures—
Philosophy. 3. Visual communication—
Philosophy. 4. Mass media—Philosophy. I. Title. 
B105.I47M58 2015 
701'.8—dc23 
2015010449
♾ This paper meets the requirements of ANSI/NISO 
Z39.48- 1992 (Permanence of Paper).

For Michael Camille and the Laocoön Group
Becky Chandler
Elizabeth Helsinger
Robert Nelson
Margaret Olin
Linda Seidel
Joel Snyder
Martha Ward


List of Illustrations ix
Preface: Figures and Grounds xi
Acknowledgments xiii
PART ONE: FIGURES
 1 Art History on the Edge: Iconology, Media, and Visual Culture 3
 2 Four Fundamental Concepts of Image Science 13
 3 Image Science 23
 4 Image X Text 39
 5 Realism and the Digital Image 49
 6 Migrating Images: Totemism, Fetishism, Idolatry 65
 7 The Future of the Image: Rancière’s Road Not Taken 79
 8 World Pictures: Globalization and Visual Culture 93
PART TWO: GROUNDS
 9 Media Aesthetics 111
 10 There Are No Visual Media 125
 11 Back to the Drawing Board: Architecture, Sculpture, and the Digital 
Image 137
 12 Foundational Sites and Occupied Spaces 153
 13 Border Wars: Translation and Convergence in Politics and Media 167
 14 Art X Environment 181
 15 The Historical Uncanny: Phantoms, Doubles, and Repetition in the  
War on Terror 195
 16 The Spectacle Today: A Response to Retort 207
Coda: For a Sweet Science of Images 219
Index 227
CONTENTS


Figures
0.1 Edgar Rubin, “Rubin’s Vase” (1921) x
1.1 Book of Hours (Rouen) (ca. 1500– 1510) 2
2.1 The “Duck- Rabbit” (1892) 12
3.1 Steven Spielberg, still from Jurassic Park (1993) 22
4.1 René Magritte, This Is Not a Pipe (1929) 38
4.2 Image/text square of opposition 41
4.3 Image/text square of opposition (elaborated) 41
4.4 Ferdinand de Saussure, “Linguistic Sign” (1916) 45
5.1 Allan Sekula, Welder’s booth in bankrupt Todd Shipyard (1991) 48
6.1 Harry Bliss, “Well, actually, they are written in stone” (1999) 66
7.1 Lascaux Caves (ancient) 78
8.1 William Blake, The Book of Urizen (1794) 92
8.2 William Blake, Europe: a Prophecy (1794) 96
8.3 William Blake, The Song of Los (1795) 96
9.1 Ferdinand de Saussure, “Linguistic Sign” (1916) 110
10.1 René Descartes, Optics (seventeenth century) 124
11.1 Anne- Louis Girodet de Roussy- Trioson, “The Origin of Drawing” (1819) 136
11.2 Antony Gormley, Interior (1991) 149
11.3 Antony Gormley, Sovereign State I (1993) 150
11.4 Antony Gormley, Float II (1992) 150
12.1 Mahmud Hams, “Egyptian protesters carry an obelisk” (2012) 152
12.2 Edgar Rubin, “Rubin’s Vase” (multiplied) 159
13.1 “Border line between British and Russian sectors” (1947) 166
14.1 Nicolas Poussin, The Plague at Ashdod (1630) 180
14.2 Mahmud Hams, “Gaza City Morgue” (2009) 190
14.3 Nicolas Poussin, The Plague at Ashdod (detail) 190
15.1 Forkscrew Graphics, “iRaq/iPod” (2004) 196
16.1 J. R. Eyerman, “Audience at a 3D Movie” (ca. 1950s) 206
Tables
4.1 
Triads of aesthetics and semiotics 46
9.1 
Triads of aesthetics and semiotics (elaborated) 122
ILLUSTRATIONS

0.1 Edgar Rubin, “Rubin’s Vase” (1921). 
One vase/two faces.

A distinction is drawn by arranging a boundary with separate sides so that a point 
on one side cannot reach the other side without crossing the boundary.
GEORGE SPENCER- BROWN, Laws of Form (1969)
There is an Outside spread Without, & an Outside spread Within
Beyond the Outline of Identity both ways, which meet in One . . . 
WILLIAM BLAKE, Jerusalem (1804)
We Germans have no lack of systematic books.
G. E. LESSING, Laocoon: On the Limitsof Poetry and Painting (1766)
“How to begin without having begun, since one needs a distinction in 
order to begin.” The answer, for philosopher Niklas Luhmann, is a simple 
imperative: “draw a distinction.”1 This remark might be taken as the fun-
damental mantra of modern systems theory, as important to contempo-
rary social and natural sciences as the Cartesian cogito, “I think, therefore 
I am,” was to early modern science. But it is also a foundational moment 
for iconology, the science of images. An iconologist is bound to notice 
the figurative expression hidden in the notion of drawing a distinction, 
and then to insist on taking it literally, as a visual, graphic operation. The 
philosopher or sociologist might say it means merely to make a distinction, 
to provide a verbal definition that distinguishes one thing from another— 
truth from falsehood, good from evil, clarity from obscurity, here from 
there— especially when the two things might otherwise be confused: 
art and life, meaning and significance, expression and imitation. In any 
case, the iconologist’s attention is drawn to drawing, to the inscription of 
a boundary, the marking of a form in space, the contrast between a thing 
and the environment in which it is located. In short, the delineation of 
figure from ground.
Of course, drawing a distinction between figure and ground is only 
1. Art as a Social System (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2000), 31.
PREFACE
Figures and Grounds

x i i  :  P R E F A C E
the beginning. In systems theory, that distinction marks the boundary 
between a system and its environment or between a form and the medium 
in which the form appears. It inevitably draws attention to three things:  
(1) the boundary between an inside and an outside that constitutes a figure 
or form in a space; (2) the frame or support in or on which an image and 
its surrounding space make their appearance; (3) the outline that curves 
in upon itself, drawing the beholder into a vortex that reverses the loca-
tions of figure and ground. Thus, what was marked becomes unmarked, 
and the previously unmarked suddenly emerges as remarkable: the vase 
disappears to reveal two faces, or vice versa.
From the standpoint of image science, then, systems theory ceases to 
be abstract. It takes on a body and locates that body somewhere. It be-
comes visible, graphic, and even palpable. And it puts into question its 
own Cartesian moment of drawing because, after all, is drawing really all 
there is to images? What about color? Doesn’t color obey a different logic, 
one that spills over boundaries, shades into an infinite spectrum of infini-
tesimal differentiations and vague indeterminacies? Is it not the ultimate 
ground out of which every figure must emerge? And isn’t color precisely 
the phenomenon that defies the fundamental gesture of systems theory, 
insofar as every distinction that is drawn between one hue, one tonality, 
and another generates an intermediate possibility, a mixture of the two 
colors being distinguished, the gray zone of the everyday?
The following essays, written unsystematically over the last decade in 
response to a variety of occasions, display a certain adherence to these 
basic gestures and limitations of systems theory. The essays are gathered 
here as a diptych, part 1 focusing on figures, part 2 on grounds. The first 
eight essays deal with the nature of images, from the ways in which they 
breach the disciplinary borders of art history, to their potential as scientific 
objects, to their centrality in questions of language, social and emotional 
life, realism and truth- claims, technology and life- forms, and, finally, in 
the notion of world pictures, or “the world as picture,” as Martin  Heidegger 
put it.2 The second eight essays focus on the media in which images ap-
pear, the sites and spaces where they live, and the frameworks of tempo-
rality and spectacle that frame them in a history of the present.
2. “The Age of the World Picture,” in The Question Concerning Technology, trans. 
William Lovitt (New York: Harper & Row, 1977), 129: “world picture, when under-
stood essentially, does not mean a picture of the world but the world conceived 
and grasped as picture.”

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I could go on at great length acknowledging the numerous friends and col-
leagues who have inspired these essays. Most were written in response to a 
question or a challenge, and I have tried to specify all of those in the notes 
to each chapter. But there is also one long- overdue debt that the book as 
a whole tries to address, and that is to a small group of colleagues at the 
University of Chicago that brought art history, literature, and philosophy 
into dialogue almost thirty years ago. It called itself the Laocoön Group, 
naming itself after the late classical sculptural group, and the crucial book 
of G. E. Lessing that provided us with an exemplary synthesis of critical 
theory across the arts. Lessing’s Laocoön: On the Limits of Poetry and Paint-
ing, a capstone of Enlightenment aesthetics, was deliberately and proudly 
unsystematic, much like our motley group of scholars. It is to that group 
that this book is dedicated, especially to its most brilliant member, the late 
Michael Camille. The first chapter, “Art History on the Edge,” is in effect 
an explanation of this dedication, a naming of names, and a genealogy of 
image science as I have experienced and understood it.
Many individuals contributed advice, counsel, and comfort as these 
essays were being written (and rewritten). As always, Joel Snyder and Alan 
Thomas have been crucial in saving me from errors and raising the game. 
Lauren Berlant, Neal Curtis, Stephen Daniels, Ellen Esrock, Michael Ann 
Holly, Janice Misurell Mitchell, Keith Moxey, Florence Tager, and Michael 
Taussig provided timely interventions. Jacques Rancière agreed to engage 
in dialogue about image theory in a way that has been endlessly produc-
tive. Nova Smith provided crucial help with permissions. And Sally Stein 
was incredibly generous in allowing me to reproduce the late Allan Sekula’s 
wonderful photograph.
I must also mention three institutions that have made it possible for 
me to finish this book. The first is the Getty Research Institute, headed by 
director Thomas Gaeghtens, which provided space, time, inspiration, and 
resources in the winter and late summers of 2013 and 2014. The second is 
the Clark Institute for Art History, where, under the benign gaze of director 
Michael Ann Holly, the first drafts of several of these essays were written 

x i v  :  A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S
in 2008, and which gave me a precious asylum for writing in the spring 
of 2013. Lastly, the Division of Humanities at the University of Chicago, 
headed by Dean Martha Roth, provided reliably regular leave time and 
research funds that have made my life as a scholar possible.
Chapter 1, “Art History on the Edge: Iconology, Media, and Visual Culture,” 
was written for “Discipline on the Edge: Michael Camille and the Shifting 
Contours of Art History, 1985– 2010,” a session in honor of Michael Camille 
at the College Art Association’s 2010 meeting. Chapter 2, “Four Fundamen-
tal Concepts of Image Science,” first appeared in Visual Literacy, ed. James 
Elkins (New York: Routledge, 2008), 14– 30. Chapter 3, “Image Science,” 
was written for the Thyssen Lecture at Humboldt University in Berlin, 
with the generous support of the Wissenschaftskolleg zu Berlin; it first 
appeared in Science Images and Popular Images of the Sciences, ed. Bernd 
Huppauf and Peter Weingart (New York: Routledge, 2007), 55– 68. Chapter 
4, “Image X Text,” first appeared as the introduction to The Future of Text 
and Image: Collected Essays on Literary and Visual Conjunctures, ed. Ofra 
Amihay and Lauren Walsh (Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 
2012), 1– 14. Chapter 5, “Realism and the Digital Image,” first appeared in 
Critical Realism in Contemporary Art: Around Allan Sekula’s Photography, ed. 
Jan Baetens and Hilde Van Gelder, Lieven Gevaert Series, vol. 4  (Leuven: 
 Leuven University Press, 2012), 12– 27; it was translated into Italian by Fed-
erica Mazzara as “Realismo e imagine digitale,” in Cultura Visuale: Par-
adigmi a Confronto, ed. Roberta Coglitore (Palermo: Duepunti Edizione, 
2008), 81– 99, and reprinted in Travels in Intermedia: ReBlurring the Bound-
aries, ed. Bernd Herzogenrath (Aachen: Mellen Press, 2011; Hanover, NH: 
Dartmouth College Press, 2012). A different version of chapter 6, “Migrat-
ing Images: Totemism, Fetishism, Idolatry,” appeared in Migrating Images, 
ed. Petra Stegmann and Peter Seel (Berlin: House of World Cultures, 2004), 
14– 24; it is reprinted here with permission by Haus der Kulturen der Welt, 
Berlin. Chapter 7, “The Future of the Image: Rancière’s Road Not Taken,” 
first appeared in “The Pictorial Turn,” a special issue of Culture, Theory, 
and Critique, ed. Neal Curtis (fall 2009), reprinted in book form as The 
Pictorial Turn, ed. Neal Curtis (New York: Routledge 2010), 37– 48. Chap-
ter 8, “World Pictures: Globalization and Visual Culture,” first appeared 
in a special issue on globalization in Neohelicon, ed. Wang Ning (34, no. 2; 
December 2007); it was reprinted in Globalization and Contemporary Art, ed. 
Jonathan Harris (Malden, MA: Wiley- Blackwell, 2011), 253– 64.
In part 2, chapter 9, “Media Aesthetics,” first appeared as the foreword 
to Thinking Media Aesthetics, ed. Liv Hausken (New York: Peter Lang, 2013), 

A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S  :  x v
15– 28. Chapter 10, “There Are No Visual Media,” first appeared in Journal 
of Visual Culture 4, no. 2 (2005): 257– 66; it was reprinted in Media Art His-
tories, ed. Oliver Grau (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007), 395– 406, and 
in Digital Qualitative Research Methods, ed. Bella Dicks (New York: Sage, 
2012). Chapter 11, “Back to the Drawing Board: Architecture, Sculpture, 
and the Digital Image,” first appeared in Architecture and the Digital Image: 
Proceedings of the 2007 International Bauhaus Colloquium, ed. Jorg Gleiter 
(2008), 5– 12. Chapter 12, “Foundational Sites and Occupied Spaces,” was 
the keynote address for Grundungsorte, a 2012 conference convened by 
the Research Group on Culture, Politics, and Space at the University of 
Munich; it appeared in Grundungssorte der Moderne von St. Petersburg bis 
Occupy Wall Street, ed. Maha El Sissy, trans. Sascha Pohlmann (Paderborn: 
Wilhelm Fink, 2014), 23– 38. Chapter 13, “Border Wars: Translation and 
Convergence in Politics and Media,” was the keynote address for the Inter-
national Conference of the English Language and Literature Association 
of Korea (ELLAK), Busan, Korea, December 2012; many thanks to the or-
ganizing genius of Youngmin Kim. Chapter 14, “Art X Environment,” was 
written as the keynote address for the “Art + Environment” conference at 
the Nevada Museum of Art in 2008. Chapter 15, “The Historical Uncanny: 
Phantoms, Doubles, and Repetition in the War on Terror,” was written for 
the Kunstwerke lecture series in Berlin. And chapter 16, “The Spectacle To-
day: A Response to Retort,” first appeared in Public Culture 20, no. 3 (2008): 
573– 81 (© 2008, Duke University Press, all rights reserved; republished by 
permission of Duke University Press); it has since been updated to the 
conditions of 2013.


PART ONE Figures

1.1 Anonymous, Book 
of Hours, Rouen, 
France (ca. 1500– 1510). 
Parchment (detail). MS 
343, ff. 89v– 90r. Photo-
graph: Special Collec-
tions Research Center, 
University of Chicago 
Library.

1: ART HISTORY ON THE EDGE
Iconology, Media, and Visual Culture
It has been a long time since I could claim to be an outsider to art his-
tory. Despite my lack of academic credentials in this field, I have been 
ploughing it for so long that, as Karl Marx would have put it, my brains 
and  muscle have long since been mixed with the soil of the visual arts, and 
that is where I expect to be buried.
But there was a time back in the 1980s when I was part of a gener-
ation of literary critics and philosophers who migrated into the visual 
arts. Scholars like Norman Bryson in England, Mieke Bal in the Nether-
lands, and Gottfried Boehm in Switzerland, not to mention the hordes of 
 semioticians, structuralists, and deconstructionists, began to invade the 
quiet domain of the visual arts and set up camp with new methods and 
meta languages. At the same time, art historians like Michael Baxandall, 
Svetlana Alpers, Hans Belting, and David Freedberg were expanding the 
boundaries of traditional art history into rhetoric, optical technologies, 
and vernacular or nonartistic images, and a new debate over modernism 
was emerging between T. J. Clark and Michael Fried.
Closer to home, in fact right at the heart of my own Department of Art 
History at the University of Chicago, was a remarkable scholar who epit-
omized these new tendencies, and who dazzled us all with his audacious 
efforts to revolutionize the study of medieval art, a field that many of us 
in literature and the visual arts had regarded for some time as hopelessly 
orthodox and stuffy, dominated by religious dogma and the archaic con-
ventions of aristocratic romances. My own literary training had led me to 
think of medieval culture as unbearably pious and obsessed with higher, 
more spiritual things than we modern, secular humanists could bear to 
contemplate. Even the great Chaucer, with his bawdy humor and scatologi-
cal realism seemed to have been made safe by a comprehensive framework 
of Christian allegorizing that assured us of the stable theological system 
underlying all the deviations. As Albert Baugh put it in his classic textbook, 
A Literary History of England:

4  :  C H A P T E R  1
One is constantly aware in medieval literature of the all- important place of 
the Church in medieval life. It is often said that men and women looked 
upon this life mainly as a means to the next. Certainly they lived in much 
more fear of Hell and its torments and were vitally concerned with the 
problem of salvation for their souls. Religious writings are, therefore, a 
large and significant part of medieval literature, not off to one side as in 
our day, but in the main stream. They bulk large because religion over-
topped the common affairs of life as the cathedral dominated the sur-
rounding country. . . . [E]ven where religion is not directly concerned, a 
moral purpose is frequently discernible in literature, openly avowed or 
tacitly implied as the justification for its existence.1
It may seem all too obvious in retrospect how such a situation was tailor- 
made for a scholar like Michael Camille who devoted himself to exploring 
the boundaries, margins, and outsides of this hegemonic picture of medi-
eval culture. His approach to the dangerous supplements and dialectical 
oppositions of canonical medievalism were refreshingly contemporary, if 
not quite postmodern, in procedure. Camille was an obsessive student of 
the detail who loved to pore over the intricate and overlooked “ornamen-
tal” features of medieval texts, placing the primary and dominant message 
in the context of the secondary elements that often complicated, parodied, 
and undermined the master discourse.
When Michael Camille joined the faculty of the University of Chicago 
in 1985, fresh from his Cambridge training with Norman Bryson, he found 
a group of young scholars eagerly awaiting his arrival. Medievalist Linda 
 Seidel, Byzantinist Rob Nelson, photographer- philosopher Joel Snyder, and 
modern art historians Becky Chandler, Martha Ward, and Margaret Olin 
had already, along with literary scholars Elizabeth Helsinger and myself, 
formed an informal workshop known as the Laocoön Group, named not 
primarily for the ancient sculpture, but for G. E. Lessing’s classic reflec-
tion on the relations of literature and the visual arts. The Laocoön Group 
was dedicated to studying the intersections of the visual arts, philosophy, 
and literature, and its monthly meetings were enlivened by visits by the 
young Gayatri Spivak, who led us through Derrida’s Of Grammatology, 
and Tom Crow, who denounced the group as a deviation from serious art  
history.2
I do not remember exactly when the Laocoön Group ceased to exist. 
1. Baugh et al. (New York: Appleton Century Crofts, 1948),115.
2. My impression is that Tom has mellowed considerably since the 1980s.

A R T  H I S T O R Y  O N  T H E  E D G E  :  5
Perhaps it was when its members began to be promoted to tenure and took 
over the running of Chicago’s art history department in the late 1980s. I do 
remember that Michael Camille’s arrival coincided with the publication 
of his wonderful first article, “Seeing and Reading: Some Visual Implica-
tions of Medieval Literacy and Illiteracy.” As one can tell from the title, 
this article was well suited to the Laocoön Group, as was Camille’s deep 
engagement with French theory, especially in its emphasis on nonverbal 
systems of meaning. Michael quickly became the heart and soul of Chicago 
art history. He was a fabulous teacher, an exquisite writer, and a colleague 
who made us all feel as if we belonged to a very special club— the “école 
Chicago”— that was blessed by his brilliance and enthusiasm. I know that 
I date my own identity as an art historian to a moment when I confessed to 
him my fear that Iconology, my 1986 foray into image theory, would never 
pass muster among art historians, and he expressed astonishment that I 
would have any such doubts.
It is difficult to separate Michael Camille’s influence on my work from 
the whole ambience of the Laocoön Group, but it may be worthwhile to 
identify a few tendencies in his thought that pervaded our discussions. 
Of course, “word and image” was central to our discussions already, but 
Michael had a way of grounding this topic in the materiality of texts and 
graphic arts, and in the technological revolutions that change the ratios 
of what Foucault called the “seeable and the sayable.” There was also Mi-
chael’s close attentiveness to the self- reflexivity of images, the ways in 
which the mimetic “monkey business” of ornamental features in archi-
tecture and book design constituted a whole other level of theorizing and 
criticizing the dominant ideologies of artistic monuments. Perhaps most 
inspiring for me was a moment of convergence in our work around the 
problem of idolatry and iconoclasm in the visual arts. As Michael was 
beginning work on his first book, The Gothic Idol (1989), he quoted back 
to me a sentence from Iconology that he had found useful: “a book which 
began with the intention of producing a valid theory of images became a 
book about the fear of images” (3). I don’t think Michael himself had any 
fear of images, but he loved to contemplate the exuberance of their lives, 
and their tendency to exceed all forms of discursive control. He gave us all 
permission to think poetically about our work, to cross disciplinary bound-
aries, and to ask forbidden questions such as (in my own case) “what do 
pictures want?”3
3. A question that haunts my book by that title, What Do Pictures Want? On the Lives 
and Loves of Images (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005).

6  :  C H A P T E R  1
I want to turn now from these reflections on the moment of Michael 
Camille to the aftermath of his influence, and that of the Laocoön Group, 
on subsequent developments in art history, or at least of my own sense 
of how the field has evolved in the last twenty years. I’m especially inter-
ested in the way Michael’s merry insistence on crossing the boundaries 
of medieval orthodoxy was also expressed as a freedom to cross the bor-
ders of traditional art history. Michael’s lovely second book, Image on the 
Edge (2004), gives me the courage to try to think broadly, if somewhat 
autobiographically, about art history itself as a “discipline on the edge,” 
an edgy discipline capable of veering between hostility and hospitality 
to border crossings from adjacent fields such as literature, cinema, and 
cultural studies.
My migration into art history was spurred, initially, not by any abstract 
or theoretical imperative, but by the practical requirements of understand-
ing the work of William Blake, a painter, poet, and engraver whose com-
posite art of “illuminated printing” made it necessary to think across the 
boundaries between word and image, literature and the visual arts. Blake’s 
work also required, as Michael pointed out to me once, the exploration 
of a past- present dialectic among the highly disparate moments of me-
dieval illumination, Enlightenment book technology, Romantic poetics, 
and contemporary cultural politics. It was as a later result of this forced 
migration from one disciplinary territory to another that I began to reflect 
more broadly on art history’s relation to adjacent disciplines that have 
influenced, supplemented, and to some extent transformed its identity.
In my view, art history may be understood as the convergence of three 
distinct fields of study that reside upon its borders, provoking, stimulat-
ing, and sometimes threatening its identity as the “history of works of 
art”: (1) iconology, the study of images across media, and especially of the 
interface between language and visual representation; (2) visual culture, 
the study of visual perception and representation, especially the social 
construction of the field of visibility and (equally important) the visual 
construction of the social field; and (3) media studies, specifically the 
emergent field known as “media aesthetics,” which aims to bridge the 
gaps between technical, social, and artistic dispositions of media. All these 
fields are, in some sense, outside the boundaries of art history, constitut-
ing its horizon or frontier, while at the same time providing a necessary 
and sometimes dangerous supplement to its work.
Iconology opens the border to the image, the fundamental unit of affect 
and meaning in art history. Visual culture opens the border to the specific 

A R T  H I S T O R Y  O N  T H E  E D G E  :  7
sensory channel through which the “visual arts” necessarily operate. (It is, 
in this sense, analogous to the relation of linguistics to poetics, language 
to literature; Ernst Gombrich called it a “linguistics of the visual field.”) 
And media aesthetics opens the border on the relation of the arts to mass 
media, avant- garde to kitsch, polite to popular arts, art to the everyday. 
These fields also cross- fertilize: visual culture provides one of the principal 
channels for the circulation of images, constituting the primary (but not 
exclusive) domain of their appearance and disappearance; media aesthet-
ics provides a framework for considering the larger “ratio of the senses” 
(Marshall McLuhan) or what Jacques Rancière calls the “distribution of 
the sensible,” studying the relations of the eye to the ear, the hand to the 
mouth, at the same time putting technical innovation and obsolescence 
at the center of attention.
The first of these fields, iconology, is very ancient. It goes back at least 
to the Renaissance and Cesare Ripa’s Iconologia, and perhaps earlier to 
Philostratus’s Imagines,4 and now includes the full range of nonartistic 
images, including scientific images.5 It is the field that interrogates the 
very idea of the image in philosophical discourse and traces the migration 
of images across the boundaries between literature, music, and the visual 
arts (the three great orders of lexis, melos, and opsis outlined in Aristotle’s 
Poetics). From the standpoint of iconology, the notion of a visual image is 
not a redundancy but a tacit acknowledgment that there are verbal and 
acoustic images as well. Iconology is therefore as much concerned with 
tropes, figures, and metaphors as with visual and graphic motifs, as much 
with formal gestures in auditory time and sculptural- architectural space as 
with pictures on a wall or screen. In Erwin Panofsky’s classic formulation 
(restricted to the visual image), iconology includes the study of iconog-
raphy, the historical study of the meanings of specific images, and goes 
beyond it to explore the ontology of images as such, and the conditions 
4. Iconologia di Cesare Ripa Perugino (Venice: Cristoforo Tomassini, 1645). 
 Philostratus the Elder flourished in the third century AD; his work was continued 
by his grandson, Philostratus the Younger. Both produced collections of essays 
on paintings entitled Imagines. See the English translations by Arthur Fairbanks 
in the Loeb Classical Library (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1931).
5. The great exemplar here is, of course, Aby Warburg. His program for a global 
art history implied a kind of merger with anthropology and performance studies 
(Warburg witnessed and photographed the coronation of Mussolini); his “Bilder-
atlas” project promised both a universal iconology and something like an emer-
gent visual cultural studies.

8  :  C H A P T E R  1
under which images attain historical significance.6 In the post- Panofsky 
era of what I have called “critical iconology,”7 it has taken up such matters 
as “metapictures” or reflexive, self- critical forms of imagery; the relations 
of images to language; the status of mental imagery, fantasy, and mem-
ory; the theological and political status of images in the phenomena of 
icono clasm and iconophobia; and the interplay between virtual and actual, 
imaginary and real images captured by the English vernacular distinction 
between images and pictures.
Iconology has found work to do as well in the realm of the sciences, 
investigating the role of images in scientific research, specifically (in my 
own work) in the phenomenon of the “natural” image (e.g., the fossil and 
the type specimen) and the entire question of speciation and evolutionary 
morphology.8 At the same time, the advancement of the life sciences in 
the last century has revolutionized the ancient conception of the image as 
an “imitation of life.” Biotechnology has now made it possible to make a 
living image of a life- form in the process known as cloning, with profound 
consequences for our concepts of both images and life- forms. When these 
developments are coupled with the revolution in information science pro-
duced by the invention of the computer, we find ourselves entering a new 
era of what I have called “biocybernetic reproduction,” characterized by 
the appearance of the “biodigital picture.” This vitalistic and animistic 
conception of the image (whose pedigree in the work of Michael Camille 
would be worth exploring) has led me to speculate that the proper ques-
tion to ask of pictures is not merely what they mean or what they do, but 
what they want.9
Visual culture, in contrast to iconology, is a fairly recent object of study, 
though it has a long pedigree in philosophical treatments of the specta-
tor as the exemplary subject of epistemology, from Plato’s Allegory of the 
Cave to Descartes’s Optics, to the tradition that Martin Jay has termed 
6. Panofsky, “Iconography and Iconology: An Introduction to the Study of Re-
naissance Art,” in Meaning in the Visual Arts (New York: Anchor Doubleday, 1955), 
26– 54.
7. Mitchell, Iconology: Image, Text, Ideology (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1987), 1– 3.
8. See, for example, Lisa Cartwright’s important work on medical imaging and 
visual culture in Scientific Images and Popular Images of the Sciences, a wide- ranging 
collection of essays on this and related topics edited by Bernd Huppauf and Peter 
Weingart (New York: Routledge, 2007).
9. See What Do Pictures Want?, particularly chapter 15, “The Work of Art in the Age 
of Biocybernetic Reproduction.”

A R T  H I S T O R Y  O N  T H E  E D G E  :  9
“ocularcentrism.”10 As a technical matter, visual cultural studies prob-
ably emerges from innovations in optical recording technologies such as 
 photography, television, and cinema, and from studies of culture and psy-
chology centered on visual perception and recognition.11 Visual anthropol-
ogy and studies of material and mass culture are important inspirations 
for the field of visual culture, as well as a variety of artistic movements that 
challenge the centrality of painting and sculpture to the canon of art his-
tory. Artistic forays into popular culture, installation and environmental 
art, conceptual art, and new media have, in alliance with critical iconology, 
forced an expansion of the field of art history that both recalls and goes 
beyond the founding ambitions of the Warburg and Vienna schools. Art 
history under the pressure of visual culture now includes a wide variety of 
research agendas, ranging from Lacan’s scopic drive to the phenomenon 
of racial profiling and the power of the gaze, to the dialectics of spectacle 
(Guy Debord) and surveillance (Michel Foucault). It aims to investigate 
the specificity of the optical field in relation to tactile and acoustical mo-
dalities, as well as the Foucauldian- Deleuzean strata of the “seeable and 
sayable.” Visual culture also explores the frontiers of visuality in its rela-
tion to the so- called visual arts,12 its imbrications with language, with the 
other senses, and with the limits or negations of visuality in phenomena 
such as blindness, invisibility, and what might be called the “overlooked” 
elements of everyday life. It is especially concerned with the phenomena 
of intersubjectivity in the scopic field, the dynamics of seeing and being 
seen by other people as a critical moment in the formation of the social. 
Inspired by such foundational texts as Jean- Paul Sartre’s “The Look” and 
Franz Fanon’s “Algeria Unveiled,” visual culture helps us see how works 
of art may “look back” at spectators. Most fundamentally, it aspires to 
explain, not merely the “social construction of the visual field,” but the 
visual construction of the social field, the way that modes of spectacle and 
10. Martin Jay, Downcast Eyes: The Denigration of Images in Twentieth Century French 
Thought (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994).
11. For a truly authoritative history of visual culture, one should immerse oneself 
in the writings of Nicholas Mirzoeff, particularly An Introduction to Visual Culture, 
rev. 2nd ed. (New York: Routledge, 2002), as well as the tradition inaugurated by 
John Berger’s classic Ways of Seeing (London: Penguin, 1972). Margaret Dikovit-
skaya’s collection of interviews, Visual Culture: The Study of the Visual after the 
Cultural Turn (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005), includes a much more extensive 
set of reflections on the field.
12. My reasons for the phrase “so- called visual arts” will be explained in chap-
ter 10.

1 0  :  C H A P T E R  1
surveillance coupled with mass and social media constitute our brave new 
world of drones, NSA data mining, and hactivism.
The third field, media aesthetics, is also quite young, tracing its gene-
alogy to the writings of Marshall McLuhan, who was the first to articulate 
the principles of a general field of media studies that would go beyond rep-
resentation to include the entire range of technical “extensions of man.”13 
For McLuhan, everything from the skin to clothing to the railroad system 
constituted the field of communication and expression, forming a “second 
nature” around individuals and societies. At its center, of course, was the 
modern invention of the mass media, especially the broadcast media. But 
McLuhan was equally concerned with what we now call “social media,” 
such as the telegraph, telephone, postal system, and (avant la lettre) the 
“extension of the nervous system” known as the Internet. He was also con-
cerned with the artistic use of both old and new media. Indeed, McLuhan 
reserved a special place for art as the realm of experimental play with new 
media inventions, the place where the effect of media on the sensorium 
and social formations could be explored. All the questions about medium 
specificity, mixed media, intermedia, and what Rosalind Krauss has called 
“the post- medium condition,” are ranged under contemporary research 
in media aesthetics.
Contemporary media aesthetics seeks to revive the ambitions of Mc-
Luhan’s project by thinking across the boundaries of mass and artistic 
media and technical, socioeconomic, political forms of mediation. In the 
work of theorists such as Bernard Stiegler, Niklas Luhmann, and Friedrich 
Kittler, it has opened up a world of total mediation in which the frontiers of 
thought make a dialectical turn toward the immediate: the phenomenology 
of the unmediated, the transparent, and the uncoded— a development 
that brings us back to the notion that the senses themselves (particularly 
seeing and hearing) can be understood theoretically and historically. 
When I teach media studies these days, I am tempted to rename it “im-
media studies” or (on the model of climatology and weather forecasting) 
“mediarology.”
These are the three fields that have grounded my own approaches to 
and departures from art history. I am not sure they have any systematic 
relationship to one another. Perhaps their relation to art history is some-
thing like the contingent relations of national borders, as if art history 
were something like Switzerland, a multilingual country bounded on three 
sides by major national entities (France, Germany, Italy), with the fourth 
13. Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man (New York: McGraw- Hill, 1964).

A R T  H I S T O R Y  O N  T H E  E D G E  :  1 1
border, on the east (Austria), opening out toward an orient, and an ori-
entalist history, that disrupts any tidy, Eurocentric synthesis. But this is 
surely a fantasy that would only occur to an American who grew up in the 
wide open spaces of the Western desert, and whose approach to disciplines 
and field boundaries has always been summed up in the old cowboy ballad 
“Don’t Fence Me In.” I like to think it is a fantasy that might have been 
shared by a working class lad from Yorkshire named Michael Camille.

2.1 Anonymous, “The Duck- Rabbit” (1892). Detail from a page in Fliegende Blätter.

2: FOUR FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS 
OF IMAGE SCIENCE
When I published Iconology twenty years ago, I had no idea that it would 
be the first volume in what has turned out to be a trilogy (Picture The-
ory and What Do Pictures Want? in 1994 and 2005 are the sequels). In the 
mid- 1980s, notions such as “visual culture” and “new art history” were 
nothing more than rumors. The concept of “word and image,” much less 
an International Association for Word and Image Studies (IAWIS), was 
hardly dreamed of. And the idea of “iconology” itself seemed at that time 
like an obsolete subdiscipline of art history, associated at worst with a 
kind of tedious method of allegorizing and motif- hunting, at best with 
the founding fathers of the early twentieth century, Aby Warburg, Alois 
Riegl, and Erwin Panofsky.
Now, of course, the terrain looks quite different. There are academic 
departments of visual studies and visual culture, and journals devoted to 
these subjects. The New Art History (as inspired by semiotics, at any rate) 
is yesterday’s news. The interdisciplinary study of verbal and visual media 
has become a central feature of modern humanistic study. And new forms 
of critical iconology, of Bildwissenschaft or “image science,” have emerged 
across the fields of the humanities, social sciences, and even the natural 
sciences.
Iconology played some part in these developments. Exactly what its in-
fluence has been would be difficult for me to assess. All I can do at this 
point is to look back at the ideas that it launched in relation to their fur-
ther development in my own work. In twenty years of working through 
problems in visual culture, visual literacy, image science, and iconology, 
four basic ideas have continually asserted themselves. Some of these 
were already latent in Iconology but were only named in later writings. I 
hope these remarks will help readers obtain an overview of the consistent 
themes and problems that grew out of Iconology and that have now become 
(with apologies to Jacques Lacan)1 what I think of as “the four fundamental 
1. See Lacan’s Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis (New York: W. W. Nor-
ton, 1981).

1 4  :  C H A P T E R  2
concepts of image science.” I call them “the pictorial turn,” the “image/
picture distinction,” the “metapicture,” and the “biopicture.” Here, in very 
schematic form, are the basic outlines of these concepts.
THE PICTORIAL TURN
This phrase (first developed in Picture Theory), sometimes compared with 
Gottfried Boehm’s later notion of an “iconic turn”2 and with the emer-
gence of visual studies and visual culture as academic disciplines, is often 
misunderstood as merely a label for the rise of so- called visual media, 
such as television, video, and cinema. There are several problems with this 
formulation of the matter. First, the very notion of purely visual media is 
radically incoherent, and the first lesson in any critical account of visual 
culture should be to dispel it.3 Media are always mixtures of sensory and 
semiotic elements, and all the so- called “visual media” are mixed or hybrid 
formations, combining sound and sight, text and image. Even vision itself 
is not purely optical, requiring for its operations a coordination of optical 
and tactile impressions. Second, the idea of a “turn” toward the pictorial is 
not confined to modernity, or to contemporary visual culture. It is a trope or 
figure of thought that reappears numerous times in the history of culture, 
usually at moments when some new technology of reproduction, or some 
set of images associated with new social, political, or aesthetic movements, 
has arrived on the scene. Thus, the invention of artificial perspective, the 
arrival of easel painting, and the invention of photography were all greeted 
as “pictorial turns” and were seen as either wonderful or threatening, often 
both at the same time. But one could also detect a version of the pictorial 
turn in the ancient world, when the Israelites “turn aside” from the law 
that Moses is bringing from Mt. Sinai and erect a golden calf as their idol. 
The turn to idolatry— the most anxiety- provoking version of the pictorial 
turn— is often grounded in the fear that masses of people are being led 
astray by a false image, whether it is an ideological concept or the figure 
2. The Pictorial Turn, ed. Neal Curtis (London: Routledge, 2010), includes an ex-
change of letters between Boehm and myself on the relation of the “iconic” and 
“pictorial” turns. This collection (originally a special issue of Culture, Theory, and 
Critique 50, nos. 2– 3), contains important essays by Jacques Rancière, Susan Buck- 
Morss, Martin Jay, Lydia Liu, Michael Taussig, Nicholas Mirzoeff, Stephen Daniels,  
and Marquand Smith, plus essays and images by artists Larry Abramson, Robert 
Morris, and Antony Gormley, and an essay on biological images by paleontologist 
Norman Macleod.
3. See chapter 10, “There Are No Visual Media,” for this argument.

F O U R  F U N D A M E N T A L  C O N C E P T S  :  1 5
of a charismatic leader. Third, as this example suggests, pictorial turns 
are often linked with anxiety about the “new dominance” of the image, 
as a threat to everything from the word of God to verbal literacy. Pictorial 
turns usually invoke some version of the distinction between words and 
images, the word associated with law, literacy, and the rule of elites, the 
image with popular superstition, illiteracy, and licentiousness. The pic-
torial turn, then, is usually from words to images, and it is not unique to 
our time. This is not to say, however, that pictorial turns are all alike: each 
involves a specific picture that emerges in a particular historical situation.
Fourth, and finally, there is the meaning of the pictorial turn that is 
unique to our time and is associated with developments in disciplinary 
knowledge and perhaps even philosophy itself, as a successor to what 
Richard Rorty called “the linguistic turn.” Rorty famously argued that the 
evolution of Western philosophy has moved from a concern with things 
or objects, to ideas and concepts, and finally (in the twentieth century) to 
language.4 My suggestion has been that the image (not only visual images 
but verbal metaphors as well) has emerged as a topic of special urgency 
in our time, not just in politics and mass culture (where it is a familiar 
issue) but also in the most general reflections on human psychology and 
social behavior, as well as in the structure of knowledge itself.5 The turn 
that Fredric Jameson describes from “philosophy” to something called 
“theory” in the human sciences is based, I think, not only in a recogni-
tion that philosophy is mediated by language but by the entire range of 
representational practices, including images. For this reason, theories of 
imagery and of visual culture have taken on a much more general set of 
problems in recent decades, moving out from the specific concerns of art 
history to an “expanded field” that includes psychology and neuroscience, 
epistemology, ethics, aesthetics, and theories of media and politics, to-
ward what can only be described as a new “metaphysics of the image.” This 
development, like Rorty’s linguistic turn, generates a whole new reading 
of philosophy itself, one that could be traced to such developments as 
Jacques Derrida’s critique of phonocentrism in favor of a graphic and spa-
tial model of writing, or Gilles Deleuze’s claim that philosophy has always 
been obsessed with the problem of the image, and thus has always been a 
4. This is the fundamental claim of Rorty’s classic text, Philosophy and the Mirror 
of Nature (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1981).
5. On the side of metaphor, or the “verbal image,” this argument has been carried 
out most resolutely by George Lakoff and Mark Johnson in Metaphors We Live By 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003).

1 6  :  C H A P T E R  2
form of iconology.6 Philosophy in the twentieth century has not just made 
a linguistic turn: “a picture held us captive,” as Wittgenstein put it,7 and 
philosophy responded with a variety of ways of breaking out: semiotics, 
structuralism, deconstruction, systems theory, speech act theory, ordinary 
language philosophy, and now image science, or critical iconology.
IMAGE/PICTURE
If the pictorial turn is a word → image relation, the image/picture relation 
is a turn back toward objecthood. What is the difference between a picture 
and an image? I like to start from the vernacular, listening to the English 
language, in a distinction that is untranslatable into German or French: 
“you can hang a picture, but you can’t hang an image.” The picture is a 
material object, a thing you can burn or break or tear. An image is what ap-
pears in a picture, and what survives its destruction— in memory, in narra-
tive, in copies and traces in other media. The Golden Calf may be smashed 
and melted down, but it lives on as an image in stories and innumerable 
depictions. The picture, then, is the image as it appears in a material sup-
port or a specific place. This includes the mental picture, which (as Hans 
Belting has noted) appears in a body, in memory, or in imagination. The 
image never appears except in some medium or other, but it is also what 
transcends media, what can be transferred from one medium to another. 
The Golden Calf appears first as a sculpture, but it reappears as an object 
of description in a verbal narrative, and as an image in painting. It is what 
can be copied from the painting in another medium, in a photograph or 
a slide projection or a digital file.
The image, then, is a highly abstract and rather minimal entity that can 
be evoked with a single word. It is enough to name an image to bring it to 
mind— that is, to bring it into consciousness in a perceiving or remember-
6. See Deleuze, “The Simulacrum and Ancient Philosophy,” in The Logic of Sense, 
trans. Mark Lester (New York: Columbia University Press, 1990), 260: “philosophy 
does not free itself from the element of representation when it embarks upon the 
conquest of the infinite. Its intoxication is a false appearance. It always pursues 
the same task, Iconology.” For Deleuze, as for iconologists more generally, I would 
argue, this is a “reverse Platonism,” which “means to make the simulacra rise and 
to affirm their rights among icons and copies” (262).
7. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, trans. G. E. M. Anscombe (New York: 
Macmillan, 1953), 48 (para.115): “A picture held us captive and we could not get 
outside it, for it lay in our language and language seemed to repeat it to us in-
exorably.”

F O U R  F U N D A M E N T A L  C O N C E P T S  :  1 7
ing body. Panofsky’s notion of the “motif” is relevant here,8 as the element 
in a picture that elicits cognition and especially recognition, the awareness 
that “this is that,” the perception of the nameable, identifiable object that 
appears as a virtual presence, the paradoxical “absent presence” that is 
fundamental to all representational entities.
One need not be a Platonist about the concept of images, postulating a 
transcendental realm of archetypes where forms and ideas dwell, waiting 
to be incarnated in the material objects and shadows of sensory percep-
tion. Aristotle provides an equally solid starting point, in which the images 
would be something like the classes of pictures, the generic identifiers 
that link a number of specific entities together by family resemblance. 
As Nelson Goodman would put it, there are many pictures of Winston 
Churchill, pictures that contain Churchill’s image.9 We could call them 
“Churchill pictures”— a phrase that suggests membership in a class or 
series, in which case we might say that images are what allow us to identify 
the genre of a picture, sometimes very specifically (the Churchill picture) 
or quite generally (the portrait). There are also caricatures, pictures of 
(for instance) Winston Churchill as a bulldog. In this case, two images 
appear simultaneously and are fused into a single figure or form, a classic 
instance of visual metaphor. But all depiction is grounded in metaphor, 
in “seeing as.” To see an inkblot as a landscape is to make an equation or 
transfer between two visual perceptions, just as surely as the proposition 
that “no man is an island” implies a comparison or analogy between the 
human body and a geographical figure.
An image, then, may be thought of as an immaterial entity, a ghostly, 
phantasmatic appearance that comes to light or comes to life (which may 
be the same thing) in a material support. But we need not postulate any 
metaphysical realm of immaterial entities. The casting of a shadow is the 
projection of an image, as is the imprint of a leaf on a page, or the reflec-
tion of a tree in water, or the impression of a fossil in stone. The image is 
thus the perception of a relationship of likeness or resemblance or analo-
gous form— what C. S. Peirce defined as the “iconic sign,”10 a sign whose 
intrinsic sensuous qualities resemble those of some other object. Abstract 
and ornamental forms are thus a kind of “degree zero” of the image, and 
8. Panofsky, “Iconology and Iconography,” in Meaning in the Visual Arts (New York: 
Anchor Doubleday, 1955), 29.
9. Nelson Goodman, Languages of Art (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1976), 57.
10. Charles Sanders Peirce, “Logic as Semiotic: The Theory of Signs,” in Philo-
sophical Writings of Peirce (New York: Dover Publications, 1955), 98– 119, esp. 105.

1 8  :  C H A P T E R  2
are identifiable by very schematic descriptions, such as arabesques or geo-
metric figures.
The relation between image and picture may be illustrated by the 
double meaning of the word “clone,” which refers both to an individual 
specimen of a living organism that is the duplicate of its parent or donor 
organism and to the entire series of specimens to which it belongs. An 
image of the world’s most famous clone, Dolly the sheep, can be dupli-
cated as a graphic image in photographs, each of which will be a picture. 
But the image that is duplicated in all these pictures and links them as 
a series is quite strictly analogous to the biological image that unites 
all the cloned ancestors and descendants of the singular specimen in a 
collective series that is also known as “the clone.”11 When we say that a 
child is the “spitting image” of its parent, or that one twin is the image 
of its sibling, we are employing a similar logic in recognition of the fam-
ily resemblance that constitutes the image as a relation rather than an 
entity or substance.
METAPICTURES
Sometimes we encounter a picture in which the image of another picture 
appears, a “nesting” of one image inside another, as when Velázquez paints 
himself in the act of painting in Las Meninas, or Saul Steinberg draws the 
figure of a man drawing in New World. In Nicolas Poussin’s Adoration of 
the Golden Calf, we see the image of a desert landscape with the Israelites 
dancing around the calf, the high priest Aaron gesturing toward it, and 
Moses coming down from Mt. Sinai, about to break the tablets of the law 
in anger at this lapse into idolatry. This is a metapicture, in which an image 
in one medium (painting) enframes an image in another (sculpture). It is 
also a metapicture of a “pictorial turn” from words to images, from the 
written law of the Ten Commandments (and especially the law against the 
making of graven images) toward the authority of an idol.12
Metapictures are not especially rare things. They appear whenever an 
image appears inside another image, whenever a picture presents a scene 
of depiction or the appearance of an image, as when a painting appears 
on a wall in a movie or a television set shows up as a prop in a television 
11. For more on the figurative and literal image of contemporary cloning, see 
my Cloning Terror: The War of Images, 9- 11 to the Present (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2011).
12. See “Metapictures,” chapter 2 of Picture Theory (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1994), for the fullest development of this concept.

F O U R  F U N D A M E N T A L  C O N C E P T S  :  1 9
show. The medium itself need not be doubled (e.g., paintings that repre-
sent paintings; photographs that represent photographs): one medium 
may be nested inside another, as when the Golden Calf appears inside an 
oil painting or a shadow is cast in a drawing.
There is also a sense in which any picture may become a metapicture, 
whenever it is employed as a device to reflect on the nature of pictures. The 
simplest line drawing, when reframed as an example in a discourse on im-
ages, becomes a metapicture. The humble multistable image of the Duck- 
Rabbit is perhaps the most famous metapicture in modern philosophy, 
appearing in Wittgenstein’s Philosophical Investigations as an exemplar of 
“seeing as” and the doubleness of depiction as such. Plato’s Allegory of the 
Cave is a highly elaborated philosophical metapicture, providing a model 
of the nature of knowledge as a complex assemblage of shadows, artifacts, 
illumination, and perceiving bodies. In Iconology, I referred to these kinds 
of verbal, discursive metaphors as “hypericons,” or “theoretical pictures,” 
which often emerge in philosophical texts as illustrative analogies (e.g., 
the comparison of the mind to a wax tablet or a camera obscura) that give 
images a central role in models of the mind, perception, and memory. The 
“metapicture,” then, might be thought of as a visually, imaginatively, or 
materially realized form of the hypericon.
As the Allegory of the Cave suggests, a metapicture may function as a 
foundational metaphor or analogy for an entire discourse. The metaphor 
of the “body politic,” for instance, involves seeing or imaging the social 
collective as a single gigantic body, as in the figure on the frontispiece of 
Hobbes’s Leviathan. The familiar metaphor of the “head of state” quietly 
extends this analogy. This metaphor then reverses itself in modern bio-
medical discourse, in which the body is seen, not as a machine or organ-
ism, but as a social totality or “cellular state” riddled with parasites, invad-
ers, and alien organisms, as well as divisions of labor between executive, 
judicial, and deliberative functions, an immune system that defends the 
body against outsiders, and a nervous system that communicates among 
its parts or “members.” Is the metaphor of the “member” a mapping of 
the social body onto the organic body, or vice versa? What kind of body 
is imaged in the figure of the corporation? These sorts of reversible and 
foundational metaphors are what Lakoff and Johnson call “metaphors we 
live by.”13 They are not merely ornaments to discourse but structuring 
analogies that inform entire epistemes.
13. George Lakoff and Mark Johnson, Metaphors We Live By (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 2003).

2 0  :  C H A P T E R  2
BIOPICTURES
A new version of the pictorial turn has taken place in our time, exempli-
fied most vividly by the biological process of cloning, which has become a 
potent metaphor as well as a biological reality with profound ethical and 
political implications. Cloning is, of course, an entirely natural process 
in plants and simple animals, where it designates the process of asexual 
reproduction of genetically identical cells. The original meaning of “clone” 
(in Greek) was a “slip or twig,” and it referred to the botanical process 
of grafting and transplanting. With the discovery of microorganisms and 
cell reproduction, the concept of cloning moved over to the animal king-
dom as well. But in recent years, a revolution has occurred in biology with 
the (partial) decoding of the human genome and the cloning of the first 
mammals. The possibility of human reproductive cloning is now on the 
technical horizon, and this possibility has reawakened many of the tradi-
tional taboos on image- making in its most potent and disturbing form, the 
creation of artificial life. The idea of duplicating life- forms, and of creating 
living organisms “in our own image,” has literalized a possibility that was 
foreshadowed in myth and legend, from the science fiction cyborg, to the 
robot, to the Frankenstein narrative, to the golem, to the biblical creation 
story itself, in which Adam is formed “in the image and likeness of God” 
from red clay and receives the breath of life.
Of course, numerous other ideas from Iconology have been further elab-
orated over the twenty years since its publication. The idea of treating 
“word and image” as a distinct theoretical problem that requires not only 
a semiotic, formal analysis but a historical and ideological contextualiz-
ing, has been highly productive in a number of fields.14 The whole cluster 
of anxieties surrounding the image (iconophobia, iconoclasm, idolatry, 
fetishism, and the prohibition on graven images in Judaism, Christian-
ity, and Islam) has become a central concern of image study in an age 
characterized by a “return of religion” that was scarcely glimpsed in the 
1980s.15 And the critique of “ideology critique” itself as a “rhetoric of icon-
oclasm” has, I hope, chastened the ambitions of a demystifying criticism 
14. The founding of a journal, Word & Image, as the house organ of the Interna-
tional Association for Word and Image Studies (IAWIS), might be taken as one 
symptom. For a recent intervention, see The Future of Text and Image, ed. Ofra 
Amihay and Lauren Walsh (Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars Publishing House, 
2012).
15. See, for instance, Idol Anxiety ed. Josh Ellenbogen and Aaron Tugendhaft (Stan-
ford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2011).

F O U R  F U N D A M E N T A L  C O N C E P T S  :  2 1
that invariably appeals to its own ideological infallibility. I have, by con-
trast, wished to ally myself with the more modest aims of “secular divina-
tion”16 and deconstruction that I associate with the example of Edward 
Said and Jacques Derrida, the two critical theorists who have been to me 
the most inspiring contemporaries in what I still think of as the Golden 
Age of Theory.
16. “Secular Divination: Edward Said’s Humanism,” in Critical Inquiry 31, no. 2 
(Winter 2005), a special issue on Said. Reprinted in Edward Said: Continuing the 
Conversation, ed. W. J. T. Mitchell and Homi Bhabha (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 2006), and in Edward Said: A Legacy of Emancipation, ed. Adel Iskandar 
and Hakem Rustom (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2010).

3.1 Steven Spielberg, “Digital Dinosaur” (1993). Still from Jurassic Park.

3: IMAGE SCIENCE
Everyone knows that science uses imagery, both verbal and visual, as an es-
sential part of its quest for ever more accurate accounts of material reality. 
Models, diagrams, photographs, graphs, sketches, metaphors, analogies, 
and equations (the whole Peircean family of icons or symbols by resem-
blance) are crucial to the life of science. They introduce entire ways of see-
ing and reading, particularly in dazzling figures of thought such as string 
theory, which seeks an elegant universe, a multiverse of parallel worlds 
and supple spaces, folding in upon themselves into wormholes, sparticles, 
and gravitrons. And these images do not remain in the sphere of technical 
science but quickly circulate into popular culture, especially cinema and 
special effects video (as in the PBS series Nova). As an institution, science is 
quite gifted at presenting itself in mass media, in popular writing as well as 
visual media. From paleontologists’ reconstructions of extinct life- forms 
like the dinosaur, to the model of the atom, to speculative images that 
circulate across the borders between science and philosophy, science and 
science fiction, science and poetry, and reality and mathematics, science 
is riddled with images that make it what it is— a multimedia, verbal- visual 
discourse that weaves its way between invention and discovery.
But amid the proliferation of scientific images, there is one conspicu-
ously missing component, and that is a scientific focus on images them-
selves. I don’t mean to suggest that scientists fail to examine images crit-
ically, trying to sort out the true from the false, the misleading or fanciful 
from the verifiable and accurate. I’m thinking instead of a more general 
problem, a science of images or Bildwissenschaft as such, which would treat 
images as objects of scientific investigation and not merely as useful tools in 
the service of scientific knowledge. So I would like to take the topic of im-
age science and turn it “inside out,” as it were, and reframe the discussion 
of “images of science and the scientist” within some reflections on the sci-
ence of images. In particular, I would like to raise the following questions:
1. Is a “science of images” even conceivable, or are images, as social and 
cultural constructions, simply outside the domain of the sciences in the 

2 4  :  C H A P T E R  3
usual sense of the word, so that their proper domain is that of the arts and 
humanities, the realm of interpretation, appreciation, and performance, 
rather than that of empirical investigation and abstract, rational, or even 
mathematical modeling? If your answer to this question is no, then you 
should probably stop reading, because I want to proceed on the assump-
tion that the answer is yes, a science of images is conceivable (and, in fact, 
there are a number of researchers already committed to the idea, which 
has been around in one form or another, sometimes under the rubric of 
“iconology,” or the theory of images, as distinct from “iconography,” the 
lexical sorting of different kinds of images).
2. If there is a science of images, what kind of science would it be? Would it 
be an experimental science like physics or chemistry, or a historical sci-
ence like paleontology and geology? What would be its relation to math-
ematics, and specifically to the role of geometry, diagrams, and other 
graphic expressions as instruments of mathematical thinking? How would 
a science of images align itself with divisions between the “physical” and 
the “biological” sciences? Would it be a theoretical, speculative science, or 
a practical and technical discipline, such as medical science? How would a 
science of images distribute itself between the “hard” and “soft” sciences?
3. If there were a science of images, what use would it be to the other sci-
ences? Would it provide a method of separating true and verifiable images 
from false and misleading ones? Would it help to settle what Peter Gali-
son describes as the ongoing battle between pictures and logic, images 
and algorithms, in scientific procedures, a battle that has its counterpart 
in the arts in the phenomenon Leonardo da Vinci called a paragone, the 
contest of words and images, poetry and painting?
The ever- elastic concept of science itself as a synonym for knowledge of 
any sort, embracing the human as well as the natural sciences, seems 
on the one hand to empty the idea of science of any specificity, so that 
a science of images could just be any knowledge of images whatsoever. 
On the other hand, and in quite the opposite way, we seem to be trapped 
at the outset by the very terms of our topic— “images of science and the 
scientist”— that is, by stereotypes and caricatures of white- coated tech-
nicians, gleaming research laboratories, supercomputers, supercolliders, 
and supergeniuses who are depicted either as madmen threatening to de-
stroy the world or benign sages who will show us how to save it. We are 
also led astray by a mainly experimental- quantitative picture of science 
that portrays it as a rather mechanical activity of proof and demonstration, 
gathering of data, and establishing of certainty and positive knowledge.

I M A G E  S C I E N C E  :  2 5
As for what might be called the “unscientific” or “soft” sciences, there 
the name of science is generally taken to be a meaningless courtesy. Only 
the Germans seem comfortable with attaching “wissenschaft” to words 
like Kultur and Bilder. The English- speaking scientist, hardheaded and em-
pirical, tends to contrast “real science” with the world of culture and im-
ages, or arts and letters. In the domain of images and culture, presumably, 
opinion and ungrounded speculation rule, empiricism is a dirty word, 
data are haphazardly gathered or ignored, and impressionistic, unreliable 
results are acceptable if they are intuitively pleasing. Our stereotype of the 
social scientist is thus of someone who is gathering dubious data based 
in subjective opinions in order to confirm what is already commonsense 
knowledge. Our stereotype of the political scientist is of someone who 
has almost nothing to do with science at all. And the economist, as every-
one knows, is a practitioner of “the dismal science,” filled with tedious 
charts and statistics that produce “predictions” that rival the readings of 
tea leaves and animal entrails. Our stereotype of the human scientist is 
of an absentminded drudge who labors endlessly in the dusty stacks of 
the library, only to emerge with a set of “findings” that are of interest to 
absolutely no one else, or with a wild theory that is attractive precisely in 
proportion to its implausibility and perversity. Our picture of C. P. Snow’s 
“two cultures” of science and the humanities, in other words, seems to 
dictate from the outset that the study of images would belong in one do-
main, science in the other. Images might be instrumental to the pursuit 
of science, but they would be at best incidental, ornamental, or functional, 
not an essential part of, much less the target of, science. Their proper 
home would be in the domain of culture and psychology, in the realm of 
subjective perceptions and poetic associations.
I hope it is clear that what I have been calling “our picture” of the two- 
culture split is the product of a rather cynical and jaundiced eye, and is 
not my own view. In fact, the relation of the sciences and the arts is much 
more nuanced, gradated, and complex than these simple binary opposi-
tions would suggest. Rather than settle for this impossible dilemma in 
which, on the one hand, any cognitive activity takes on the name of science 
and, on the other, a rigid stereotype of a specific form of science dominates 
our thinking, I want to think about the range of scientific models that 
might be brought to bear on the problem of images and to ask which ones 
seem especially promising— or unpromising. What would such a science 
be? How would one move from the image considered as the instrument 
or medium of science to the image as the object of science, something 
to be tested, experimented with, described, and explained, in accordance 

2 6  :  C H A P T E R  3
with the most rigorous scientific methods. What would it mean to run 
an experiment on an image? Would it involve investigation of the mate-
rial particles in an oil painting? (New York University’s Institute of Fine 
Arts requires considerable training in chemistry if one wants training in 
restoration and connoisseurship). Insofar as images are material things, 
objects in the world, chemistry and physics have something to contribute 
to their understanding, but mainly at the level of forensics, the detection of 
forgeries, the examination of the physical body or support in or on which 
the image appears. The science appropriate to the study of images has to 
include this level, but it also has to be an optical science, one that pays 
attention to visual perception and imagination, to optical illusions, reflec-
tions, transparency, and translucence. The science of images, then, would 
have to consider not just material objects but also the spaces between 
objects and the light that is transmitted from one thing to another. Insofar 
as images appear in nonvisual media like language, a science of images 
would have to engage with linguistics, with psycholinguistics, and with 
the study of logical as well as spatial relations. Since images are generally 
defined as “icons,” or signs by similarity, it would have to be a science of 
similitude, analogy, and likeness, as well as of dissimilarity, adjacency, and 
 difference.
The science of images would also have to be a historical science, one that 
deals with the spatial and temporal circulation of images, their migrations 
from one place or epoch to another. It would have to be a science that looks 
at images as groupings, families, classes, linked by resemblance to other 
things in the world and to each other. It would have to be a science that 
registers the capacity of images to represent reality, but also recognizes 
that images can be highly misleading and deceptive, precisely because they 
have such a capacity to engage our trust with their seemingly immediate 
testimony to the visible, the palpable, the concrete world of experience. A 
science of images would have to address the very divided reputation of im-
ages within science, the tendency of scientists, as Galison has observed, to 
divide themselves into iconoclastic and iconophilic camps, with some re-
searchers putting great stock in the usefulness of images, others regarding 
them as distractions that prevent the hard questions from being addressed.
Image science would have to be, and has been, a cognitive science, an 
empirical study of the conditions of human perception, of the centers of 
pattern recognition, image formation, and transformation in the brain and 
the mind. Given the affective potency of images in human consciousness, 
however, it seems clear that a cognitive science would not be enough by 
itself. It would have to be complemented by a psychology that reckons with 

I M A G E  S C I E N C E  :  2 7
the unconscious effects of imagery, their uncanny ability to lure, seduce, 
and even traumatize the beholder. The science of imagery could not just 
be about pattern recognition. It would have to include misrecognition, 
fantasy, dreaming, and hallucination. It would have to be about memory 
images, and also about false memory, screen memory, and the dubious 
status of “recovered memory.”
If science in general uses images as part of its cognitive apparatus, 
then it seems clear that a science of images would also have to use im-
ages to get at its subject, but it would then be in the curious position of 
doubling that subject, of working with images of images, or what I have 
called “metapictures,” to capture its object. Metapictures are pictures that 
show us what pictures are, how they function, where they are located; they 
are seen most literally in the familiar sight of pictures- within- pictures, 
the “nesting” of one picture inside another picture. A science of images, 
then, could try to be rigorously iconoclastic and limit its representations 
of images to nonpictorial, nongraphic forms (sentences, descriptions, 
equations, algorithms, etc.), or it could accept the inevitability of the 
metapicture and grapple with the vertiginous abyss of infinite regress that 
it seems to open up when we use pictures to understand pictures.
My own impulse, of course, is to commit myself to exploring the abyss. 
And not the abyss of culture, society, or politics, where the “soft” science 
of images seems most at home, but that of hard sciences— mathematics, 
physics, and biology— places where images abound but a science of im-
ages has yet to emerge.
DIAGRAMMATOLOGY
Peter Galison’s essay on the paragone between the iconophiles and icono-
clasts of mathematics provides a metapicture of the role of images in the 
abstract science of numbers, functions, and logic.1 Galison reconstructs 
this struggle at many levels: as a debate between an “intuitive” approach 
to mathematics, stimulated by visual, pictorial, and sculptural model- 
building, and an approach governed by logic, calculation, and demonstra-
tion. It is also a debate between analog and digital media, between “con-
crete” and “abstract” renderings of problems, between an “eyes open” and 
an “eyes shut” approach to problem- solving. As should be clear from this 
1. “Images Scatter into Data, Data Gather into Images,” in Iconoclash: Beyond the 
Image Wars in Science, Religion, and Art, ed. Bruno Latour and Peter Weibel (Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002), 300– 323.

2 8  :  C H A P T E R  3
partial inventory, there is something slippery and even incoherent about 
this array of oppositions. Galison notes that, despite the vehement emo-
tions often expressed, the battle lines are never very well defined, and that 
figures such as Poincare and David Hilbert, who seem to occupy opposite 
sides, often wind up defecting to the enemy camp at critical moments. Gal-
ison concludes that there is something illusory about the whole struggle:
At the heart of the scientific image is the search for rules: at the heart of 
the logical- algorithmic has been a hunt for the recognition that is the 
eternal promise of representation. Said another way: the impulse to draw 
the world in its particularity never seems to be able to shed itself of the 
impulse to abstract, and that search for abstraction is forever pulling back 
into the material- particular. (302)
The question arises, then: is the difference between images and logic an 
illusory frontier, a poorly analyzed distinction that, on reflection, dissolves 
into a general science of signs, a semiotics that would transcend all the 
superficial barriers between words and images, numbers and diagrams, 
the abstract and the concrete? Galison’s own rhetoric— “the eternal 
promise of representation” that is “forever pulling back into the material- 
particular”— is equivocal, as if he were describing something between a 
religious- metaphysical utopia (an “eternal promise”) and a physical force, 
a gravitational or electromagnetic field “forever pulling.” His historical 
account of the paragone of image and logic in twentieth- century science, 
on the other hand, suggests that the invention of a new entity, the so- called 
digital image, has overcome the ancient division and rendered crossovers 
and conversions routine:
But now, ever more intensively, the routinization of analog- to- digital and 
digital- to- analog conversions has made the flickering exchanges routine: 
image to non- image to image. No longer only set in motion at moments 
of crisis, we find that ordinary, every- day science propels this incessant 
oscillation: “Images scatter into data, data gather into images.” (322)
Is the ancient quarrel, with its eternal promises and endless tug of war, 
about to be settled once and for all? Has the image finally been tamed by 
the rule of the computer, the digitization of the analog sign? Galison does 
not answer this question, and perhaps it has no answer, though intuitively, 
I think, we want to respect both the philosophical and historical impulses 
in his discussion. That is, there seems to be something both eternal and 

I M A G E  S C I E N C E  :  2 9
historical about this problem, as if every solution simply reintroduces the 
problem at a new level.
This impasse is, in my view, precisely what necessitates a science of the 
image, rather than a merely instrumental use of images as unexamined 
instruments in getting at other kinds of reality. The first step in this sci-
ence, however, has to be some definition of its object. What is an image 
that it can, as Galison argues, “scatter into data” or (conversely) appear 
as a “gathering” of data? I have written on this question elsewhere and 
simply want to rehearse my conclusions briefly here. First, I take as ax-
iomatic the intuition of C. S. Peirce that an image is an icon, that is, a 
sign by resemblance. This means, of course, that the whole notion of the 
specifically “visual image,” and the accompanying language of intuition, 
concreteness, perceptual immediacy, graphic arrays, and so forth, has to 
be put into question. One of Peirce’s deepest insights, often forgotten, was 
that the algebraic equation is no less an icon than its diagrammatic ren-
dering in two- dimensional space. The equals sign (=) is itself an indexical 
sign, like the brackets of set theory, or other relational pointers (< as “less 
than”; > as “greater than”; congruence, similarity, and the signs for oper-
ations such as addition, subtraction, division, etc.). At the heart of logic 
and mathematics, then, the iconic relations of identity and equivalence, 
similitude and difference, are lurking. These relations also obtain in some 
pictures and diagrams, as well as in language, so that we speak of “ver-
bal icons” and mean by that expression both the names and descriptions 
of objects, and the figurative comparison of one object to another. Both 
names and metaphors are “verbal images” but in very different senses of 
the word “image.” An image is a double sign, then, naming something we 
see, like a portrait or landscape or graph, and something we comprehend 
as a signifying relation to something beyond itself: this portrait represents 
that person. Our ordinary language captures this double relation when 
we say that a portrait “looks like” the person it represents. Looking and 
likening, seeing and similitude, are fused, and confused, in ordinary rep-
resentational images, which is why we run into difficulty when we encoun-
ter an image that doesn’t look like anything, or doesn’t look like what it 
represents. The scientific image of the atom as a kind of miniature solar 
system, for instance, is widely understood to be a completely false picture 
of the atom, if we take it as a picture that is supposed to “look like” actual 
atoms. It is rather a model that attempts to capture some features of the 
atom that are graspable in other, mainly quantitative terms. It is surely an 
image, and a visual image, but not one that looks like what it represents.
If we are going to have a science of images, then, the first step is to 

3 0  :  C H A P T E R  3
release it from the tyranny of the physical eye, literally understood, and 
understand that images (as icons) circulate through many domains: there 
are mental and mathematical and verbal images, as well as pictorial and 
visual images.2 The images we should be concerned with in science are not 
just the pictures, graphs, and physical models, but also the metaphors that 
provide pictures of a domain of research— the universe “as” a heat- engine 
or a clock or a ball of string— pictures that need not be made visible or 
drawn graphically. Images are not medium- specific, though they are never 
encountered outside of some medium or other. An image can move from 
one medium to another, appearing now as an equation, now as a diagram, 
now as a figure in a narrative, and now as a figure in a narrative painting.3 
Panofsky called the image a “motif” to emphasize its repeatability in many 
different pictures, but he failed to draw the obvious conclusion that resides 
in our ordinary language of talking about images: the image and the pic-
ture are very distinct, yet intimately linked entities. The English language 
(but not German) registers this distinction when we say that we can hang a 
picture, but it would seem odd to speak of hanging an image. The picture 
is the material support, the physical medium (whether stone or paint, 
metal or electromagnetic impulses) in which the image appears. But the 
“image as such,” if we can speak of such a thing, is not itself a material 
thing, though it must always appear in or on some material support—  
a statue, an embodied perceiver. An image is a relationship and an appear-
ance: it might be better, in fact, to think of images as events or happenings 
than as objects, in order to register their often fleeting temporality (ap-
pearing and disappearing, going in and out of focus, or, in Galison’s lovely 
metaphor, scattering and gathering). We might then want to speak, with 
phenomenologists like Bachelard and Merleau- Ponty, of the “onset” of the 
image or, with Wittgenstein, of the “dawning of an aspect.” But only an 
immaterial, phantasmatic conception of the image that treats its being in 
what Derrida described as a “hauntology” can capture its spectral nature.
THE PHYSICS OF THE IMAGE
I realize that the foregoing remarks may convict me of being an idealist or 
worse, and that this is an unfashionable position in a time when invoca-
2. See the first chapter of Iconology: Image, Text, Ideology (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press,1987), “What Is an Image?,” for a discussion of the variety of things 
that go by the name “image.”
3. See the discussion of the image/picture distinction in chapter 2 above.

I M A G E  S C I E N C E  :  3 1
tions of materiality and embodiment are de rigueur. But a monistic mate-
rialism can never grasp the specific materiality of the image. For that, we 
need a dialectical materialism of the sort that led Marx to solve the riddle 
of the commodity: “So far,” Marx points out, “no chemist has ever discov-
ered exchange- value either in a pearl or a diamond.”4 Exchange value is 
not a physical property of objects but a property of the circulation and 
exchange of objects, their alienation from use, their abstraction from their 
concrete, material properties. Images are another form of the exchange- 
value of things, operating primarily at the perceptual and cognitive level, 
though of course the commodification of images is a familiar enough phe-
nomenon, and the fetishism of commodities marks precisely that moment 
when the spectral, phantasmatic character of images seems to settle like 
an aureole around the physical body of an object.5
But an even simpler demonstration of the peculiar physics of the image 
can be glimpsed if we raise the question of their destruction. Iconoclasm 
is the effort to destroy images, usually for political or religious reasons, 
though Galison’s account of twentieth- century science makes it clear that 
there can also be professional and epistemological motives for the effort to 
banish images. His story, however, makes it clear that the image invariably 
comes back in a kind of “return of the repressed,” even in the thinking of 
the most relentless iconophobes. This situation could have been predicted, 
of course, by a historical reflection on the age- old crusade to stamp out 
idolatry, to purge the world of graven images, and even of verbal images. 
This is not simply a matter of grinding or melting down a Golden Calf, 
scattering it on water and forcing the Israelites to drink it, as in the Exo-
dus story. (As we know, this sort of materialist effort to destroy an image 
always fails: the Calf survives as a verbal image in the very narrative that 
tells of its destruction, and is reborn as a visual, graphic image in scores 
of Renaissance paintings.) So the effort to destroy images cannot rest with 
their mere sculptural or graphic rendering. The most persistent effort to 
achieve utter annihilation of images in words and even in thought is the 
commentaries of Maimonides’s Guide for the Perplexed, which finds that 
even the language of the Bible itself is riddled with misleading metaphors 
and concrete words that attribute things like a body, a face, hands, feet, 
and spatial location to the invisible, unrepresentable deity.6 The mandate 
4. Capital (New York: International Publishers, 1967), 1:83.
5. For further discussion of analogy between the commodity and the image, see 
“The Rhetoric of Iconoclasm: Marxism, Ideology, and Fetishism,” chapter 6 of 
Iconology.
6. Maimonides’s anti- iconism is discussed at length in chapter 1 of Iconology.

3 2  :  C H A P T E R  3
of iconoclasm is, finally, not just the destruction of graven images but also 
the purging of words and ideas, to arrive at a purified language, and con-
sciousness, that is capable of thinking about God without thinking about 
anyone or anything. This is, of course, an impossible, unattainable state, 
but it has the virtue of revealing just how impossible it would be to follow 
or enforce the second commandment, prohibiting the making of images 
of any kind or any thing. The destruction of images, as Michael Taussig has 
argued, is a sure way of guaranteeing them an even more potent presence 
in memory, or as reincarnated in new forms.7
So a fundamental law of the physics of images is: images cannot be 
destroyed. The picture or physical support in which they appear can be 
destroyed, but the image survives destruction, if only as a memory in the 
mind— that is, the body— of the destroyer. The question arises, then: if we 
are going to pursue the metaphor of a physics of the image, is it subject 
to a “law of conservation” similar to the one that governs matter and en-
ergy in the physical world? That is, should we say that images can neither 
be created nor destroyed? It is easy to see why it is so difficult to destroy 
images, but creation seems to be another matter. Surely new images are 
always being created by artists and scientists, as well as by ordinary people, 
from the child’s first drawing to the everyday snapshot. Here I think we 
have reached a boundary of our understanding, but my intuition (if that 
will be allowed) is that images cannot be created, at least not ex nihilo. In-
sofar as images are always images of something, then what they are images 
of must always logically and temporally precede them. We say that a child 
is the image of its parent, by which we mean that there is a discernible 
family resemblance, even though we also know that in many respects the 
child looks nothing like its parent. The image, then, is not the bearer of 
the new, the different, in the child, but of what was already present in the 
parent. The rule of likeness is a conservative rule, defying innovation and 
insisting on the return of the similar. This is true, I suspect, even when 
we are attempting to create a totally new, original image, and it explains 
why it is so difficult, if not impossible, to imagine what it would mean to 
create a radically new image.
The efforts of the surrealists are especially instructive in this regard, for 
their wildest innovations are invariably discovered to be novel conjunc-
tions of already existing images. One could call these “new images,” but 
only in the sense that a sequence of words that are themselves not new can 
7. Defacement: Public Secrecy and the Labor of the Negative (Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press, 1999).

I M A G E  S C I E N C E  :  3 3
constitute a “new sentence” in a language. Perhaps we should say, then, 
that new combinations of images can be created, and even new images in 
the sense that we speak of “coinages” in language (which are invariably 
old, recognizable words “morphed” into something new). If an image (or a 
word) were completely new, how would we recognize it? It is this moment of 
recognition that makes the image readable as such, and that provides the 
thread of continuity with variation, deviation, and difference that makes it 
possible to see images morphing (as in a Michael Jackson video) from one 
identity to another. This morphing would be purely abstract and nonrefer-
ential if it did not pass through moments of stillness— “freeze frames,” as 
it were— in which the multiple identities were registered as this image or 
that image. And even if we imagine the morphing of an abstract image—  
a very concrete and technical possibility— the various stages of morpho-
genesis would each have a specific gestalt as this form or that form. Per-
haps the only sense in which a new image could appear would be in some 
composite or synthetic or transitional form, as in the Galtonian photo-
graphs that blur together several portraits to produce a portrait that looks 
“strangely familiar” but is of no individual who ever existed.
THE BIOLOGY OF IMAGES
I warned you at the outset that the search for a science of images might 
lead us into an abyss of speculation, and I hope that so far you have not 
been disappointed. We have traced the mathematics of images as dia-
grammatic and logical relations, and the physics of images as immate-
rial, phantasmatic entities that require a physical medium to make their 
appearance. But what about the life sciences? Could there be a “natural 
history” of images built around a metapicture of images as organisms or 
life- forms? This question can be broached by returning to the question 
of the Galtonian photograph as a “new” or “created” image. The reason 
this Galtonian image is “strangely familiar”— both old and new— is that it 
broaches the question of the image as a type, or “typical” representation, 
rather than as a representation of an individual. We are familiar enough 
with this phenomenon in the realm of stereotypes and what might be 
called “reductive” or “schematic” images. The smiley face on the bumper 
sticker is recognizable as a face, but not as any particular face. In fact, 
when we speak of “recognizing” what an image represents, the form of 
re- cognition involved can be quite general and abstract: it can amount to 
seeing something as a face or a body without seeing it as any particular 
face or body, just as, in geometry, we can recognize something as a square 

3 4  :  C H A P T E R  3
or circle without thinking of it as a unique, particular entity. The specific 
drawing or diagram may function as the token of a type, a concrete em-
bodiment of a quite general and generic image, one that can be translated 
into an algebraic icon in Peirce’s sense (x = y, in the case of the square; of 
the circle, C = πr2).
But this generalizing property of images is exactly what links them to 
the life sciences, and particularly to the concept of the species and the 
specimen. One thing we could not account for in the physical model of 
the image was the question of morphing, transformation, and the gene-
sis of “family resemblance” across a series of images. But the metaphor 
of the image as life- form brings this process into focus, at the same time 
that it raises a whole new set of difficulties. If images are like living things 
(rather than the spectral, ghostly entities we encountered in the realm of 
physics),8 then surely they can be created and destroyed. But here we must 
remind ourselves that we are constructing a multitiered stack of analogies, 
in which material objects are to apparitions as pictures are to images, as 
specimens are to species. I have never argued that a picture or a mate-
rial object cannot be created or destroyed. This painting, that statue, this 
manu script with those equations and diagrams, can surely be created and 
destroyed. But think of what it would mean to destroy a species, rather 
than a specimen. Not impossible, perhaps (and quite a realistic prospect in 
an era that is defined by its consciousness of “endangered species” and ex-
tinctions). So the move from the physics of the image to the biology of the 
image does reveal a level of our science that it was not possible to address 
within the sphere of physical, inanimate matter. It is in the sphere of the 
life sciences that our science of images would confront the problem of the 
reproduction of images, their mutations and evolutionary transformations. If 
the image is to iconology what the species is to biology, then pictures (in 
an extended sense that includes sculpture and other material construc-
tions or “situations”) are the specimens in a natural history of images. 
This natural history is, of course, also a cultural and social and political 
history, but it is one that is focused on the “second nature” we have created 
around ourselves— the entire image- repertoire of human consciousness 
and civilization. We have always understood that the arts are, as Aristotle 
insisted, “imitations of nature,” and that this means not just that they rep-
resent or resemble the natural world, but also that they themselves are a 
8. The metapicture of images as “ghostly” entities, phantasmatic apparitions, 
of course already links it not just to the world of physical things, but also to the 
world of formerly living things, the realm of what Derrida called “hauntology.”

I M A G E  S C I E N C E  :  3 5
kind of nature “in process,” an expression of the species identity of human 
beings. Now we live at a moment of crisis when the human is regarded by 
some as an extinct or endangered species, when the “posthuman” looms 
as the horizon of speculative thought. At the same time, we are told that 
the ancient, indestructible domain of images has been mastered finally 
by the “digital,” and that numbers, calculations, and mechanical opera-
tions will finally replace us in an infinite circuit of information.9 Neither 
posthumanism nor the digital image seems to me especially coherent or 
promising as a concept, but they belong together, I think, as symptoms of 
a failure to think historically or philosophically but instead to take refuge 
in a curious kind of posthistorical presentism. And they also help us to see 
why the two most conspicuous and highly publicized “natural images” of 
our time dominate our picture of the fate of our own species. I’m thinking 
of the fossil and the clone, and I’ll end this chapter with a brief reflection 
on their meaning.
FOSSIL AND CLONE
The destruction of a species is not necessarily the destruction of its image. 
On the contrary, extinction of a species is a precondition of its resurrec-
tion as image in the form of fossil traces. The fossil record is a material 
and pictorial record, a vast iconic and indexical archive of species, most 
of them extinct, that have inhabited this globe. And of course fossils are 
not the only image- traces that we have to reconstruct the evolution of 
life- forms. Contemporary paleontology regards birds as the descendants 
of dinosaurs, placing the reptilians in quite another class. In that sense, 
the analogy of image and species needs to be qualified, because higher 
level taxa such as phyla also have their clusters of attributes, their family 
resemblances, their Galtonian composite images. (There is also, though 
I don’t have time or expertise to address it, the crisis within biological 
theories of taxonomy as such, in which the rise of cladistics has made the 
notion of species itself an object of controversy. How this will play out for 
iconologists is beyond the scope of this book.10)
The fossil image is what survives the death of a species, just as the 
9. This is the dark message of Friedrich Kittler’s wonderful history of media, 
Gramophone, Film, Typewriter, trans. Geoffrey Winthrop- Young and Michael Wutz 
(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999).
10. But for some opening moves, see Norman Macleod, “Images, Totems, Types, 
and Memes: Perspectives on an Iconological Mimetics,” in The Pictorial Turn, ed. 
Neal Curtis (New York: Routledge, 2010), 88– 111.

3 6  :  C H A P T E R  3
corpse is what survives the death of the individual specimen. The sciences 
of natural history are the species equivalent of the rituals of mummifica-
tion and preservation of effigies of the dead that find their place in the 
ethnographic wing of the natural history museum. Both are sciences of 
resurrection and reanimation, an effort of life- forms, bodies (our own), 
to manage mortality by means of images. But that is exactly what makes 
them so uncannily similar to the other great breakthrough in the life sci-
ences in our time: the DNA revolution epitomized by the clone. The clone 
is the obverse of the fossil in every way. It epitomizes the hope for species 
immortality in the promise of therapeutic cloning to “scrub” all birth de-
fects from our DNA, to produce replaceable organs and ever- improved 
specimens. It also signifies the hope for the immortality of a singular, 
individual specimen in the utopia of reproductive cloning, where exact 
duplicates of parent organisms can be produced.
The fossil and the clone, then, play the role of endpoint species for both 
the image and the human. Both are, quite precisely, image “families” or 
classes: the fossil the product of a slow process of petrification, reversed by 
resurrection and reanimation in the paleontological imagination. (It is no 
accident that most paleontologists have highly developed visual acuity and 
that many of them are artists and image- processors.11) The fossil is also an 
allegorical image, a premonition of our own species mortality. It is thus 
what Walter Benjamin called a “dialectical image,” capturing history at a 
standstill (in this case, the “deep time” of the geological record, projected 
backward through the entire history of life on earth and forward toward 
the specter of our own extinction).
The clone, by contrast, is the technical, biocybernetic chimera of our 
time, and is thus generally pictured as a monstrosity, an unnatural and 
sterile freak. It personifies and incarnates in living flesh the anxiety about 
images that pervades hypericonoclastic critiques such as Baudrillard’s pre-
cession of simulacra: copies without an original; indistinguishable copies, 
the horror of repetition and indefinite sameness; the fear of the double; 
homophobia and heteronormativity; reproduction without difference; 
confusion of identity and similitude. The clone, then, is also a dialectical 
image. It points forward to a utopian or dystopian future in which the rule 
of the “spitting image,” the exact simulacrum, is extended to an unprece-
dented degree. It points backward toward our most archaic fantasies about 
images: that they are imitations of life in a more than figurative sense, 
11. For more on the visual arts and paleontology, see my The Last Dinosaur Book 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998).

I M A G E  S C I E N C E  :  3 7
that some of them possess “aura” (literally, the breath of life), that they 
look back, have desires and agency. All the taboos about image- making 
are revived around the clone, and strange political alliances emerge be-
tween eco- activists, Greens, and fundamentalist Christians. Notions such 
as the “circulation” or “mobility” of images in an age of globalization and 
genetic engineering are clearly insufficient. We need to think instead of a 
migration of images, in which their movements are incessantly regulated, 
prohibited, or accelerated by fantasies of contamination, plague, and pu-
rification.12 With the clone the metaphor of the life- form as image, and 
vice versa, seems to be literalized. Is it that the image is like a life- form, 
or the reverse?
The figures of the clone and the fossil merge, as it happens, in Jurassic 
Park (1993), one of the great cinematic spectacles of the early 1990s, a pe-
riod that now seems like a time of innocence. For just an instant (fig. 3.1), 
a velociraptor is caught in the beam of a film projector that is projecting 
the DNA sequence that made it possible to clone a living dinosaur from 
its fossil traces. Let this “digital dinosaur” stand as a nexus point for these 
speculations on the science of images. It is, first, a science fictional image, 
a speculative projection of what the convergence of paleontology and ge-
netic engineering might produce. It is also a technical, cinematic image, 
an early example of the revolution in digital animation that has ushered in 
a whole new era in the relation of animated and live- action images. Within 
the life sciences, this image has to be dismissed as a fantasy, a biological 
impossibility. But within the science of images, it is a crucial specimen, a 
“missing link” in the evolutionary record of these strange, phantasmatic 
liknesses and apparitions. In the narrative of the film, this animal is break-
ing into the computer control room of the park and threatening to devour 
the controllers. Perhaps it is an allegory for our hope that the digitizing 
of the image is a way of controlling the wild kingdom of images, making 
peace between scientific logic and fleshly, concrete pictures, annihilat-
ing the Golden Calf once and for all. Not a likely story.
12. See my essay, “Migrating Images: Totemism, Fetishism, Idolatry,” in Migrating 
Images, ed. Petra Stegmann and Peter C. Seel (Berlin: House of World Cultures, 
2004), 14– 24.

4.1 René Magritte, This Is Not a Pipe (1929). © 2015 C. Herscovici/Artists Rights 
Society, New York.

4: IMAGE X TEXT
What is the “imagetext”? We might begin not by asking what it means, but 
how can it be written down. In a footnote to Picture Theory (1994), I took a 
stab at a notational answer:
I will employ the typographic convention of the slash to designate the 
“image/text” as a problematic gap, cleavage, or rupture in representation. 
The term “imagetext” designates composite, synthetic works (or concepts) 
that combine image and text. “Image- text,” with a hyphen, designates 
relations of the visual and verbal. (89)1
Rupture, synthesis, relation. We are obliged to range over all three of these 
possibilities. On the one hand, there are what we might call “literal” man-
ifestations of the imagetext: graphic narratives and comics, photo texts, 
poetic experiments with voice and picture, collage composition, and ty-
pography itself. On the other hand, there are figurative, displaced versions 
of the image- text: the formal divisions of narrative and description, the 
relations of vision and language in memory, the nesting of images (met-
aphors, symbols, concrete objects) inside discourse, and the obverse, the 
murmur of discourse and language in graphic and visual media. And then 
there is a third thing: the traumatic gap of the unrepresentable space be-
tween words and images, what I tried to designate with the “/” or slash.
It is that third thing that I would like to reopen. And I want to do it, again, 
“literally,” with an exploration of a typographic sign that might synthesize 
the three relationships of texts and images, and suggest further possibilities 
as well. My chosen sign is “X,” and I wish to treat it as a Joycean verbo- voco- 
visual pun that condenses the following meanings and inscriptions: (1) X as 
1. See also, in the same book, chapter 3, “Beyond Comparison: Picture, Text, and 
Method,” and the concluding chapter, “Some Pictures of Representation.” Other 
key writings on the concept of the imagetext include Iconology: Image, Text, Ideol-
ogy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987) and “Word and Image,” in Critical 
Terms for Art History, ed. Robert Nelson and Richard Schiff (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1996).

4 0  :  C H A P T E R  4
the “unknown” or “variable” in algebra, or the “X factor” in vernacular usage; 
the signature of the illiterate. (2) X as the sign of multiplication, or (even 
more evocatively) as the “times sign”; also as a tilted or torqued modification 
of the simplest operation in mathematics, the “plus” sign (+). (3) X as the sign 
of chiasmus in rhetoric, the trope of changing places and dialectical reversal, 
as in “the language of images” providing “images of language”; another way 
to see this is to grasp the ways in which image and text alternately evoke dif-
ferentials and similarities, a paradox we could inscribe by fusing the relation 
of image versus text with image as text, a double cross that could be notated 
with an invented symbol, “VS” overlapped with “AS” to produce a double X 
in the intersection of A and V. (4) X as an image of crossing, intersection, and 
encounter, like the iconic sign at a railroad crossing. (5) X as a combination 
of the two kinds of slashes (/ and \), suggesting opposite directionalities in 
the portals to the unknown, different ways into the gap or rupture between 
signs and senses, indicating the difference between an approach to words 
and images from the side of the unspeakable or the unimaginable, the in-
visible or the inaudible. And (6) X as the phoneme of eXcess, of the eXtra, 
the unpredictable surplus that will undoubtedly be generated by reopening 
the variety of relations subtended by this peculiar locution, the imagetext. 
This is the sign of everything that has been left out of my construal of the X.
Why is it possible, even necessary, to formulate such an abundance of 
meaning around a simple relation between two elementary, even primi-
tive terms like “text” and “image”? One scarcely knows where to begin. A 
simple opening is provided by the innocent little phrase, “visual and verbal 
representation,” that is often uttered as a kind of alternative to “word and 
image” or “text and image.” A moment’s thought reveals a strange discon-
tinuity, a shift of levels of meaning. In order to make anything specific out 
of the visual- verbal, we must ask: Visual as distinct from what? Verbal as 
opposed to what? The obvious candidates are images or pictures as op-
posed to verbal signs, and visual sensations as opposed to auditory. The 
visual denotes a specific sensory channel; the verbal designates a specific 
semiotic register. The difference between the visual and verbal is actually 
two differences, one grounded in the senses (seeing versus hearing), the 
other in the nature of signs and meaning (words as arbitrary, conventional 
symbols, as distinct from images as representations by virtue of likeness 
or similitude). The phrase “visual- verbal,” then, produces a productive 
confusion of signs and senses, ways of producing meaning and ways of 
inhabiting perceptual experience.
Figure 4.2 provides a picture of this confusion. The X that links and differ-
entiates images and texts is the intersection between signs and senses, semi-

I M A G E  X  T E X T  :  4 1
otics and aesthetics. It becomes evident at a glance, then, that the apparently 
simple concept of the imagetext opens up a kind of fractal expansion of 
terms, as is captured in a more fully elaborated version of the figure (fig. 4.3).
As the sensory- semiotic dimensions of the word- image difference ex-
pand, they begin to demand some essential distinctions. When we talk 
about “words,” for instance, are we referring to speech or writing? (Let’s 
leave out, for the moment, gesture, which Rousseau saw as the original 
form of verbal expression, and which is fully elaborated today in the lan-
guages of the deaf).2 Does the “imagetext” concept automatically rule out 
orality? On the side of the image, are we talking about visual images—e.g., 
drawings, photographs, paintings, sculpture? Or auditory images, as in po-
etry and music? And what happens when we include the notion of “verbal 
imagery” (metaphor, description, etc.), which has not yet found a place 
in figures 4.2 and 4.3? Is this the X factor as an excess that overflows the 
boundary of any conceivable graphic representation?
Any systematic analysis of the relation of images and texts, then, leads 
inevitably into a wider field of reflection on aesthetics, semiotics, and the 
whole concept of representation itself as a heterogeneous fabric of sights 
2. See my “Utopian Gestures: The Poetics of Sign Language,” preface to Signing the 
Body Poetic: Essays on American Sign Language Literature, ed. H. Dirksen Bauman, 
Jennifer L. Nelson, and Heidi M. Rose (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
2006), xv– xxiii.
4.2 Image/text square opposition.
4.3 Image/text square opposition 
(elaborated).

4 2  :  C H A P T E R  4
and sounds, spectacle and speech, pictures and inscriptions.3 Is this not 
a multiply articulated fabric, in which the warp and woof are constantly 
shifting, not only from sensory channels (the eye and the ear) to semiotic 
functions (iconic likenesses and arbitrary symbols), but also to modalities 
of cognition (space and time) and to operational codes (the analog and the 
digital)? The fractal picture of the imagetext has scarcely begun with the 
“visual- verbal.” And will we not also have to add the “thirds” that inevitably 
spring up between our binary oppositions, sometimes as compromise for-
mations (could the “ana- lytical” itself be a demand for fusion or interplay 
between analog and digital codes?), sometimes as blank spaces in which 
something unpredictable and monstrous might emerge? The gap between 
the Lacanian registers of the Symbolic and Imaginary is the black hole of 
the Real, the site of trauma and the unrepresentable (but clearly not an 
unnameable place, since there it is, the name of “the Real”). Could it be 
the “beach” or margin between sea and land that Foucault names as the 
frontier between the words and images in Magritte’s Ceci n’est pas une pipe? 
Is it a contested zone, as Foucault puts it, “between the figure and the text” 
where “a whole series of intersections— or rather attacks launched by one 
against the other”4 exist. Could we then see our X as crossed lances (/ \) or 
“arrows shot at the enemy target, enterprises of subversion and destruc-
tion, lance blows and wounds, a battle.” Leonardo da Vinci called the en-
counter of painting and poetry a paragone or contest, and Lessing described 
their relation as the frontier between two countries, normally friendly and 
peaceful, but sometimes launching invasions into their neighbors’ territory.
There are, then, normal and normative relations between texts and 
images. One illustrates or explains or names or describes or ornaments 
the other. They complement and supplement one another, simultaneously 
completing and extending. That is why Foucault focuses on the “common 
frontier” between Magritte’s words and images, the “calm sand of the 
page,” on which “are established all the relations of designation, nomina-
tion, description, classification”— in short the whole order of the “seeable 
and sayable,” the “visible and articulable,” that lays down the archaeolog-
ical layers of knowledge itself.5 Word and image are woven together to 
3. See “Some Pictures of Representation,” the conclusion to Picture Theory, 417– 25.
4. Michel Foucault, This Is Not a Pipe, trans. James Harkness (Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1983), 26. Foucault also refers to the blank space between the 
pipe and its caption as a “crevasse— an uncertain foggy region” (28).
5. For an account of the way Foucault’s playful reflections on Magritte’s image-
text composition serve as a basis for his whole archaeological method, see Gilles 
Deleuze, Foucault (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1988), 80.

I M A G E  X  T E X T  :  4 3
create a reality. The tear in that fabric is the Real. Foucault makes the space 
between images and texts even more radical when he denies it the status 
of a space at all: “It is too much to claim that there is a blank or lacuna: 
instead, it is an absence of space, an effacement of the ‘common place’ 
between the signs of writing and the lines of the image.” X becomes, in 
this sense, the erasure, or “effacement,” not just of something inscribed, 
but of the very space in which the inscription might appear, as if the X 
signified a pair of slashes, like the tearing of a page, or cuts in a canvas left 
by a militant iconoclast— or an artist like Lucio Fontana.
Let’s say, then, that the normal relation of text and image is comple-
mentary or supplementary, and that together they make up a third thing, 
or open a space where that third thing appears. If we take comics as our 
example, the third thing that appears is just the composite art form known 
as comics, combining text and image in a highly specific medium. But 
there is also a third thing in the medium of graphic narration that is nei-
ther text nor image but which simultaneously links and separates them, 
namely, the gutter. These unobtrusive framing lines, as is well known, are 
neither words nor images, but indicators of relation, of temporal sequence 
or simultaneity, or of notional camera movements in space from panorama 
to close- up. Avant- garde comics, from Smokey Stover to Art Spiegelman to 
Chris Ware, have often played with the gutter, cutting across it, treating it 
as a window that can be opened to hang out the laundry.
So the third thing, the X between text and image, does not have to be an 
absence. In fact, we might argue that there is always something positive, 
even in the blank space of the Real, the slash of the canvas, or the non-
space beyond blankness. Something rushes in to fill the emptiness, some 
X to suggest the presence of an absence, the appearance of something 
neither text nor image. In Iconology: Image, Text, Ideology, I identified this 
third thing, as the subtitle indicated, as the ideological framework that 
invariably suffuses the field of image- text relationships: the difference be-
tween the “natural” and “conventional” sign; the distinction between an 
illiterate viewer, who can see what images represent, and a literate reader, 
who can see through the image to something else (typically, a text). In the 
polemic of Lessing’s Laocoön, the difference between image and text is 
not only figured in the relation of different nations but rendered literal in 
his characterization of French culture as obsessed with effeminate “bright 
eyes” and spectacle, while German and English cultures are described as 
manly cultures of the word.
If we survey the history of semiotics and aesthetics, we find the positive 
presence of the third element everywhere. The locus classicus is, of course, 

4 4  :  C H A P T E R  4
Aristotle’s Poetics, which divides the “means” or “medium” of tragedy into 
three parts: opsis, melos, and lexis (spectacle, music, and words). Or, as Ro-
land Barthes would have it, Image/Music/Text.6 The X- factor in the image-
text problematic is music, or, more generally, sound, which may be why 
“imagetext” has always struck me as slightly impoverished in that it con-
fines words to the realm of writing and printing, and neglects the sphere of 
orality and speech, not to mention gesture.7 Sometimes, this silencing of 
the third dimension becomes explicit, most famously in Keats’s “Ode on 
a Grecian Urn,” where the text not only conjures up the sight and image of 
its titular subject but attributes to it a silent music and speech— “a leafy 
tale” told “more sweetly than our rhyme,” accompanied by an “unheard” 
music. The radio comedians Bob and Ray used to pose the riddle Why is 
radio superior to television? The answer: because the images we see while 
listening to the radio are better, more vivid, dynamic, and vital.
The triad of image/music/text must be the most durable and deeply 
grounded taxonomy of the arts and media that we possess, because it 
recurs constantly in the most disparate contexts, defining the elements of 
the Wagnerian Gesamstkunstwerk, the components of cinema, radio, and 
television, and even the order of technical media that constitute moder-
nity. I am thinking here of Friedrich Kittler’s masterpiece, Gramophone, 
Film, Typewriter, which is, on the one hand, an updating of the old Aris-
totelian categories and, on the other, a trio of inventions subject to a new 
technical synthesis in the master platform of the computer.8
Finally, we must turn to the role of the imagetext in the constitutive 
elements of semiotics: the fundamental theory of signs and meaning. 
There we encounter Saussure’s famous diagram of the linguistic sign as a 
bifurcated oval with an image of a tree in the upper compartment and the 
word “arbor” in the lower (figure 4.4). It is as if Saussure were forced to 
admit that even words, speech, and language itself cannot be adequately 
represented by a purely linguistic notation.9 The image, which stands here 
not just for a tree but also for the signified or mental image conjured by 
6. Image/Music/Text, trans. Stephen Heath (New York: Hill & Wang, 1977).
7. A version of the Aristotelian and Barthesian triad was institutionalized some 
years ago in the University of Chicago’s common core as a yearlong course se-
quence in “media aesthetics” entitled “Image/Sound/Text.”
8. Gramophone, Film, Typewriter (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999).
9. Since Saussure’s text was a compilation of lecture notes by himself and his 
students, it is not possible to be certain that this diagram was actually drawn by 
the great linguist. Nevertheless, it has become a canonical picture of his under-
standing of the linguistic sign.

I M A G E  X  T E X T  :  4 5
the verbal signifier, actually stands above and prior to the word in the 
model of language itself. Saussure is building upon a picture of language 
that could be traced back into the psychology of empiricism, in which 
mental images are the content named by words, or all the way to Plato’s 
discussion of natural and conventional signs in the Cratylus. But we also 
have to notice that the imagetext is not all there is to the sign; there is a 
surplus of “third elements”: the oval, presumably a graphic rendering of 
the wholeness and fertility of the sign- as- ovum, despite its binary struc-
ture; the arrows, which stand for the bidirectionality of meaning, a circuit 
of alternating current between spoken words and ideas in the mind; and 
(most important) the bar between signifier and signified, the index of the 
fundamental duality of language and thought.
But this mention of the index must bring to mind immediately the 
most comprehensive analysis of the sign to date, the semiotics of Charles 
Sanders Peirce, who identified three elements or sign- functions that make 
meaning possible. These are the elements he calls “icon/index/symbol,” 
a triad that describes (very roughly) the distinctions between images (pic-
tures, but also any sign by resemblance, including metaphors), indexical 
signs (arrows and bars, for instance, but also pronouns and other deictic 
words that depend upon context), and symbols (signs by “law” or con-
vention).10 The relation of image and symbol, we must note, is merely 
analogous to, and at a quite different level from, the image- text relation, 
because Peirce is not interested in classifying signs by their singular man-
ifestations, such as “words and images,” but by their sign function, which 
depends upon the way in which they make meaning. The category of the 
icon includes pictures and other visual, graphic images, but it is not ex-
hausted by those things. Icons can appear in language as metaphor and 
in logic in the form of analogy. They are signs by resemblance or likeness. 
Similarly, indices may be exemplified by arrows and bars, but they also 
include elements of language, such as deictic terms (this, that, there, then) 
and pronouns (I, we, you). Indices are “shifters” or existential signs that 
10. “Logic as Semiotic: The Theory of Signs,” Philosophical Writings of Peirce, ed. 
Justus Buchler (New York: Dover Publications, 1955), 98– 119.
4.4 Ferdinand de Saussure, “Linguistic Sign,” 
from Cours de linguistique générale (1916).

4 6  :  C H A P T E R  4
take their meaning from context. They are also signs by cause and effect 
(tracks in the snow indicating where someone has walked; smoke as an 
indicator of fire). And finally, symbols are signs that take their meaning 
from arbitrary conventions (we will let the word “arbor” stand for this 
vertical object sprouting with leaves).
From Peirce’s standpoint, then, the imagetext is simply a figure for 
two- thirds of the semiotic field, awaiting only the recognition of its third 
element, the “/” as the index of a slash or relational sign in the concrete 
thing (a text, a work of art) that is being decoded. All these triads of aes-
thetics and semiotics can be seen at a glance in table 4.1, to which I want to 
add one final layer that will, as it were, bring us back to the surface of these 
reflections and the original question of how to write these things down. 
I’m thinking here of Nelson Goodman’s theory of notation, which exam-
ines the way marks themselves can produce meaning, and which relies 
on categories such as “density” and “repleteness” (where every difference 
in a mark is potentially significant), and “differentiated” and “articulate” 
(where marks belong to a finite set of characters that have definite mean-
ing, as in an alphabet, in which the letter a still means a, regardless of 
whether it is handwritten, typed, or printed in Gothic or Times New Ro-
man).11 Goodman’s categories, in contrast to Peirce’s, take us back to the 
surface of inscription. Goodman’s triad— sketch, score, script— reinscribes 
the image/music/text triad, but this time at the level of notation.
I hope it is clear that table 4.1 does not postulate some kind of unifor-
mity or even translatability down the columns. The rows are the strong 
elements, teasing out concepts of semiotics and aesthetics that happen to 
fall into these precise terms. The columns are merely iconic: they suggest a 
structural analogy between the ideas of radically different kinds of think-
ers. Why, for instance, should we want to link music with the Lacanian 
11. Nelson Goodman, The Languages of Art (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1976).
Aristotle
opsis
melos
lexis
Barthes
image
music
text
Lacan
Imaginary
Real
Symbolic
Kittler
film
gramophone
typewriter
Goodman
sketch
score
script
Peirce
icon
index
symbol
Foucault
seeable
[X]
sayable
Hume
similarity
cause and effect
convention
Saussure
bar
arbor

I M A G E  X  T E X T  :  4 7
Real? Kittler provides a technical answer based in recording apparatuses 
and the physical structure of the ear.12 Nevertheless, the whole point of 
this table is to produce a set of diagonal, X- shaped reflections, that would 
slash across the rigid order of the columns: the arrows in Saussure’s pic-
ture of the sign are indices, for sure. But are they not also icons in that 
they resemble arrows, and symbols in that we have to know the convention 
of pointing? Point out an object to the average dog, and he will sniff your 
finger.
We still have not addressed the most fundamental question, which is 
why the image/text rupture, the image- text relation, and the imagetext 
synthesis should be so fundamental to aesthetics and semiotics. Why do 
disciplines like art history and literary criticism find themselves inexorably 
converging around encounters of visual and verbal media? Why does the 
theory of representation itself seem to converge on this primitive binary 
opposition? My claim is that the imagetext is the convergence point of se-
miotics, the theory of signs, and aesthetics, the theory of the senses. It is 
the place where the eye and the ear encounter the logical, analogical, and 
cognitive relations that give rise to meaning in the first place. David Hume 
understood the laws of “association of ideas” in terms of a triad very close 
to Peirce’s analysis of the sign; similarity, cause/effect, and convention 
are his three laws, corresponding quite precisely to Peirce’s icon, index, 
and symbol. The imagetext, then, is a principle of thought, feeling, and 
meaning as fundamental to human beings as distinctions (and the accom-
panying indistinctions) of gender and sexuality. William Blake glimpsed 
this when he asserted that the great Kantian modes of intuition, and space 
and time, are gendered as female and male respectively. And Lacan revised 
the Saussurean picture of the sign by portraying it as a pair of adjacent 
doors labeled “Men” and “Women,” as if the gendered binary (and urinary 
segregation) was the foundation of semiosis itself. Of course, some will say 
that we have transcended all these binary oppositions in the digital age, 
when images have all been absorbed into the flow of information. They 
forget that the dense, sensuous world of the analog doesn’t disappear in 
the field of ones and zeros: it resurfaces in the eye and ear ravished by new 
forms of music and spectacle, and in the hand itself, where digits are lit-
eralized in the keyboard interface and game controller. Hardly surprising, 
then, that the imagetext can play such a productive role, embracing poetry 
and photography, painting and typography, blogs and comics, and every 
conceivable form of new media.
12. See Kittler, Gramophone, Film, Typewriter, 24.

5.1 Allan Sekula, Weld-
er’s booth in bankrupt 
Todd Shipyard. Two 
years after closing. Los 
Angeles harbor. San 
Pedro, California (July 
1991). Dye transfer 
print. 321/8 × 225/8 in. 
© 2015 The Estate of 
Alan Sekula. From 
the series Fish Story, 
1988– 1995. Photograph: 
courtesy of the Estate 
of Allan Sekula.

5: REALISM AND THE DIGITAL IMAGE
The currency of the great bank of nature has left the gold standard: images are no 
longer guaranteed as visual truth— or even as signifiers with stable meaning and 
value— and we endlessly print more of them.
WILLIAM J. MITCHELL, The Reconfigured Eye1
One of the most consistent commonplaces about the nature of digital pho-
tography (and digital imagery more generally) is that it has undermined 
the old claim of photographic images to represent the world faithfully, 
naturally, and accurately. Traditional chemical- based photography, we are 
told, had an indexical relation to the referent; it was physically compelled 
to form an image by the light rays emanating or reflecting from the sub-
ject. This image or likeness was thus doubly referential, a double copy in 
that it was both an impression or trace, on the one hand, and a copy or 
analogon, on the other. Both index and icon, it provided a kind of double- 
entry bookkeeping of the real. Like the fossil trace, the shadow, or the 
mirror reflection in a still lake, traditional photography was a natural sign. 
It carried a certificate of realism with it as part of its fundamental ontology. 
Of course, one could, as Mark Hansen notes, recognize that “the specter 
of manipulation has always haunted the photographic image,” but insist 
that this is “the exception rather than the rule.”2 As William J. Mitchell 
argues, “Reworking of photographic images is technically difficult, time- 
consuming, and outside the mainstream of photographic practice” (7). 
With Photoshop, presumably, reworking or “doctoring” photographs be-
comes technically easy, quick, and quite ordinary.
I remember a game that my father used to play when taking family 
photographs. It involved lining up my sisters and me behind him on a 
hillside, and my mother photographing us such that we appeared to be 
tiny children standing on his outstretched hands. The photograph itself 
1. The Reconfigured Eye (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992), 56.
2. New Philosophy for New Media (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004), 95.

5 0  :  C H A P T E R  5
was not manipulated, but the pro- filmic event was staged for it, in a way 
that took advantage of the mechanical automatism of the camera lens (its 
perspectival design) to produce an illusion.
When Kaiser Wilhelm came to Palestine in the first decade of the twen-
tieth century, he met with his friend Theodore Herzl, and a photo oppor-
tunity was staged to show them together. Unfortunately, when the pho-
tographs were developed, it turned out that the two men never appeared 
together in a single shot. So the pictures went back to the darkroom and 
a famous photo of Herzl and the Kaiser together was fabricated. Was this 
photograph lying, given that the two men did actually meet? Was this 
an unusual occurrence? Was it technically difficult or time- consuming? 
Outside the mainstream? What would happen if a politically loaded photo 
fabrication like this was produced today in Photoshop? Would it be taken 
as authentic, or would the “specter of manipulation” automatically hover 
over it, by virtue of its digital character? The Herzl- Kaiser fabrication went 
undiscovered for many years. Would a digital trick of this sort be immedi-
ately perceptible? Or is it the imperceptibility of the “specter of manipula-
tion” that casts doubt on all digital photographs. In that case, of course, we 
would be back to square one. If all digital photographs are equally suspect, 
merely by virtue of being digital, then can none of them be trusted— or 
distrusted— any more than any other digital photograph?
I use Photoshop once a year to fabricate an illusion for my family’s 
annual Christmas card. Once I tried to shrink my wife and kids down to 
little Munchkins and put them on the parapet of one of my sandcastles, 
with me, at full size, looming above them like a Leviathan. Needless to say, 
this picture did not meet with the approval of the wife and kids; it exists 
now only in a fading print and a digital archive. Is this a rare or excep-
tional practice? Was it technically difficult? Outside normal professional 
practice? My ordinary use of Photoshop is actually just the opposite of 
fakery: it principally involves what is called the “optimization” of images 
for whatever purpose they are going to serve— crunching them down for 
screening or transmitting over the Internet, fattening them up in .tiff for-
mat to produce highly saturated color prints. In other words, I manipulate 
almost all the digital images that come into my computer, not in order to 
fake or fabricate anything, but to enhance their functionality in playing 
roles very like traditional lantern slides or photographic prints. And in 
fact, I am barely competent at any these practices. People often complain 
that my PowerPoint presentations employ low- quality, low- resolution 
images snatched from the Internet. And my answer is: this is a kind of 
realism. Why should I try to simulate the color saturation and focus of 

R E A L I S M  A N D  T H E  D I G I T A L  I M A G E  :  5 1
a lantern slide, when in fact I am not showing lantern slides but digital 
projections at 72 dpi? If realism means anything, surely it means candor 
about the nature of one’s images. The famous Life magazine photo of Lee 
Harvey Oswald holding the rifle that killed Kennedy is probably a fake. 
What difference does it make that this was a chemical- based photograph 
and not a digital photograph?
All of these examples are mobilized, clearly, to undercut or at least com-
plicate the prevailing myth that digital photography has an ontology quite 
different from chemical- based photography, that this ontology dictates a 
different relation to the referent, one based in information, coding, and 
signage (the symbolic realm) rather than the iconic and indexical realms 
of older forms of photography. These examples also help us to question 
whether this very dubious “ontology” (which isolates the “being” of pho-
tography from the social world in which it operates, and reifies a single 
aspect of its technical processes),3 has any fixed relation to issues such as 
authenticity and fakery, or “manipulated” and “natural” images. It seems 
clear that things such as the authenticity, truth value, authority, and legit-
imacy of photographs (as well as their aesthetic value, their sentimental 
character, their popularity, etc.) are quite independent of their character 
as “digital” or “chemical analog” productions. The notion that the digi-
tal character of an image has a necessary relation to the meaning of that 
image, its effects on the senses, its impact on the body or the mind of the 
spectator, is one of the great myths of our time. It is based on a fallacy 
of misplaced concreteness, a kind of vulgar technical determinism that 
thinks the ontology of a medium is adequately given by an account of its 
materiality and its technical- semiotic character.
I prefer Raymond Williams’s account of media as “material social prac-
tices”4 that involve skills, traditions, genres, conventions, habits, and 
automa tisms, as well as materials and techniques. And (though this will 
take time to develop) I want to argue that the myth of digital photogra-
phy has things exactly upside down. Instead of making photography less 
credible, less legitimate, digitization has produced a general “optimiza-
tion” of photographic culture, one in which better and better simulations 
of the best effects of realism and informational richness in traditional 
photography have become possible for many more camera operators. My 
3. As William J. Mitchell puts it in The Reconfigured Eye (4), “The difference is 
grounded in the fundamental physical characteristics that have logical and cul-
tural consequences.”
4. “From Medium to Social Practice,” in Marxism and Literature (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1977), 158– 64.

5 2  :  C H A P T E R  5
inkjet printer can now produce 8 × 10s with glorious color, something that 
was a rare and exceptional experience in the old days. If we are looking 
for a “tendency” in the coming of digital photography, it is toward “deep 
copies” that contain much more information about the original than we 
will ever need, and “super copies” that can be improved, enhanced, and 
(yes) manipulated— not in order to fake anything but to produce the best- 
focused, most evenly lit image possible. In other words: to produce some-
thing like a professional quality photograph of the old style. We mustn’t 
forget Marshall McLuhan’s admonition that one of the first effects of a new 
medium is simply the simulation and replacement of an older medium. 
What digital photography is doing to the senses, the body, the referent, 
the sign, and the image, much less that ever- vanishing entity known “the 
Real,” ought to be at least a question to be asked and answered by some 
empirical particulars, not a transcendental deduction from a thin descrip-
tion of the bare technical facts about the digitization of images.
In saying this, however, I don’t mean to suggest that digitization has 
made no difference to photography, or to image- making and circula-
tion more generally. It’s just that this difference has to be understood as 
a complex shift in many layers of photographic and image culture, one 
that involves popular as well as professional, political, and scientific uses 
of automated image- production, and that is linked to modes of produc-
tion more generally— that is, new ways of making a living (or not) and of 
reproducing life itself. My argument is against the reduction of digital 
photography to a bare material and technical essence, “grounding it,” as 
William Mitchell puts it, in “fundamental physical characteristics” rather 
than social practices and uses. I will be using Mitchell’s discussion of dig-
ital photography throughout this chapter as my principal example, simply 
because his book, The Reconfigured Eye, is so often cited as the principal 
authority and the “classic” statement of this argument.
The main use of digital photography has been (aside from simulating 
the effects of chemical- based photography for amateur users) a deepen-
ing of the referent, not its disappearance. This point is demonstrated by 
Mitchell’s own frequent recourse to technoscientific examples, such as the 
“spacecraft imaging” that makes it possible to take a “perspective view” of 
a volcanic landscape on Venus.5 Digital imaging in this case enhances one 
of the most venerable aims of “classic” or “realist” photography, namely, 
the revelation of realities that are inaccessible to the naked eye. Does any-
one seriously argue that the digitization of X- ray images and magnetic 
5. Reconfigured Eye, figure 2.1 (10).

R E A L I S M  A N D  T H E  D I G I T A L  I M A G E  :  5 3
resonance imaging compromises the “adherence of the referent” to these 
images?
Of course, the kinds of manipulation and artifice that were already 
possible in traditional photographic practice become even easier in the 
digital darkroom. Photoshop is packed with magical tools for distortion, 
enhancement, cutting and pasting, resizing, cropping, and optimizing. 
But despite the handwringing over the coming inability “to distinguish 
between a genuine image and one that has been manipulated,”6 the actual 
professional use of digital photography in the news media has revealed 
remarkably few attempts to fabricate false or misleading images. The very 
fact that cutting and pasting is so easy has, in fact, had just the opposite 
effect on professional practices, and the National Press Photographers 
Association has gone out of its way to warn against the use of digital tech-
nology to “create lies.” As for the distinction between a “genuine” and a 
“manipulated” image, this is a paranoiac fantasy, since every photograph 
that was made in the traditional way was also a product of manipulation 
in the sense of technical, material standards, and decisions about what to 
shoot, at what settings, and how to develop and print it. The concept of 
the “genuine” image is an ideological phantasm.
Again, none of this disputes the fact that the camera can be used to lie, 
or that photographs can be manipulated to deceive. It is only to insist that 
the invention of digital imaging does not, in itself, render this capability 
the key to some essentialized “ontology of the digital photograph.” If on-
tology is the study of being, then we must not forget that the ontology of 
photography should focus on its being in the world, not in some reductive 
characterization of its essence.
Mitchell makes a great deal of the de- realizing image practices that 
were first tried out in the first Gulf War, where “laser- guided bombs had 
nose- cone video cameras,” and “pilots and tank commanders became cy-
borgs inseparable from elaborate visual prostheses that enabled them to 
see ghostly- green, digitally enhanced images of darkened battlefields” (13). 
What Mitchell fails to note, however, is that these ghostly- green images 
permitted actual human beings to see what would have otherwise been 
invisible. There is a kind of paradox here in the relation of the image tech-
nology to the referent: what was dark is illuminated, what could not be 
seen becomes available to sight. The “de- realization” is only with reference 
to something like natural human night vision, which would have seen 
nothing. So is this a loss of reality, or a gain? My sense is that it is both, 
6. Mitchell is quoting a New York Times photography critic (Reconfigured Eye, 17).

5 4  :  C H A P T E R  5
and any attempt to confine ourselves to one side of the equation will miss 
the point of this kind of image technology as a worldly practice.
In that same Gulf War, Mitchell complains that
there was no Matthew Brady to show us the bodies on the ground, no 
Robert Capa to confront us with the human reality of a bullet through the 
head. Instead, the folks back home were fed carefully selected, electroni-
cally captured, sometimes digitally processed images of distant and imper-
sonal destruction. Slaughter became a video game: death imitated art. (13)
Of course, at the level of fact, this statement is remarkably selective. There 
were real- time images of Iraqi bodies beamed by satellite from Baghdad 
after a US “smart bomb” destroyed what turned out to be a civilian struc-
ture.7 There were photographs (probably not digital) made of the trail of 
destruction left by the retreating Iraqi army, massacred in a “turkey shoot” 
by American bombs and rockets (though their circulation, along with im-
ages of US servicemen’s coffins, was suppressed). If there was no Robert 
Capa, there was Peter Arnett on hand to verify the authenticity of the im-
ages of dead Iraqi civilians. And one wonders what Mitchell would make 
of the role of digital photography and video in the US invasion and occu-
pation of Iraq after 9- 11.8 The famous Abu Ghraib photographs were all 
digital. One of the most notorious of them (the stack of naked Iraqi men) 
was used as a screen- saver image on a computer at Abu Ghraib prison. 
The digitization of the photos had, so far as I can tell, absolutely no effect 
on their reception as authentic, realistic depictions of what was going on 
inside that prison, revealing as well the peculiar attitudes of sadistic en-
joyment that characterized the American presence in front of— as well as 
7. See my discussion of media practices during the first Gulf War in “From CNN 
to JFK,” chapter 13 of Picture Theory (1994).
8. It is worth noting that the presence of digital photography has had a major 
impact on the circulation of realistic images of the war in Iraq. No longer the 
exclusive purview of professional journalists, photo- and text- blogs from Iraqi 
civilians and American soldiers are flooding the Internet. And the US military 
mission made it clear that notions of journalistic professional neutrality would 
not be honored in this war. The mandatory “embedding” of journalists with mil-
itary units and the confinement of journalists to military- controlled compounds 
was only the first stage in the attempt at total media control. Direct violence and 
incarceration are also favored tactics: sixty- seven journalists were killed in the 
US war in Iraq, in contrast to the sixty- three killed in ten years of reporting in 
Vietnam (Salon.com, August 30, 2005).

R E A L I S M  A N D  T H E  D I G I T A L  I M A G E  :  5 5
behind— the camera. Like the American lynching photographs of the early 
twentieth century, these images were revelations of a structural, social, 
and political reality that would have remained, but for their existence, at 
the level of rumor and verbal report.9 Of course, these images could have 
been manipulated and fabricated to convey false information. And many of 
them were quite visibly manipulated to erase the faces of the Iraqi victims. 
An entire Internet industry of fake, staged Abu Ghraib photographs sprang 
up in the wake of the authentic images. But these images were faked in 
the pro- filmic scenario, not in the digital processing of them. Their inau-
thenticity had exactly nothing to do with their status as digital images.
My point, however, is not that digitization is irrelevant, but that its rel-
evance needs to be specified. In the case of the Abu Ghraib photos, the 
main relevance of digitization is not “adherence to the referent” (which is 
almost always, in any case, established by documentation and testimonial 
credentials outside the image itself) but circulation and dissemination. If 
the Abu Ghraib photos had been chemical- based, it would have been very 
difficult for them to circulate in the way they did. They could not have 
been copied so readily or transmitted worldwide by e- mail, or posted on 
websites (not unless they had been scanned and digitized, that is). If Abu 
Ghraib did not have its heroic star photojournalists to provide a human 
perspective, it provided something perhaps even more striking and dis-
turbing: a revelation of the inner workings of American military prisons 
in the gulag outside the law that the Bush administration created as an 
instrument of its “war on terror,” as well as an insight into a different use 
of photography as an instrument of torture. Above all, the Abu Ghraib 
photos demonstrated a new role for photography’s “being in the world” 
made possible by digitization. They showed the way in which the rapid, 
virulent circulation of digitized images gives them a kind of uncontrollable 
vitality, an ability to migrate across borders, to escape containment and 
quarantine, to “break out” of whatever boundaries have been established 
for their control. At a time when actual human bodies are more and more 
fenced in by actual and virtual borders, fences, checkpoints, and security 
walls, when those same bodies are subjected to increasingly intensive and 
intrusive surveillance, the digital image can sometimes operate as a kind 
of “wild gas” that escapes these restrictions.
It is not so much “adherence to the referent” that is endangered by 
digital imaging, then, as adherence to a “controlling intention” in the 
9. See my discussion of the Abu Ghraib images in Cloning Terror: The War of Im-
ages, 9- 11 to the Present (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011).

5 6  :  C H A P T E R  5
production of photographs. Certainly, the intention of the Abu Ghraib 
photographers was not exactly “realized” by their digital circulation. Their 
intentions (which remain obscure) were more along the lines of creating 
trophies of sadistic domination in a context where the American inabil-
ity to contain the Iraqi insurgency was already becoming evident, and to 
humiliate the subjects of the photographs, perhaps even providing a ba-
sis for blackmail to coerce Iraqis to work against the insurgency for US 
intelligence. (See Seymour Hersh’s speculations on this point.10) Both of 
these intentions were frustrated or turned against the producers of the 
photographs. Their “trophies” became exhibit A in the indictment of the 
“few bad apples” who were punished for the “abuses.”And far from helping 
to obtain information about the Iraqi insurgency, the photographs fueled 
resistance and served as instruments of recruitment for the insurgency, 
and for worldwide terrorist networks.
What can we say, then, about the actual— as opposed to the mythical— 
meaning of the technical revolution in digital imaging? Are all the intelli-
gent commentators simply mistaken in their portrayals of chemical pho-
tograph as inherently realistic and the digital image as inherently open to 
manipulation and deceit, de- realization, disembodiment, and dehuman-
ization? I think that it is more complicated than a simple mistake, and 
that these sorts of mythic narratives of loss of authenticity and human 
meaning need to be stirred into whatever mixture of elements comprises 
the ontology of photographic images, their “being in the world” of poli-
tics, technoscience, and everyday life. The very fact that these stories are 
somehow compelling, that they become classic or commonplace, is a part 
(but not the whole) of the ontology of the image.
I want to conclude this chapter by widening the horizon of inquiry be-
yond photographic images to two more general domains: (1) the level of 
the “codes” that underlay claims about referentiality and significance in 
images, especially the opposition between the digital and the analog im-
age, and (2) the analogy between images and life- forms that is drastically 
enhanced by the quantitative increase in production, reproduction, and 
circulation of images in the digital world.
William Mitchell’s distinction between digital and analog codes is a 
convenient place to start:
The basic technical distinction between analog (continuous) and digital 
(discrete) representation is crucial here. Rolling down a ramp is continu-
10. See Hersh, “Torture at Abu Ghraib,” New Yorker (May 10, 2004).

R E A L I S M  A N D  T H E  D I G I T A L  I M A G E  :  5 7
ous motion, but walking down stairs is a sequence of discrete steps— so 
you can count the number of steps, but not the number of levels on the 
ramp. A clock with a spring mechanism that smoothly rotates the hands 
provides an analog representation of the passage of time, but an elec-
tronic watch that displays a succession of numerals provides a digital 
representation. (4)
While this illustration might seem compelling at first, it quickly decon-
structs itself. Rolling down a ramp may be continuous motion, but one 
can in fact count the number of rolls. Or one can walk down the ramp 
and count the number of steps one takes. As for walking down stairs: yes, 
one can count the stairs, but one may experience that descent (as my lively 
nieces and nephews routinely demonstrate) as a kind of flight or free fall. 
There is a real difference, then, between digital and analog representation, 
but it is a highly labile and flexible difference, a dialectical relationship, 
not a rigid binary opposition. It is not, most importantly, an ontological 
difference, but a difference in representation and perception. The same 
thing can be scanned, mapped, depicted, described, assessed— in a word, 
represented— in a digital or analog format. The stairs can be given analog 
representation; the ramp can be digitized.
The two forms of representation are mutually definitive and comple-
mentary. The idea of isolating one of them as somehow self- sufficient is a 
myth (which is why the very idea of “digital culture” strikes me as such a 
slovenly and misleading shorthand, even while I recognize the inevitability 
of its deployment). The analog only has the meaning it does in contrast 
to some specifiable notion of the digital, and vice versa. And the mutual, 
reversible translation between the two formats is essential to their practi-
cal uses. Digital sound recording, for instance, does not produce a digital 
output. The analog signal returns the moment the recording is played 
on speakers driven by an amplifier. Chemical- based newspaper photo-
graphs throughout the twentieth century were mechanically digitized to 
facilitate printing long before the invention of computers. Examine any 
older newspaper photo with a magnifiying glass and you will find that 
it is composed, then as now, of a grid of Ben- Day dots, pixels before the 
pixel. It is the human eye that “resolves” the digitized grid into an analog 
representation. If digitization is (as Mitchell suggests) a matter of “dis-
crete steps,” then everything from mosaic tile to pointillist painting is 
already digitized. Chemical- based photography itself had to contend with 
a digital level known as “grain.” Anyone who has seen Antonioni’s classic 
film Blow- Up (1966) is aware that, at high levels of magnification and en-

5 8  :  C H A P T E R  5
largement, chemical- based photographic prints dissolve into an abstract 
mélange of black- and- white specks.
A better guide to the relation of digital and analog is provided by Nelson 
Goodman, who insists that we specify the kinds of digits and marks being 
differentiated, and the codes that govern their combination.11 The digital/
analog relation varies, for instance, depending on what sorts of digits or 
“discrete elements” are being employed. Letters of the Latin alphabet and 
Greek numerals are already digital in the sense of being “discrete.” Black- 
and- white tiles assembled to produce a geometric figure that seems alter-
nately to recede and advance are digital elements that are received as ana-
log in perception. A geometric curve that descends the y- axis and extends 
infinitely along the x- axis is an analog depiction that can be expressed digi-
tally in the expression y = 1/x. Sometimes a system of representation can be 
a compromise between a precise digital quantification and a rather vague, 
qualitative assessment. Are shoe sizes specified by numerals— 8, 9, 10— a 
“digital” representation, in contrast to T- shirt sizes specified by words: 
small, medium, large? Digitization need not, in other words, involve binary 
number systems (1 and 0). It need not even involve numbers but can occur 
whenever a limited number of unambiguous characters (e.g., red, yellow, 
green) are deployed to signal unambiguous meanings (stop, caution, go).
The dialectical character of the digital/analog difference is rendered 
vividly in Chuck Close’s paintings, which simulate the look of the digi-
tal grid or screen of depiction, but then treat the individual “pixels” or 
discrete units as objects of individual painterly operations, as if each 
were a miniature abstract painting. Or, if a more widely known example 
is desired, consider two scenes from that universal cultural referent, The 
Matrix (1999).12 In one scene, a character named, appropriately, “Cipher” 
is watching a computer screen that is awash with a stream of alphanu-
meric characters. When asked what he’s looking at, he says it is the Miss 
Universe contest, that he is so familiar with the code that it has become 
transparent to him. He sees right through the numbers and letters to the 
analog images they represent (just as we “see through” the Ben- Day dots in 
newspaper photos to the analog images they transmit). The other scene is 
the moment of revelation of the “digital reality” that underlies the analog 
“surface” or “illusion” constructed for human beings by the Matrix. When 
Neo has his moment of revelation, he suddenly sees the deadly agents of 
the Matrix as what they “really are”— streams of alphanumeric characters 
11. Goodman, The Languages of Art (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1976).
12. The Matrix, dir. Andy and Lana Wachowski (1999).

R E A L I S M  A N D  T H E  D I G I T A L  I M A G E  :  5 9
in a virtual space. But at the very moment of this revelation, we see that 
the ghost of the analog is returning: the shapes of the agents’ bodies are 
clearly outlined amid the flow of numbers and letters that lie “behind” 
their corporeal illusion. When sophisticated commentators tell you (as 
they routinely do) that the “analog” era is behind us, that digitization has 
destroyed photography, that digital video has destroyed film, and that the 
image itself has been eliminated by digitization, ask them what they make 
of this scene. If the Desert of the Real is, in fact, just numbers, then we can 
take some comfort in the fact that Plato already made this point over two 
thousand years ago, and he still thought the only moral to be drawn from 
it was that we had to go on living in this world of shadows, illusions, and 
images— in short, in the world of the analog.13
But still, the mythmakers are not completely mistaken about the digital 
image. Digitization makes an enormous difference to the role of images 
in culture, politics, and everyday life, but those differences cannot simply 
be “read off” their material or technical features. One would expect, for 
instance, that since digital images can be duplicated with a simple set 
of keystrokes, the world would be flooded with more copies of these pic-
tures than ever. But my own experience is just the reverse. Digital images 
(private, amateur pictures, that is) tend to languish unseen on the hard 
drives of computers or the memories of smartphones, in much the same 
way that 35- millimeter slides used to remain hidden away in storage boxes 
or carousels. Printing a digital photograph requires a new set of habits. 
Should one drop off the memory card at the drugstore the way one did 
with a film canister? Or should one first optimize and edit the image files 
in Photoshop, then copy them to a CD- ROM, and then take them to the 
drugstore? Should one buy a photo printer and print them at home (a pro-
cess that looks simple until you try formatting the images for smaller sizes 
like 4 by 6 inches)? Or should one send them to an online service and wait 
for the prints to arrive in the mail?
The problem here is not that it is difficult to produce a set of prints in 
the traditional way, but that there are too many ways to do it. The simplest 
one, dropping off the memory card (or sending the photos to an online 
service), is complicated by the fact that one knows it would not be difficult 
to make the prints just a little better by taking time to optimize the images. 
13. I recommend here Brian Massumi’s superb essay, “On the Superiority of the 
Analog,” in Parables of the Virtual (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002), 
133– 43. See also my discussion of Plato’s Allegory of the Cave in Iconology: Image, 
Text, Ideology (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987), 93.

6 0  :  C H A P T E R  5
But who has time for that, or even to think about choices like these? My 
answer, which I suspect is typical, is to defer these decisions for another 
time, leaving the family photos safely (one hopes) in the digital archives.
Digital photographs have a different life- cycle from chemical- based 
photographs. They do not necessarily circulate in printed form but re-
main in a mainly subterranean realm, unseen and mostly forgotten but 
(thanks to a variety of search mechanisms) available for retrieval much 
more quickly than printed photos or transparencies. Although it is tempt-
ing to call this a “dematerialization” of the image, since it exists only as 
a data file on a disk somewhere, the fact is that this is also a material ex-
istence; the data occupies a real place, and it is subject to material decay 
just as surely as traditional photographs. William Mitchell claims that a 
traditional photograph “is fossilized light,” and if this metaphor makes 
sense, then digital photographs are simply the instruments of a more far- 
reaching paleontology of the image.
Another implication of the fossil metaphor is that images are like dead, 
dormant, or even extinct life- forms that can be brought back to life by be-
ing brought back into the light— printed, projected, or screened. And this, 
I think, is one of the key frameworks for thinking about the larger cultural 
context of the digital image. These images have achieved technical perfec-
tion in the same period that an entirely different class of images has been 
subjected to an analogous process. I’m thinking here of the reproduction 
of organisms, biological life- forms, by the process of cloning. Clones are 
a living, organic version of the digital image, involving a similar relation 
between an underlying genetic code and a visible, bodily, analog manifes-
tation. And much of the anxiety about digital imaging echoes common 
phobias about cloning: both processes are accused of replacing a “natu-
ral” process with one involving artificial manipulation; both are accused 
of producing endless copies that threaten the identity of the individual 
specimen. As Mitchell puts it, “A digital image that is a thousand gen-
erations away from the original is indistinguishable in quality from any 
one of its progenitors” (6).14 The metaphor of “generations” and “progen-
14. See Lev Manovich’s discussion of “Lossy compression” in The Language of 
New Media (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002) for a technical puncturing of this 
myth of the perfect copy. A similar problem occurs with the notion of a clone 
as a perfect copy. Actually, a clone is less similar to its donor or parent than an 
identical twin because it has generally been gestated in a different womb and 
matures in a completely different environment, at least one generation after its 
ancestor. Neither clones nor (printed) digital photographs can be identical twins 
in this very fundamental sense.

R E A L I S M  A N D  T H E  D I G I T A L  I M A G E  :  6 1
itors” makes clear the biological figure of the perfect, artificial double or 
twin, in contrast to traditional copying processes that always involve loss  
of detail variations and natural decay. There is a kind of horrific immor-
tality to the digital image, whether photographic or organismic. And this 
may explain why the descriptions of digital photographs so often resort 
to biological metaphors, as if we were beset by a “plague” of images, self- 
generating, virulent entities that threaten not just traditional photography 
but also traditional forms of life itself.
One of the most fundamental consequences of the more virulent and 
volatile “life” produced by the digitization of images is an erosion of the 
boundaries between the private and public, amateur and professional cir-
culation of photographs.15 The digital image is not merely a matter of 
taking a picture with a digital camera and storing it on a disk or printing it 
out. It is also a matter of circulating it on the Internet via e- mail and other 
social media. Family albums are now easily transformed into public exhibi-
tions, and even secret photographs (again, Abu Ghraib is the conspicuous 
example) can circulate globally once they break out of their quarantine.
What does all this say, finally, about the problem of realism in photog-
raphy or in images more generally? It all depends, obviously, on what you 
think counts as realism in representation. I think it means that we must 
untether the problem of realism from the ontology of the medium. Despite 
Susan Sontag’s passionate arguments, there is nothing automatic about 
realism in photography, nothing encoded in the ontology of the photo-
graph that makes it “adhere to the referent.”16 And realism can mean, in 
any event, many other things besides adherence to the referent. For one 
thing, the referent of a photograph has to be stipulated. Is a photograph 
of my Aunt Mary referring to her? Or to her dress? Her expression on this 
particular day, and the meaning of an occasion? Is it realistic if she put on 
her Sunday best to be photographed, so that this image shows her in a way 
that is somewhat exceptional? And would discussions of the value or qual-
ity of this picture be likely to focus on the question of its realism at all? Or 
would they focus on whether she looked pretty in this picture, looked her 
best, and what a special day this was? My sense is that in ordinary family 
photographs, realism is very low on the totem pole of evaluative criteria.
Realism is not “built into” the ontology of any medium as such. Cin-
15. I am grateful to Alan Thomas for pointing this out.
16. In fact, Sontag’s On Photography (New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1972) 
makes an even stronger case for surrealism as the net effect of photography in its 
capacity to alienate the spectator.

6 2  :  C H A P T E R  5
ematic realism reveals this perhaps most vividly, since it is a very special 
project within a medium that, if it has a built- in tendency, would tend 
toward fantasy and spectacle, not the faithful portrayal of ordinary life. 
Most people take photographs in order to idealize and commemorate, not 
to realistically portray something. As for what realism “really is,” this is a 
subject that would take up a lot more space than the confines of this chap-
ter. One can make a photograph that “adheres to the referent” in a quite 
literal way, by producing a direct transfer contact print. But this guarantees 
nothing about its realism. Socialist realism, as we know, was anything 
but. It was a contrived process of ideological idealization of a projected, 
hoped- for reality, but, as Georg Lukács pointed out, it was not the same 
thing as what he called “critical realism,” a project of objective, historically 
informed representation built upon an independent point of view “out-
side” of socialism, a view that necessarily identifies the critical realist as 
someone who occupies a middle, perhaps even bourgeois, class position.17 
Literary realism, as Northrop Frye pointed out long ago in a similar vein, 
involves the representation of ordinary people in a “middling” situation, 
between the Aristotelian categories of “high” subject matter (tragedy and 
romance) and “low” (comic characters and incidents).18 “Social realism” of 
the sort practiced by Allan Sekula tends to fuse Lukács’s “critical realism” 
with an emphasis on the conditions of labor and an interest in exposing 
to photographic view a world that is overlooked or generally hidden away 
from public view— all this, however, in tension with his photographs’ ar-
tistic status, their character as highly crafted and often beautiful objects.
As an example, consider Sekula’s photograph (figure 5.1) of a displaced 
wrench, from his photo essay Fish Story.19 The photograph exemplifies 
social realism in that it does not stand alone but is part of a whole world 
that is documented in loving detail, both in other photographs and the 
accompanying text. It satisfies Frye’s notion of low mimetic realism in 
its emphasis on the world of masculine labor. It is “critical realism” in 
Lukács’s sense in that it is the sort of image that would only occur to an 
outsider to the world Sekula is documenting. It is safe to say that no sailor 
aboard a container vessel would be likely to regard this as a picture worth 
taking. It would be “overlooked” and invisible, not only to the outside 
17. Realism in Our Time (New York: Harper and Row, 1964).
18. Anatomy of Criticism (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1957).
19. Fish Story, Exhibition Rotterdam (1995), Witte de With Center for Contempo-
rary Art (Düsseldorf: Richter, 1995).

R E A L I S M  A N D  T H E  D I G I T A L  I M A G E  :  6 3
world, but to insiders as well. But in addition to all of this, it is an extraordi-
narily beautiful and haunting image, one that I have never forgotten since 
the first time I picked up Fish Story. Why? First, it satisfies many of the 
aesthetic criteria of abstract formalism, with its simple, bold, geometric 
composition and its defiance of perspectival depth in favor of a flatness to 
the picture plane that would please a Clement Greenberg. This flatness is 
coupled with a high- resolution and high- color saturation, attention to the 
materiality of rusting metal, and the sheer beauty of those materials when 
they are isolated as a graphic specimen in a high- gloss representation (if 
photography has an automatism, it is as much a tendency to aestheticize 
and beautify as to adhere to a referent).20 And finally, what is the “referent” 
of this photograph? Is it the wrench? Or the ghostly trace of its displace-
ment that appears just to the right of it? Whatever else this picture refers 
to, it clearly refers to the very issue we have been pondering, namely, the 
adherence of an image to its referent. The ghostly trace of the displaced 
wrench is a kind natural contact print traced in the medium of rusting 
metal, very like those solar prints I used to make of leaves on paper in sci-
ence class in elementary school. One would like to know whether the artist 
displaced the wrench himself or simply found it this way. Neither answer 
would lower my high estimation of the picture, though my assumption 
has been that Sekula would, as a matter of a certain realist principle, prob-
ably not have moved the wrench.21 Either way, the photograph satisfies 
another condition of modernist aesthetics, and that is the revelation of 
self- consciousness and self- reference in the work of art. It would make 
little difference to this meaning of the image if it turned out that it was 
made with a digital camera or were projected as a digital slide.
And then, finally, there is scientific realism, which carefully defines 
its notion of truth, correspondence, adequation, and information, and 
which (given its quantitative basis) is deeply in love with the precision 
of digital imaging. Scientific realism, however, is generally at odds with 
commonsense realism, which tends to content itself with the realm of an-
alog information, with dense, qualitative impressions filled with random, 
20. This is one of the central claims of Susan Sontag’s classic book, On Photog-
raphy (1972).
21. During the discussion at the University of Leuven conference in September 
2005 on “Critical Realism” and the photography of Allan Sekula, it became clear 
that he had in fact moved the wrench, not to mention bringing in artificial light 
to enhance the photograph’s color saturation.

6 4  :  C H A P T E R  5
unsystematized detail.22 Scientific realism, in fact, usually begins by taking 
issue with common sense, and showing us something that we couldn’t see 
with the naked eye. That is why, obviously, photography (both chemical 
and digital) plays both sides of the fence with regard to the debate between 
science and common sense, verifiable truths, testable hypotheses, and the 
idealizations of desire. And that is why I come to rest, finally, with phil-
osophical realism (as distinct from nominalism), the view that abstract, 
ideational entities are “real entities” in the real world— more real, in fact, 
than our confused repertoire of sense impressions and opinions. Truth, 
Justice, Being, and “the Real” itself (along with geometric concepts, such 
as the circle, the square, and the triangle) are, for the philosophical realist, 
the foundations of the real world. But the realism that would get at them is 
not uniquely tethered to any particular medium or its putative “ontology.” 
They are themselves the foundations of ontology, and the media— verbal 
or visual, material or immaterial— are simply poor instruments for rep-
resenting them. That is why realism is a project for photography, and for 
images more generally, not something that belongs to them by nature.
22. This is the form of literary realism that Roland Barthes termed “the reality 
effect.” See The Rustle of Language, trans. Richard Howard (Oxford: Blackwell, 
1986), 141– 48.

6: MIGRATING IMAGES
Totemism, Fetishism, Idolatry
The migration of images is not just a metaphor but also what I call a 
metapicture. That is, it provides a picture of the way images move, circu-
late, thrive, appear, and disappear. It is a figure that we should examine 
carefully and, if not flog the metaphor to death, at least make it cry out 
and explain itself.
What would it mean to talk about images as migrants, as immigrants, 
as emigrants, or as travelers who arrive and depart, who circulate, pass 
through, and thus appear and disappear?1 Or (from their own point of 
view) who endure the passages and vicissitudes of displacement, con-
stantly seeing the world as a place of estrangement and dislocation? Im-
ages regarded as having a native, original, or aboriginal location, or as be-
ing foreign and exotic, coming from elsewhere and arriving either bidden 
or unbidden. Images as the welcomed Gastarbeiter on the one hand, or 
the illegal alien, the unwanted immigrant, on the other. If images are like 
migrants, do we ask them as they fill out their entry card to check off a box 
that tells us where they come from and how to classify them? Is the meta-
data that accompanies the digital image like an identity card, specifying 
time, place, and location of “birth,” production, or first appearance in the 
world? Could this sort of data be amplified to include the group (genre, 
referential content) they belong to, the family they come from, their proper 
or tribal names? Are there racial categories of images, that is, Arab images, 
African images, Indian and Aboriginal images, white and black images?
It is important at the outset that we differentiate quite firmly between 
the neutral notion of images in circulation, moving freely, circulating ba-
sically without consequences, and the concept of migrating images, which 
suggests something much more fraught with contradiction, difficulty, fric-
tion, and opposition. The great ethnomusicologist Ry Cooder makes this 
distinction clear in his rendering of “Migration Blues,” a ballad that was 
written during the Dust Bowl in the 1930s:
1. See Hito Steyerl, “In Defense of the Poor Image,” e- flux 10 (November 2009) 
(http://www.e- flux.com/journal/in- defense- of- the- poor- image/).

6 6  :  C H A P T E R  6
How can you keep on movin’
unless you migrate too
They tell you to keep on movin’
but migrate you must not do
the only reason for movin’ and the reason why I roam
is to move to a new location and find myself a home.
“Migration Blues” is sung by a migrant who has been told (as they rou-
tinely were) to “keep on movin’”: don’t stop; don’t rest here; you don’t 
belong here. The inevitable, logical question then arises: how can you keep 
on movin’ unless you migrate too?
To what extent, then, are images like migrants: homeless, stateless, dis-
placed persons, exiles, or hopeful aspirants to “a new location” where they 
might find a home? We live in a world in which a growing population is 
sans papiers, without passports, without states, dislocated. Are images like 
that? Ackbar Abbas has noted how contemporary cinematic images exhibit 
6.1 Harry Bliss, “Well, actually, they are written in stone” (1999). Moses gives the 
Ten Commandments to the Israelites. New Yorker Collection/The Cartoon Bank. 
© Condé Nast.

M I G R A T I N G  I M A G E S  :  6 7
not just the effects of hybridity or merging, an easy, frictionless picture of 
image circulation, but also traces of dislocation— of their origin, of hope 
for a new destination or home, of the contradiction between those places.2
Two contradictory metapictures of images emerge, then, when we con-
sider them as moving, circulating, or migrating entities. The first is of free, 
unimpeded circulation, a picture that seems especially compelling in the 
age of virtual and digitized images, moving from one side of the globe 
to the other in the nearly instantaneous temporality of cyberspace. The 
other is of images always necessarily arriving and appearing somewhere, 
in some support or material apparatus— a computer screen, a printout, 
an embodied memory. The distinction between images and pictures (see 
chapter 2, “Four Fundamental Concepts of Image Science”) is grounded 
in the difference between a disembodied, phantasmatic idea of images 
as immaterial apparitions, and the inevitable arrival and appearance of 
an image in a concrete, physical picture, no matter how fleeting. Pictures 
are the homes where images take up residence, the bodies in which their 
spirits are incarnated. This is why the language of metempsychosis, of the 
“transmigration of souls,” is so easily adaptable to iconology and art his-
tory, where motifs and icons travel across the boundaries between epochs 
and media. Perhaps this is why museums sometimes seem like displaced- 
persons camps for images that came from somewhere else, refugees from 
religion and ritual, castaways from politics and performance. The salon 
des refuses in nineteenth- century Paris became the asylum for art works 
that could find no home in the Academy, and in the process created a 
new home for the avant- garde, migrating into new, previously uncharted 
territories.
All images, then, whether still or moving, are in motion. The only ques-
tions are, How fast? How far? From where to where? Still images are best 
seen as examples of extreme slow motion, so slow in fact that their move-
ments cannot be seen directly but must be inferred from an art histor-
ical or iconological reconstruction of their temporal dimensions, or (in 
certain contemporary art works) prolonged, patient acts of attention. One 
thinks here of Bill Viola’s extreme slow- motion video portraits that seem 
at a glance to be seventeenth- century oil paintings, or Douglas Gordon’s 24 
Hour Psycho (1993), which stretches out the Hitchcock thriller into languor-
ous images in which nothing seems to be happening, or eighteenth- century 
2. Abbas, “Building on Disappearance: Hong Kong Architecture and the City,” 
Public Culture 6 (1994): 441– 59, at 453.

6 8  :  C H A P T E R  6
history paintings in which the “pregnant moment” has been displayed to 
arrest the beholder in front of a passing, ephemeral scene of decision.
Underlying this metapicture of images as migrants is, of course, a more 
general picture that I tried to capture in my book What Do Pictures Want? 
and that is the notion of images as living organisms driven by desire, ap-
petite, need, demand, and lack. This is a metapicture that goes beyond the 
personifying metaphor of the image as person to the image as organism. 
When we talk of migratory entities, the concept is clearly not restricted to 
human beings but includes animals, plants, and even microorganisms, 
such as bacteria and viruses. Nothing is more routine than the notion of 
quarantining life- forms as well as persons, and it is an annual ritual of the 
World Health Organization to announce the arrival of unwanted immi-
grants (Ebola from Africa, SARS and influenza from Asia, etc.).
How seriously are we to take the notion that images are like persons 
or that they are more generally like living things, organisms that move, 
circulate, proliferate, reproduce, settle, then move on? What are the limits 
of the metaphor of a “life of images” and how does it bear on the other 
crucial question of the “knowledge of images”? It is important, I think, to 
say two things about the notion of a life of images, the idea that images 
are something like life- forms. The first is just a matter of my own personal 
testimony, which is that I don’t believe images are alive. As a devout secular 
materialist, I understand that images are inanimate objects. I’m not an an-
imist, and I do not believe in idols and fetishes— at least I am not aware of 
harboring such beliefs. The second is that I think it is impossible for us to 
talk about images for very long without falling into a vitalist metapicture, 
which involves attributing life to them in notions of autonomy, and in im-
ages of migration, circulation, and reproduction. The life of images seems 
to be an incorrigible metaphor, a metaphor that we can’t avoid, no matter 
how firmly we disavow any literal application of it.
This leads me, then, to ask what sort of knowledge we can have about 
an entity about which we have these contradictory impulses. When our 
tendency to fall into the figure of the living image intersects with the epis-
temological issue, the question of “the knowledge of images,” a curious 
ambiguity arises. We find ourselves not simply asking the question “what 
do we know of images?” but also “what do images know?” Are images not 
just objects of our knowledge, but also repositories of their own?3 Is this 
3. Jacques Rancière’s notion of the “pensive image” would be relevant for con-
sideration here. See his chapter by this title in The Emancipated Spectator (New 
York: Verso, 2014).

M I G R A T I N G  I M A G E S  :  6 9
what we are looking for when we are interrogating a photograph or a work 
of art, hoping that it will teach us something, reveal or betray something? 
Is it what we feel when an image seems to demand something from us, to 
challenge us with something that exceeds its nameable content? Could it 
be that we are condemned to a “partial knowledge” of images, in the sense 
both of what we can know and of what knowledge they carry?
There is no way of knowing at the outset what the limits of this met-
aphor are, what its “proper” meaning is, what belongs to it as its home 
territory. In this respect, the metapicture of the living image is itself the 
quintessential migratory creature in its refusal of borders. We might like 
to keep it in its proper location— in the realm of primitive superstition, 
childhood, paranoid delusion— but it is not so easily contained. So we 
have no choice but to face the question head- on, without prejudging its 
limits, and to see where it takes us. We need to trace its movements, most 
especially where those movements are obstructed, and consider the notion 
of the image as something whose circulation is blocked, that must be kept 
out, that involves border guards that regulate the circulation of the dan-
gerous or alien image. And perhaps even more fundamental than the idea 
that images are “out there” trying to gain illegal entry is the notion of the 
expulsion or destruction of images on their home grounds, the prevention 
of images from having a chance to migrate at all, the purification of images 
as “indigenous aliens.” This is the most radical form of the destruction of 
images, the most thorough iconoclasm, and it comes up in biblical texts 
repeatedly when a kind of ethnic cleansing of images is performed.
A famous passage in the book of Numbers expresses this doctrine most 
explicitly: “When you cross the Jordan into Canaan, drive out all the inhabi-
tants of the land before you. Destroy all their carved images and their cast 
idols, and demolish all their high places. Take possession of the land and 
settle in it, for I have given you the land to possess” (33:52– 53). Here the de-
struction of images is directly linked to the production of immigrants some-
where else, to forced emigration, or what we now call “ethnic cleansing.” 
The removal of images, sacred sites, and persons is all one process. This 
is a militantly proactive interpretation of the second commandment, as if 
the commandment were not simply a prohibition on the making of graven 
images but also a positive mandate to destroy images wherever they may 
be found— to cleanse the world of these images and of the “inhabitants” 
for whom they are important signs of identity and belonging to a place.
In their book Idolatry, Avishai Margalit and Moshe Halbertal describe 
the second commandment as a kind of territorial legislation: the mandate 
against making images and the command to destroy graven images is, they 

7 0  :  C H A P T E R  6
write, actually an effort to dictate exclusive control of a territory.4 The de-
struction of the Baalim, of gods of the place, local deities, the genius loci, as 
the Romans called them, the destruction of the local gods and the objects 
and images in which they appear— this is not merely a religious mandate; 
it is also a territorial mandate involving conquest of land and iconoclasm 
as an instrument of racial purification.5 Iconoclasm, the prohibition and 
destruction of idols, is thus the “degree zero” of the migration of images. 
That is, it figures iconoclasm as extermination or annihilation, as a form 
of ethnic cleansing, and the destruction of images as a way of controlling 
a place and conquering a territory.
The conjunction of images and migration, then, inevitably brings up 
the question of imperialism, and specifically of empires of conquest and 
territorial expansion. But certain images (idols, most notably) clearly play 
a very special role in the ideology of settler colonization and native ex-
pulsion. I want to place them within a framework that we might call “im-
perial objectivity,” a framework that singles out certain “special” things 
as “bad objects,” or “objects of the other.” I’m loosely adapting Melanie 
Klein’s notion of the split “part- object,” more precisely “imagos, which are 
a phantastically distorted picture of the real objects upon which they are 
based.”6 “Bad objects,” then, are not simply bad in some straightforward 
moral sense. They are objects of ambivalence and anxiety that can as easily 
be associated with fascination as with aversion.
Bad objects are not, at least to start with, the commodities (e.g., spices, 
gold, sugar, tobacco) that lure colonial expeditions, nor the symbolic gifts 
that are exchanged between emperors. (See Tony Cutler on the “empire of 
things” that passed between the Byzantine and Islamic emperors to im-
press the recipient with the donor’s wealth and refinement.7) Bad objects 
4. Halbertal and Margalit, Idolatry (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1998). See also my essay “Idolatry: Nietzsche, Blake, Poussin,” in Idol Anxiety, 
ed. Joshua Ellenbogen and Aaron Tugendhaft (Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press, 2011), 56– 73.
5. Ibid., 5. See also my article “Holy Landscape: Israel, Palestine, and the American 
Wilderness,” in Landscape and Power, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2002), 261– 90.
6. J. La Planche and J. B. Pontalis, The Language of Psychoanalysis (London: Ho-
garth Press, 1973), 188.
7. “The Empire of Things” is an unpublished book manuscript, but some of the 
essential points are made in Cutler’s article “Gifts and Gift Exchange as Aspects 
of the Byzantine, Arab, and Related Economies,” Dumbarton Oaks Papers 55 (2001), 
247– 78.

M I G R A T I N G  I M A G E S  :  7 1
are, by contrast, objects generally seen as worthless or disgusting from the 
imperial perspective, but which are understood to be of great and no doubt 
excessive value to the “native inhabitants,” to the aborigines, or to the co-
lonial other.8 These objects usually have some kind of religious or magical 
aura and a living, animated character, which is seen from the objective 
imperial perspective as the product of “merely subjective” and supersti-
tious beliefs. Although these objects are given many different names in 
the languages of colonized peoples, I want to focus on three categories of 
objects that have had a remarkably durable life in the history of European 
imperialism, and that have a further life in imperialism’s picture of its own 
“proper” objects, especially its works of art. I will not have space in this 
chapter to deal with this thoroughly, but of course the “coming home” of 
all these objects, especially fetishism— most notably in the Marxist theory 
of the commodity, the Freudian symptom, and, of course, the modernist 
work of art— is a big part of the story.
The names of these image- objects, the classes of migratory images, are 
fetishes, idols, and totems, terms that are often confused with one another 
or given special meanings in technical discussions— in theology, anthro-
pology, economic theory, psychoanalysis— thing- concepts that are located 
in terms of disciplinary territories. But to my knowledge, they have never 
been put together or triangulated as a set of objects and images that reso-
nate with one another or that derive their logic from one another and from 
their historical position within discourses of imperialism.
These three objects are exactly the sort of things that tend to throw the 
distinction between “objectivity” and “objectivism” into crisis. By objec-
tivity, I mean a kind of critical, neutral, dispassionate, rational attitude. 
Objectivism, by contrast, is the ideological parody of objectivity, when a 
certainty about your position has been established and cannot be ques-
tioned; this is an attitude that is quite alien to the spirit of objectivity, at 
least in its scientific sense. These objects— fetishes, idols, and totems— 
are uncanny things that we should be able to dismiss as naïve, supersti-
tious objects of primitive mentalities, but which at the same time awaken 
a certain suspicion or doubt about the reliability of our own categories. 
We— and I think I’m speaking here as a white man— know that the voodoo 
doll impaled with pins cannot really hurt us; its power is totally psycho-
logical and depends upon the gullibility of a believer, not on any forces in 
8. See my essay “The Surplus Value of Images,” Mosaic 35, no. 3 (September 2002), 
for more on the over- and underestimation of the image of the other.

7 2  :  C H A P T E R  6
the real, objective world. And yet we hesitate to dismiss it outright.9 The 
statue of Virgin Mary does not really weep, but the staunchest unbeliever 
will hesitate to desecrate her image. The child’s doll cannot really feel pain, 
but the wise parent will refrain from abusing or destroying this object out 
of respect for the child’s feelings, knowing also that the child herself will 
very rapidly tear the magical object to pieces. These benign constructions 
of the bad object, then, correspond to what D. W. Winnicott called the 
“transitional objects” of childhood, in the sense of objects of imaginative 
play that help to unfold cognitive and moral sentiments.10
Both the history and logic of empire can be, in a sense, “told” by the 
triad of the idol, fetish, and totem. Idols correspond to the old territorial 
form of imperialism that moves by conquest and colonization, physically 
occupying someone else’s lands and either enslaving or displacing the in-
habitants. The idol has two quite contradictory functions in this process, 
depending on whether it is the ideal of the inhabitants or the image of the 
conquest. On the one hand, it is a territorial marker that is to be erected 
or eradicated, as with the Baalim of nomadic tribes, a god of the place.11 
On the other hand, it is the figurehead or image that “goes before” the 
conquering colonizers, the function of images invoked by the Israelites 
when they urge Aaron to “make us a God to go before us,” the image of the 
Golden Calf that will (it is hoped) take the place of the lost leader, Moses. 
When the emperor himself plays the role of a god, and his image is cir-
culated in statues and coins (or on television wearing a flight jacket?), he 
becomes the center of a military cult, and imperial idolatry in its classic, 
Roman form is achieved.12
As symbols or actual incarnations of a god, idols are the most power-
ful of imperial images, presenting the greatest dangers and making the 
greatest demands. Idols characteristically want a human sacrifice, and 
the punishment for idolatry in the Judeo- Christian tradition is death. Not 
every idolatrous people is, of course, imperialist. In principle, a tiny tribal 
unit could worship idols, and a family could have its household gods. The 
consolidation of idolatry into an imperial imaginary comes, I suspect, with 
9. See Bruno Latour, “Notes toward an Anthropology of the Iconoclastic Gesture,” 
in Science in Context 10 (1997): 63– 83, for an excellent account of iconoclastic hes-
itation in the face of the sacred object.
10. Winnicott, Playing and Reality (London: Routledge, 1971).
11. See my discussion of the Baalim as gods of the place or genius loci, in “Holy 
Landscape,” in Landscape and Power, 2nd ed., 277.
12. I’m grateful to my colleague Richard Neer for his help with the question of the 
cult of the Roman emperor.

M I G R A T I N G  I M A G E S  :  7 3
the rise of monotheism, coupled with sufficient technical resources to 
give it military force. Either the empire is ruled by a god, a living idol, or, 
conversely, the empire sets its face against idolatry in all its local forms 
and makes iconoclasm a central feature of colonial conquest.
Ironically enough, this phase of imperialism corresponds to what the 
economist Joseph Schumpeter called “an objectless disposition on the 
part of a state to unlimited forcible expansion.” A warrior culture, plus 
an infinitely voracious, jealous, and bloodthirsty deity who will tolerate 
“no other gods before him” and demands destruction of all idols, is the 
formula for empire without limits, empire for the hell of it, a variation 
that Schumpeter traces from the Assyrians and Egyptians right down to 
Louis XIV.13
Fetishism, as William Pietz has shown, is a much later development, 
emerging in early modern Europe as a buzzword among the mercantile, 
seafaring empires, Holland, Portugal, Genoa, and the seventeenth- century 
phase of the British empire. The word fetish comes from the Portuguese 
and means simply a “made thing” (compare “facture”).14 The typical Eu-
ropean attitude toward fetishes is a complex mixture of aversion and fasci-
nation. Sometimes they were regarded as native deities, and equated with 
idols, but more often they were regarded as less important and power ful 
than idols, and were seen as connected to the private interests of individ-
uals. Fetishes were almost invariably regarded with contempt as crude, 
inert, smelly, obscene, and basely material objects that could only acquire 
magical power in an incredibly backward, primitive, and savage mind. A 
contrast is sometimes drawn between the idol— a relatively refined iconic 
or imagistic symbol of a deity who lives elsewhere— and the fetish, re-
13. See Schumpeter, Imperialism and Social Classes (New York: A. M. Kelley, 1951), 7.
14. Pietz, “The Problem of the Fetish,” pts. 1– 3, Res, no. 9 (Spring 1985), 5– 17; no. 
13 (Spring 1987), 23– 45; and no. 16 (Autumn 1988), 105– 23. In contrast to the all- 
powerful image of the idol, fetishism (or “making fetish”) treats the object as a 
prop in a ritual performance rather than as a freestanding, self- authorizing thing. 
Compare David Simpson’s Fetishism and Imagination (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1982) on Herman Melville’s descriptions of the fragility and 
ephemerality of sacred objects in Polynesia, holy one minute, on the trash heap 
the next. Fetishism, Pietz argues, refers originally to the sacred objects and rituals 
of West Africa encountered by Portuguese sailors, and fetish objects were used by 
Africans in a variety of ways: as power objects, talismans, medicinal charms, and 
commemoration devices to record important events, such as marriages, deaths, 
and contractual agreements. Fetishism rapidly became a term of art in the African 
trade, and the trinkets and gadgets that the Europeans brought to Africa also took 
on the name of fetishes.

7 4  :  C H A P T E R  6
garded not as symbolic but as the place of the real presence of the ani-
mating spirit; hence fetishism is often equated with crude materialism 
in contrast to the relative refinement and sophistication of idolatry.15 
Seventeenth- century empires made a distinction between idolatry and 
 fetishism, locating fetishism in Africa and idolatry in Rome and Greece. 
For the Protestant empires of northern Europe, the idolatry of the savages 
was readily associated with the Roman Catholic empires, so fetishism im-
mediately became associated with idolatry and the holy crusade against 
popery, right alongside the missionary effort to stamp out heathen idol-
atry all over the world. Nevertheless, European traders to Africa found 
it necessary to tolerate the fetishes, and even to accept their social and 
cultural currency among the tribes they encountered. Swearing an oath 
on a fetish object, or driving a nail into a power figure in order to com-
memorate an agreement, was often the only way to secure a bargain. Given 
this background in commerce, it seems only appropriate that when Marx 
looks about for a figure to define the magical character of Western modern 
capitalist commodities, he adopts the fetish- character as the appropriate 
figure for our rationalized and objective measures of exchange value.
Totems, finally, are the latest in the sequence of objects of the other, 
emerging in the nineteenth century mainly in the writings of anthropolo-
gists in North America and the South Pacific. Less threatening than idols, 
less offensive than fetishes, totems are generally natural objects or their 
representations, and they are rarely seen as having godlike powers. They 
are, rather, “identity” objects associated with tribes or clans, and some-
times with their individual members as tutelary or guardian spirits. The 
word totem comes, as Claude Lévi- Strauss noted, “from the Ojibwa, an 
Algonquin language of the region to the north of the Great Lakes of North 
America,”16 and it is usually translated as equivalent to the expression 
“he is a relative of mine.” Of all the imperial objects, totems are the most 
benign. While idolatry and fetishism were generally condemned as ob-
scene, demonic belief systems to be stamped out, totemism is usually 
characterized as a kind of childish naïveté, based in an innocent oneness 
with nature. Hegel’s discussion of the “flower” and “animal” religions in 
Phenomenology of Spirit stresses the harmless character of these early intu-
15. See my essay “The Rhetoric of Iconoclasm,” in Iconology: Image, Text, Ideology 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987), for more on this distinction.
16. Lévi- Strauss, Totemism, trans. Rodney Needham (Boston: Beacon Press, 
1963), 18.

M I G R A T I N G  I M A G E S  :  7 5
itions of spirit in nature. Totem objects, therefore, are rarely the target of 
iconoclastic fervor. On the contrary, the characteristic imperial attitude to 
totems is one of curiosity and curatorial solicitude. Totemism represents 
what Sir James Frazer and others regarded as “the childhood of the human 
species,” and thus it is treated with tolerance and condescension. Frazer, 
in fact, sent out questionnaires to missionaries, doctors, and government 
administrators throughout the British empire in order to gather the infor-
mation for his first book, Totemism (1887).17
It is crucial to remind ourselves at this point of what is probably obvi-
ous: these objects— totems, fetishes, and idols— are anything but objec-
tive. They are really objectivist projections of a kind of collective imperial 
subject, fantasies about other people, specifically, other people’s beliefs 
about certain kinds of objects. Totemism, fetishism, and idolatry are thus 
“secondary beliefs,”18 beliefs about the beliefs of other people, inseparable 
from (in fact, constitutive of) systems of racial or collective prejudice. They 
involve quite general notions about the operations of a “savage” or “prim-
itive” mentality: that the natives are invariably gullible and superstitious; 
that they live in a world of fear and ignorance where these objects compen-
sate for their weakness; and that they lack the ability to make distinctions 
between animate and inanimate objects— that is, between the living image 
and whatever is considered to be the dead sign or the dead letter. They 
are, moreover, firmly held, collective, and official imperial belief systems, 
axioms within scientific discourses of ethnography and comparative reli-
gion, not just private opinions. Beliefs about idolaters— for instance, that 
they believe the idol hears their prayers and that it will intercede on their 
behalf and be pleased with their sacrifices— are articles of faith for the 
iconoclast, held so firmly that they justify the extermination of idolaters 
as subhuman creatures.
What then, do these premodern migrations of images have to do with 
our present situation? We have seen in our time two very striking phe-
nomena in global political economy and culture: the first, described in 
many ways by postcolonial theory but also more recently by Michael Hardt 
and Antonio Negri’s book Empire, is the passing of something called im-
17. Sir James Frazer, Totemism (Edinburgh: A. & C. Black, 1887); see The Golden 
Bough: A New Abridgement from the Second and Third Editions, ed. Robert Fraser 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1994), esp. xlvii, “A Chronology of Sir James 
George Frazer,” for an account of Frazer’s methods.
18. See the discussion of secondary beliefs in “The Surplus Value of Images,” What 
Do Pictures Want?, chapter 4.

7 6  :  C H A P T E R  6
perialism and its replacement by something called the postcolonial con-
dition and the rise of what Hardt and Negri call empire and others call 
globalization. This process, by whatever name, is undeniably a dominant 
narrative that we tell ourselves about the present. Whether it is true or 
not is debatable.
The other phenomenon is the migration of images, the global circula-
tion of images in media and the dematerializing of the image, accompa-
nied by its dialectical contrary, the rise of a new materialism, the obsession 
with thingness, materiality, and objecthood.
This leads me to what I think of as the essential contradiction of my 
topic here. On the one hand, we have a world in which we observe every-
where around us the mobility, free migration, and unlimited circulation 
of images, as if they could pass through walls and leap great distances, 
instantaneously from one side of the planet to the other. Although they 
may bear traces of dislocation, they nevertheless circulate with incredible 
rapidity as if we lived in one world, Marshall McLuhan’s “global village.” 
On the other hand, there is the stubborn immobility and recalcitrance of 
bodies and material things; there is the fact that material commodities 
still move around the world in container vessels in much the same way 
they did in 1900.19 While images and information move incredibly rapidly, 
we haven’t passed beyond the age of the steamship in the sense of the 
speed of movement of material commodities.
We glimpse this paradox in the universal cinematic myth of our time, 
The Matrix (1999), which shows us a world characterized, at the level of 
the image, by total mobility, and yet, at the level of the body, by complete 
immobility— with no one moving anything but their thumbs and fingers, 
the “digital” world in its physical and literal sense. What does it mean 
that we live in this world of radical contradiction between the mobility 
of images and the immobility of things and bodies? Of course, people at 
academic conferences move around the world, they “circulate,” along with 
their ideas; they are a part of a global elite of intellectuals, but we mustn’t 
think that that is somehow the typical state of bodies on this planet.
Does this mean that the old categories of imperialism— the idolatry to 
be eradicated, the fetishism to be negotiated, the totemism to be curated— 
are no longer relevant? Are all images now merely totemic, that is, passing 
or transitional sites of communal identification? Or have images become 
19. See Allan Sekula’s Fish Stories for a discussion of the unchanging rate of move-
ment of the shipping trade in the last century.

M I G R A T I N G  I M A G E S  :  7 7
more powerful than ever, and is the deepest meaning of the second com-
mandment only now coming to pass in films like Clone Wars (the latest 
episode of Star Wars), where the circulation of images and of actual bodies 
is identified with the armies of the new empire and the new emperors that 
rule the world?

7.1 Anonymous, Lascaux Caves, Perigord, Dordogne, France. Photograph: Art 
Resource, New York.

7: THE FUTURE OF THE IMAGE
Rancière’s Road Not Taken
The following was originally written for a dialogue with Jacques Rancière 
at Columbia University in the spring of 2008.1 I am embarrassed to admit 
that it is only in the last four years, driven largely by my students, that I 
really became aware of Rancière’s late work. I of course knew about his 
early writings on philosophy and politics, and was dimly conscious of his 
participation in the events of May 1968 in Paris, and particularly of his 
break with Louis Althusser over the question of Communist Party control 
over the workers and students in that momentous period. But Rancière’s 
more recent turn to questions of image theory and aesthetics had eluded 
me. Like Gottfried Boehm’s pathbreaking work in image theory, Rancière’s 
inquiries into the question of the image, its relation to language, and the 
implications for aesthetics and politics had been conducted as a kind of 
distant thunder over the horizon of disciplinary and language barriers.
So it was immediately striking to me how many points of commonality 
there are in our approaches to these questions. We share a belief in the 
deep imbrication of words and images, and a conviction that their relation-
ship is one of dialectical interchange rather than a strict separation into 
binary oppositions. This has led us both to investigate relations between 
literature and the visual arts, and the mixtures of elements that make 
up forms of media. We came independently to focus on what Rancière 
calls “the distribution of the sensible” and what I (following Marshall 
 McLuhan) describe as the “ratio of senses and signs” in media. From the 
earliest moments of my aesthetic research, I had been convinced by Wil-
liam Blake’s claim that the function of art is to “cleanse the doors of per-
ception” and to overturn the hierarchies of sensibility, as well as of wealth 
and power, that separate people into classes. Imagine my excitement when 
I encountered a philosopher who had adapted the classical economic and 
political questions of human inequality and found a way to translate them 
into the unequal distribution of things like the ability or the right to see 
1. I am grateful to Akeel Bilgrami, the director of the Columbia University Hu-
manities Institute, for organizing this event.

8 0  :  C H A P T E R  7
and hear, to be seen and to speak, to have time and space for thought and 
movement. My own efforts to unpack the relations of the eye and the ear, 
vision and voice in the aesthetic and political writings of Edmund Burke, 
or the territories of literary time and graphic- sculptural space in G. E. Less-
ing’s Laocoön, seemed to encounter in Rancière’s work the adventure of a 
kindred spirit.2 And of course, we are also destined to discover differences 
of emphasis, method, and sensibility. The following pages are an attempt 
to register both the commonalities and the differences.
Our assigned topic at the Columbia colloquium was “the future of the 
image,” and our basic task was to unfold our respective positions on this 
question while stressing the common concerns that bring us together and 
offering some comments on the differences between our methods and 
objects of study. I want to begin, then, with a few basic reflections on this 
question, before turning to an inventory of the topics and questions that 
resonate for me in Rancière’s work, especially his recent book, which pro-
vided the title for the colloquium, The Future of the Image (2007).
This title, as I’m sure Rancière would agree, is not an especially felic-
itous translation of his French text, which might be more literally trans-
lated as “the destiny of the image.” As if conscious of this mistranslation, 
Rancière opens his book by declining to provide a panoramic survey or 
“odyssey,” “taking us from the Aurorean glory of Lascaux’s paintings to the 
contemporary twilight of a reality devoured by media images and an art 
doomed to monitors and synthetic images.” Instead, he offers reflections 
on “the labour of art” on the images that provide its raw materials. The 
nonartistic image is, for Rancière, a simple copy— “what will suffice as a 
substitute” for whatever it represents.3
I want to follow the path that Rancière declines to take, and trace the 
odyssey from the cavernous gloom of Lascaux to the contemporary twi-
light of synthetic images. And for the sake of consistency in subject matter, 
I want to follow this as an animal trail that begins with the familiar bison 
and horses of Lascaux (figure 7.1) and ends with a futuristic image of a 
futuristic animal, a digital dinosaur from the film Jurassic Park (figure 3.1). 
You might ask why the long journey of the image from the deep, primeval 
2. See the chapters on Burke and Lessing in my Iconology: Image, Text, Ideology 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987).
3. Rancière, The Future of the Image, trans. Gregory Elliot (New York: Verso, 2009), 
1. As will become evident in what follows, Rancière’s notion of the image as a 
sufficient substitute is one place where we part company. In my view, the image 
is never sufficient as a substitute, but always slightly “off”— displaying either a 
deficiency or a surplus, too little or too much.

T H E  F U T U R E  O F  T H E  I M A G E  :  8 1
past to the contemporary moment of virtual, imaginary futures should be 
exemplified, not by the “image of man,” the human fabricator and implied 
beholder of these images, but by images of animals. What is it about an-
imal images that provides a clue to the entire odyssey of the image and 
allows us to glimpse the future of the image?
Before I address this question, I want to consider the situations of the 
images themselves. Among the many speculations about the function 
of the Lascaux cave paintings is the notion that they were a ritualistic 
“teaching machine” in which a quasi- Platonic cinema was staged prior to 
the hunt, in order to familiarize the hunters with their prey, producing a 
virtual rehearsal that would, by means of an iconic, homeopathic magic, 
ensure the success of the hunt.4 No doubt the smoky atmosphere and the 
ingestion of appropriate stimulants would help to heighten the hallucino-
genic, dreamlike atmosphere of the cave, which became a place for using 
images to project and control an immediate and possible future. Similarly, 
the scene in Jurassic Park is in the control room of the park, which has just 
been invaded by a real, not imaginary, velociraptor, which has accidentally 
turned on the film projector showing the park’s orientation film. The rap-
tor is caught in the projector beam at the moment when the film is show-
ing the DNA sequence that made it possible to clone a real live dinosaur 
from its fossilized remains. If we imagine a real bison galloping into the 
caves of Lascaux and threatening to trample the stoned- out hunters, we 
would have a Paleolithic version of the effect produced in the projection 
room of Jurassic Park.
Consider these two images, then, as an allegory of the beginning and 
end of the odyssey of the image. They exemplify many of our common 
assumptions about the past and future of this narrative, moving from 
hand- painted, primitive likenesses that still “suffice to stand in” for the ob-
jects they represent, to a highly technical object, a product of high- speed 
computing and genetic engineering that is then represented filmically by 
the latest development in the cinematic image, namely, digital animation. 
Many more contrasts could be elaborated: the image of primitive magic 
with the technoscientific artifact; the mythic ritual of the deep past and 
the science fiction narrative of a possible future; and the beast to be pur-
sued in the wild, with the cloned organism to be produced as a theme 
park attraction.
And yet, the longer we contemplate these two images, the more evident 
4. Bertram Lewin, The Image and the Past (New York: International Universities 
Press, 1968).

8 2  :  C H A P T E R  7
it becomes that the binary oppositions between past and future, nature 
and technology, wild and domesticated, and hunting and zookeeping will 
not stand up to scrutiny. Both images are technical productions, located 
in quasi- cinematic “control rooms”; both are present objects of visual 
consumption to be “captured” by their images. Most interesting is the 
temporal inversion that the two images demand: the image that stands 
for the past in this pairing turns out to be much younger than the image 
that represents the future. The digital dinosaur is not, like the Paleolithic 
bison, an actual existing animal in the present; it is a hybrid scientific- 
fictional creature, a living, fleshly reanimation of an animal that existed on 
this planet long before the bison or the primitive artists who painted their 
images. In this sense, our futuristic animal, if not its image, is much more 
ancient than the animals depicted in Lascaux. Perhaps the only contrast, 
then, that really stands up to deconstruction is the most literal natural 
fact about the objects represented by these images: Lascaux is about herbi-
vores, and Jurassic Park features its carnivores as the main attraction. The 
positions of predator and prey have been reversed. In the primitive image, 
it is we who hope to kill the wild object represented; in the contemporary, 
futuristic image, the artificial object we have created has gone wild and 
threatens to kill us.
I want to return now to the question with which I began. Why should 
the odyssey of the image be adumbrated by the animal, and why does the 
animal image provide such a crucial clue to the future, if not the destiny, 
of the image? Why, moreover, does the animal image appear at both the 
beginning and the end, and in the past and the future, of this narrative?
Let us just briefly recall some of the leading arguments about the tem-
poral status of images and imagination, and its intimate association with 
the animal as a figure of futurity. Animals have, of course, been associated 
since time immemorial with divination, augury, and prophecy. If there 
is a future to be predicted, about images or about anything else, it is ad-
umbrated by the image or the reality of the animal. Whatever is done to 
animals will, as John Berger noted, predictably be done to human beings 
in the future: domestication, enslavement, the mass industrialization of 
death, extermination, and extinction are all tried out on animals before 
they are used on human beings, who are thus reduced to the status of 
animals.5 Experiments are conducted on animals in order to predict what 
their effects will be on the human organism. And most notably, the cloning 
5. See Berger, “Why We Look at Animals,” in About Looking (New York: Pantheon, 
1980), 11.

T H E  F U T U R E  O F  T H E  I M A G E  :  8 3
of animals (sheep, mice, frogs, and horses) is widely understood to be a 
prelude to the cloning of human beings, either as superhuman creatures, 
cleansed of all birth defects, or as subhuman organ donors and cannon 
fodder in the “cloned armies” envisioned by the Star Wars saga.
We should also recall here John Berger’s claim that “the first subject 
matter for painting was animal. Probably the first paint was animal blood. 
Prior to that, it is not unreasonable to assume [as Rousseau did as well] 
that the first metaphor was animal.”6 There is the biblical creation myth, 
in which the animals precede the fabrication of the human image from 
clay. There are Jacques Derrida’s playful conjurings with the early form of 
writing known as “zoographia” (1974) and with the image of the animal as 
that which the human “follows” (2002), in the sense of “coming after,” in 
the odyssey of evolution as well as predatorlike pursuit.7 There is, more 
ominously, the ur- narrative of idolatry, the production of an animal image 
that serves as an idol, designed (as the Israelites specify) to “go before” 
them in their quest for the Promised Land.8 The image of the Golden Calf 
is “what will suffice as a substitute” (to echo Rancière) for the lost leader, 
Moses, who promises to lead the Hebrews into the promised future, at the 
same time that it is immediately denounced by Moses as a return to the 
past of Egyptian captivity and idolatry.
The temporality of the animal image, then, embraces both past and 
future, both what precedes the human and what leads it on or “goes be-
fore us,” to a time to come, either in a narrative of a return to a utopian 
Eden, where human nature finally achieves its potential, or in a return 
(via the “worship of brutes”) to the nasty, brutish, and short existence of 
zoe rather than bios.9 This is why the specific genre of the animal image 
6. Berger, 5.
7. Derrida, Of Grammatology, trans. Gayatri Spivak (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
Press, 1976), on zoographia or “animal writing,” 292. See also “The Animal That 
Therefore I Am (More to Follow),” trans. David Wills, Critical Inquiry 28, no. 2 
(Winter 2002): 369– 419.
8. “And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down out of the mount, 
the people gathered themselves together unto Aaron, and said unto him, Up, 
make us gods, which shall go before us” (Exodus 32:1, KJV). This scene, so often 
denounced as the prime example of idolatry, might also be read as a good ex-
ample of populist democracy in action, with “the people” self- consciously com-
missioning a visible sign of their sacred unity as a nation.
9. I am echoing here Giorgio Agamben’s distinction between “qualified life” (bios) 
and “bare life” (zoe), in Homo Sacer:Sovereign Power and Bare Life, trans. Daniel 
Heller- Roazen (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1998).

8 4  :  C H A P T E R  7
is so crucial to understanding the question of the future of the image as a 
general concept, and beyond that, the entire question of the temporality 
of the image. The image as such always engages temporality, either as the 
memory of a lost past to be recalled and re- presented as the perceived 
present of a “real- time” representation— such as a shadow, a reflection, 
a dramatic performance, or a “live” telecast— or as the imagination of a 
hoped- for or dreaded future. When we talk about the “future of the im-
age,” then, we have to notice that we are conjuring with a double image or 
“metapicture”: the image of an image to come. An image of what has not yet 
arrived but is on the horizon, like the “rough beast” William Butler Yeats 
spied slouching toward Bethlehem in his poem “The Second Coming.” 
Thus, the future of the image is always now, in the latest and newest form 
of the image, whether it is the marvelous apparitions of Lascaux or the 
contemporary technological realization of the ancient dream of producing 
not just a “lifelike” image of a living thing, but an image that is simulta-
neously a copy, a reproduction, and itself a living thing.
In our correspondence leading up to our colloquium, Jacques Rancière 
rightly identified this element of my approach to images as a kind of vi-
talism, and contrasted it to his own emphasis on “artistic operations” 
that “produce beings whose appeal relies precisely on the fact that they 
do nothing and want nothing.”10 He calls this a “difference of sensibility,” 
and no doubt it stems from a difference of formation. As a boy raised in 
the Catholic church, I was unquestionably indoctrinated with the whole 
repertoire of animated images, from the poetics of the eucharist to the 
icons and relics of saints, to the figure of the human as itself an imago dei. 
I sense in Rancière’s remark a deep skepticism about the notion of a “life 
of images.” In fact, I share this skepticism, even as I indulge in its oppo-
site, a “willing suspension of disbelief” in animist and vitalist accounts 
of the image. In What Do Pictures Want? (2005), I even suggested that one 
way of describing the ultimate goal of the labor of art on images might 
be to produce a picture that wanted nothing at all, producing a kind of 
aesthetic utopia beyond desire, a field of play and (in Rancière’s terms) an 
emancipatory “re- distribution of the sensible.”
But what could account for Rancière’s suspicion of a vitalist approach 
to the image? The closest I can come to a diagnosis is in the concluding 
10. E- mail message, April 8, 2008. See also Rancière’s essay “Do Pictures Really 
Want to Live?” in The Pictorial Turn, ed. Neal Curtis (New York: Routledge, 2010), 
27– 36.

T H E  F U T U R E  O F  T H E  I M A G E  :  8 5
pages of his essay “The Future of the Image,” in the book by that title.11 In 
his survey of “the images exhibited in our museums and galleries today,” 
Rancière identifies three major categories: (1) the “naked image,” exempli-
fied by Holocaust photographs and other images of abjection and atrocity, 
which “excludes the prestige of dissemblance” associated with the “labour 
of art” (this kind of image demands, I take it, an ethical and political rather 
than an aesthetic response); (2) the “ostensive image,” which insists on 
“its power as sheer presence” and employs aesthetic means to produce 
an effect modeled on that of the religious icon; and (3) the “metaphoric 
image,” which engages in critical “play with the forms and products of 
imagery,” that cuts across the boundaries between artistic and nonartis-
tic images in a “double metamorphosis” that makes meaningful images 
“into opaque, stupid images,” thus “interrupting the media flow,” on the 
one hand, and, on the other, “reviving dulled utilitarian objects . . . so as 
to create the power of a shared history contained in them.” The principal 
examples of the metaphoric image come from installation art and from the 
montage of Godard, especially his encyclopedic and poetic film Histoire(s) 
du cinema (1997– 1998).
Two things strike me about Rancière’s “three ways of sealing or refusing 
the relationship between art and image” (26). The first is, as he notes, that 
“each of them encounters a point of undecidability . . . that compels it to 
borrow something from the others.” Even the anti- artistic “dehumaniza-
tion” presented by the “naked image” strays into the aesthetic “because 
we see it with eyes that have already contemplated Rembrandt’s skinned 
ox . . . and equated the power of art with obliteration of the boundaries 
between the human and the inhuman, the living and the dead, the animal 
and the mineral” (27).
The second thing that strikes one is that these results of the operations 
of art can hardly be said to produce objects that “do nothing and want 
nothing.” The language of power, desire, and vitalism runs throughout 
Rancière’s own descriptions of these categories: the naked image (already 
a personification) refuses the separation of art and life; the ostensive 
brings its images to life in the manner of sacred icons; and the metaphoric 
produces “metamorphoses.” My best guess is that Rancière is citing this 
way of talking, which is certainly common in contemporary discussions 
of art, without endorsing it. Indeed, if we pursued this question back into 
earlier periods of art history, we would find the language of life, if not of 
vitalism, everywhere. Rancière himself traces the genealogy of the mod-
11. Future of the Image, 22– 30.

8 6  :  C H A P T E R  7
ern ostensive image back to “Manet’s dead Christ” with his “eyes open,” 
an image that causes “the dead Christ” to come “back to life in the pure 
immanence of pictorial presence” (29). And the discourse of ancient and 
early modern art is riddled with variations on the imperative to produce 
“lifelike” images.
Perhaps Rancière wants to see the “labour of art” on images as a way of 
calming their incorrigible tendency to take on lives of their own, their habit 
of behaving like viruses that spread and mutate faster than our immune 
systems can evolve to fight them off. An art that would “produce beings 
whose appeal relies precisely on the fact that they do nothing and want 
nothing” is perhaps a strategy of demystification, a cure for the “plague 
of images,” including the fetishism of commodities and the idolatry of 
the spectacle.12 It would be a concept of art that not only worked against 
the vitalist and animist tendencies within aesthetic discourse, but also 
resisted those parallel narratives drawn from religion, magic, and science 
that conjure with the notion of a literally living image, from the creation 
12. Here it may be worth recalling Walter Benjamin’s 1919– 1920 essay “Categories 
of Aesthetics,” in which, as Judith Butler argues, he distinguishes the seductive, 
living “semblance” or mythic sign from the magical “mark.” As Butler puts it, ‘To 
the extent that a work of art is living, it becomes semblance, but as semblance it 
loses its status as a work of art for Benjamin. The task of the work of art, at least 
at this point in Benjamin’s career, is precisely to break through this semblance 
or, indeed, to petrify and still its life. Only through a certain violence against life 
is the work of art constituted, and so it is only through a certain violence that we 
might be able to see its organizing principle and hence, what is true about the 
work of art” (68). See Butler, “Beyond Seduction and Morality: Benjamin’s Early 
Aesthetics,” in The Life and Death of Images, ed. Diarmud Costello and Dominic 
Willsdon (London: Tate Publishing, 2008), 63– 81. I would reformulate the issue 
as follows: insofar as an image takes on the properties of a life- form, it becomes 
necessary to ask what sort of life it manifests. Is it a kind of viral, infectious life? 
An inhuman, or parahuman mimicry of life, on a scale reaching from the can-
cer cell to the higher primates? We might then be in a position to examine the 
work— or, more precisely— the “labour” of art on such an image, which might 
take as many forms as the varieties of life it encounters, from the cellular level of 
immunization and antibody, to conjuring with the aid of the totemic animal, the 
image of animism. The point might then be that the work of art is not so much 
to kill the living image as to still it, to put it in a state of suspended animation. 
See my discussion of the logical permutations of the living image in What Do 
Pictures Want? On the Lives and Loves of Images (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2005), where I posit three contraries to the notion of the “living” object: 
the dead, the inanimate, and the undead (54).

T H E  F U T U R E  O F  T H E  I M A G E  :  8 7
of Adam out of the inert clay of the ground, to the medieval Jewish golem, 
to the myth of Frankenstein’s monster, to the robots and cyborgs of the 
twentieth century. The twenty- first- century version of the living image is 
the clone, which is not merely the literalization of the living image but also 
its actual, scientific realization, at least at the level of the animal. The hu-
man clone has yet to make its appearance, except in scores of Hollywood 
movies and in ominous works of art, such as Paul McCarthy’s The Clone, 
which portrays it as the anonymous, hooded figure of the organ donor, an 
image that has been in circulation at least since Jean Baudrillard’s (2000) 
reflections on what he called the “acephalic clone.” In a variety of guises, 
from Abu Ghraib’s famous “Hooded Man” to Hans Haacke’s Star Gazing 
(featuring a hood made out of the American flag), this hooded, faceless 
figure has become the contemporary icon of “facingness” that Rancière 
associates with the contemporary “obtuse image.”
If there is common ground between Rancière and me, then, it is per-
haps located in a certain ambivalence about the concept of the living im-
age and the vitalist discourse of iconology and art history. We both want 
to resist it, but I also want to explore it, to see where it leads, following 
(with Roland Barthes) a thread into the center of the labyrinth of images, 
where the Minotaur (half man, half bull) is waiting. This entails a certain 
yielding to the spell of images, artistic or not. Rancière and I share an 
aversion to the fundamental assumption of iconoclasm, that an image can 
be destroyed. Images, in my view, can neither be created nor destroyed. 
The attempt to destroy or kill an image only makes it more powerful and 
virulent.13 This, among other things, is why “iconoclastic,”, destructive 
criticism wins such easy victories over bad images. I prefer the Nietzschean 
strategy with idols: strike them with a hammer, not to destroy them, but 
to make them ring and divulge their resonant hollowness. Even better, 
we should play the idols with a tuning fork so the sound of the image is 
transmitted to the hand and the ear of the beholder.14
Rancière and I clearly share a fascination with the relation of literature 
and the visual arts, but I think we see the flow of influence and agency 
going in opposite directions. I get the sense that he regards literature, es-
pecially the realist novel, as producing a new “distribution of the sensible” 
that precedes and determines the devices of film narrative. His remarks on 
media and the absolute independence of the image from medium specific-
13. For a brilliant treatment of this point, see Michael Taussig, Defacement: Public 
Secrecy and the Labor of the Negative (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999).
14. Nietzsche, Twilight of the Idols (New York: Oxford University Press, 1998), 3.

8 8  :  C H A P T E R  7
ity will scandalize media theorists, but they make the crucial point. An im-
age is a configuration or convergence of what Foucault called “the seeable 
and the sayable.”15 The Golden Calf appears in both text and image, circu-
lating across the media of sculpture, painting, and verbal narrative. Every 
image is really an “image/text,” or a “sentence image,” as Rancière would 
put it. The question is: which term takes priority, and in what sense? For 
Rancière, it is the word; for me, the image. Rancière believes that Dutch 
painting became “visible” in a new and modern way in the nineteenth 
century, that something became seeable in these paintings as a result of 
a new discourse, principally Hegelian. My sense is that something was in 
the painting, waiting to be described in a new way, waiting for language 
to catch up with a compelling picture. In that sense, the image (as always) 
goes before the word, foreshadowing the future if only we knew how to 
read it. It is the older sign, the archaic sign, the “first” sign, as C. S. Peirce 
would put it. That is why images not only “have” a future related to tech-
nology and social change, but are the future, seen through a glass darkly.
I want to conclude with a concrete example of a work of art that explores 
another area of common ground between Rancière’s and my approaches, 
and that is the relation of aesthetics and politics. Mark Wallinger’s marvel-
ous installation State Britain is a work that crosses the line between art and 
politics in the most literal way possible. Wallinger and his collective fabri-
cated handmade replicas of propaganda posters that had been removed by 
the police from Parliament Square (and subsequently destroyed) as a result 
of a new law prohibiting political demonstrations within a one- mile radius 
of Parliament. Wallinger had noted that the circumference of this circle 
passed right through the central hall of Tate Britain, and so he installed 
the posters to straddle this line in defiance of the law.
The effect of this work is, however, deeply disturbing to a vitalist like 
me. The removal of the images from their proper location has the effect 
of anesthetizing them, putting the whole thing in a kind of trance or cryo-
genic sleep. There is something haunting and melancholy about this dis-
placement, as if the function of Tate Britain is now to serve as a mauso-
leum for the forlorn relics of British liberty.
So I would prefer to conclude with a living image, a recent work of art 
at Tate Modern by Tania Bruguera that brought two mounted policemen 
onto the bridge across the turbine hall, where they proceeded to herd the 
audience about, demonstrating their crowd- control techniques.16 Why do 
15. Foucault, This Is Not a Pipe.
16. Tania Bruguera, Tatlin’s Whispers #5 (2008).

T H E  F U T U R E  O F  T H E  I M A G E  :  8 9
I call this an image when the artist declares that her intention was to re-
sist the image as a distancing operation, a separation of the viewer from 
what is beheld? Because it is an awakening and enlivening of an image 
that has been “anesthetized” in its media circulation by being dislocated 
“from TV to real life” (as Bruguera puts it). Or better, a place between TV 
and real life: the space of Tate Modern and the regime of the aesthetic 
image. Although Bruguera wanted the audience “not to know” that this 
was art, she knew that they had to know, at least in the sense that they 
were prepared to see this, not as a serious police action, but as an artistic 
event. They understood it as a picture, a representation, but one that they 
had entered as an environment. In the background, we see that people are 
already taking pictures.
As with the Wallinger, I find it difficult to specify the precise effect of 
this piece. It shares with State Britain a staging of the encounter between 
police power and the primal source of the authentically political, the 
gathering of people who may or may not resist the power that controls 
their lives. Neither Wallinger nor Bruguera are engaged in what might be 
called “directly political” protest art, or agitprop. They are instead remov-
ing that kind of art and action to a space of contemplation. They could 
be interpreted, then, as engaging in mourning for a time of revolutionary 
resistance and dissent that is no longer available, or in a redistributing of 
our sense of where the proper boundaries of art and life, aesthetics and 
politics, are located (the title of Bruguera’s piece is Tatlin’s Whispers, a sotto 
voce evocation of revolutionary monumentalism). The aesthetic regime is 
now a shelter for an endangered, vanishing sense of the political, and per-
haps a Petri dish for nurturing it back to life. Tate Britain is hospitable to 
images that are refugees from their proper home in Parliament Square; the  
mounted police are benign and well behaved in the Tate Modern, the 
horses well trained, good shepherds to the sheep they are herding. This 
may not be directly political or revolutionary art but rather, to use Bru-
guera’s phrase, “useful art”— useful for making one of the most common 
images of public space today available to experience in a new way. It is also 
an image of an increasingly probable future in social spaces marked, not 
by fixed, legislated “police lines,” but by flexible, animated boundaries, like 
the “flying checkpoints” that spring up unpredictably all over the country-
side of the occupied Palestinian territories. This, therefore, is one “future 
of the image” that is already upon us.
Finally, in discussion of the future of the image, especially its political 
future, it would seem strange not to mention the emergence of a new po-
litical and cultural icon that has marked the onset of a new political epoch 

9 0  :  C H A P T E R  7
in our time, signaling the close, not just of a political administration, but 
perhaps the whole “age of terror” and the “war on terror” that dominated 
the world from 2001 to 2008— the era of the Bush administration.
I’m speaking, of course, of Barack Obama and the remarkable iconog-
raphy that has evolved around his face, his body, and even his family. The 
omnipresent “Hope” poster by Shepard Fairey deploys techniques familiar 
from the history of propaganda: a solarized photographic image, reduced 
to areas of primary colors (red, white, and blue), coupled with a simple 
verbal slogan. The stylistic similarity to Soviet- era posters of Lenin was 
mobilized within days of Obama’s election (in a blog by Peggy Shapiro in 
the American Thinker) to reinforce the right- wing labeling of Obama as a 
socialist, maybe even a communist.17 I doubt very much that this “guilt 
by association” will work any better than did the imagistic attempts to 
link Obama with the so- called terrorist Bill Ayers. It will be overwhelmed, 
at least for the time being, by images like the postelection cover of Time 
magazine, which Photoshops Obama into the famous iconography of an 
ebullient Franklin Roosevelt riding in the back of a convertible on inau-
guration day. The historical comparison with FDR’s image will, I think, 
have more legs than the Lenin poster, if only for the prosaic reason that 
Obama took power in a democratic election, not a violent revolution or 
military coup, and did so at the moment of the worst financial crisis since 
the Great Depression, the “Great Recession” of 2008. In contrast to George 
W. Bush, for instance, who exploited the national tragedy of 9- 11 to fuel 
“fear itself” and declared an endless war on terror as the justification for 
a state of emergency and unprecedented executive powers, Obama has 
taken power with a message of hope and the unambiguous support of 
the voters. Bush’s most famous effort to enhance his image is the famous 
“Mission Accomplished” photo- op, when he appeared in jet- pilot drag to 
declare victory in Iraq.
But another reason the guilt by association strategy will not work is that 
the public has been educated and immunized to this sort of image- tactic 
over the yearlong war of images that has punctuated every stage of the 
presidential campaign. One notable moment of immunization was July 21, 
2008, when the New Yorker released a cover portraying Barack Obama as 
a Muslim and Michelle Obama as an Angela Davis– style revolutionary, 
complete with Afro hairdo and an AK- 47.
Most of my leftist friends were horrified by this image, but I welcomed it 
17. See www.americanthinker.com/blog/2008/04/obamas_posters_message_in 
_the.html (accessed 30 April 2009).

T H E  F U T U R E  O F  T H E  I M A G E  :  9 1
as a kind of iconographic immunization, a measured dose of the image vi-
ruses circulating in the mediasphere. It had the effect of rendering visible 
and manifestly ridiculous the sly innuendos of right- wing propaganda. 
Some images (like Bush as a jet pilot) gain their power by only being half 
visible and easily disavowed, avoiding direct manifestation. To me, it was 
clear that the joke in this image was not on the Obamas but on the idiots 
who believe in this sort of slander, and on left- wing critics who think that 
most American citizens are idiots who cannot be trusted to discern irony 
and satire. The joke was aimed, most specifically, at Fox News and their coy 
speculations about whether the gesture exchanged by Michelle and Barack 
on his winning the nomination was a “terrorist fist- pump.”
The New Yorker was well aware, I suspect, that its intentions would be 
misconstrued, that it would outrage its own liberal, politically correct, so-
phisticated readers. In effect, the magazine offered itself up as a substitute 
victim for the Obamas, by making its own elitist Knickerbocker avatar into 
a punching bag for its readers, as the cartoonist for the Nation magazine 
immediately saw, when he parodied the New Yorker by showing the Knick-
erbocker knocked to the floor, and the offending magazine burning in the 
fireplace as the Obamas celebrate their victory in round number one. The 
New Yorker foresaw the future of its own image, inviting and welcoming it. 
One cannot say the same thing about the evolutionary mutation of Bush’s 
“Mission Accomplished” photo- op, which quickly degenerated into an im-
age of puerile phoniness and false promises that haunted his presidency 
right down to its ignominious conclusion. Or the despicable cartoon in the 
New York Post (February 18, 2009) that showed two police officers standing 
over a bullet- riddled ape, who is characterized as the author of the Obama 
economic stimulus bill, an image that returns us to the domain of the an-
imal, this time as an avatar of past, present, and future images of racism.
Of course, the Post cartoonist, Sean Delonas, and the publisher, Rupert 
Murdoch, vehemently denied any racist intentions. Apparently they didn’t 
know that black people have been caricatured as apes since time immemo-
rial, or that the actual author of the stimulus bill is also the nation’s first 
African American president, or that this image joins the growing gallery of 
images that predict the assassination of this president. These people must 
come from a planet where animals do not exist, and where their images do 
not predict or produce the possible futures of human beings.

8.1 William Blake, The 
Book of Urizen (1794), plate 
17. Lessing J. Rosenwald 
Collection, Library of 
Congress. © 2015 William 
Blake Archive. Used with 
permission.

8: WORLD PICTURES
Globalization and Visual Culture1
Fellow Labourers! The Great Vintage & Harvest is now upon Earth
The whole extent of the Globe is explored: Every scattered Atom
Of Human Intellect is now flocking to the sound of the Trumpet.
WILLIAM BLAKE, Milton: A Poem (1803)
I have to confess that I find the very idea of “globalization” somewhat 
intimidating. There is something overwhelming about the concept itself, 
as if it had become synonymous with totality and universality. And then 
there is the scope and variety of the numerous disciplines and bottomless 
archives that are mustered to describe it, as well as the objective reality 
it claims to describe. There is no doubt that, in our time, an intensified, 
accelerated process of “worlding” and what Jacques Derrida called “mon-
dialization” has taken place. The forces of media, capital, and culture swirl 
about us like massive storms of images. We know more about the world 
now than ever before, just as it seems to be more than ever escaping our 
comprehension, much less control. Edward Said could call for a worldly— 
that is, a secular and cosmopolitan criticism— at the same time that he 
recognized the undeniable fact that the twenty- first- century world is de-
scending into religious wars motivated largely by perceived violations of 
sacred spaces and places. Globalism and localism seem, in this light, not 
really alternatives but contradictions that grow out of one another— as if 
the very idea of the local had been generated by the global. It is this par-
adox in the concept of the global that I would like to ponder— the emer-
gence of a “world picture” that has become incredibly clear, realistic, and 
information- saturated (every inch of the world has now been scanned and 
is searchable), at the same time that it seems to be facing a growing crisis 
that can only be described as apocalyptic. Projections of a catastrophic 
1. This chapter was written as the keynote address for the Conference on Global-
ization and Cultural Translation, Tsinghua University, Beijing (August 13, 2006). 
Many thanks to Professor Wang Ning for organizing this memorable occasion.

9 4  :  C H A P T E R  8
future are no longer the province of Hollywood; now it is the domain of 
realistic documentary, based in empirical research, archival work, and 
punctuated by the mass media spectacles of disaster— tsunami, hurricane, 
plague, and (last but not least) war.
There is a temptation to indulge in presentist thinking at a time when 
apocalyptic predictions are made on every side. That is why I began by 
quoting the words of William Blake, who expressed very similar senti-
ments more than two hundred years ago in a time of war, revolution, and 
counterrevolution. Of all the English poets and painters, Blake probably 
had the most vivid sense of what was entailed in the image of the globe and 
globalization, which plays a major role in both his words and his images. 
Blake’s work was situated in the transition period from the first, mercan-
tilist phase of the British empire to its second phase of colonization and 
conquest. We occupy a similar transitional moment, from the breakup of 
the European empires, commonly known as the “postcolonial” period, to 
a new historical formation after the fall of the Soviet Union that is called 
globalization, neoliberal hegemony, or (in the words of Michael Hardt and 
Antonio Negri) simply “Empire.”2
So Blake, the prophet against empire, seems especially apt at this time. 
I invoke his work, not to deny the novelty of globalization in our time, but 
to place that novelty in a larger framework, one that attends to the longue 
durée of globalizing processes, and to the history of the central image of 
“the global” as such. So much has been written about globalization that 
the term has become overfamiliar, an unexamined cliché. When this topic 
has been scrutinized from the standpoint of visual culture, media, and 
image theory, the general tendency has been to talk about the global dis-
tribution of images, their circulation in forms of mass media such as cin-
ema, television, advertising, and the Internet. My approach is somewhat 
different, emphasizing not the “world circulation” of images but images 
of the world and the global as such. I want to pay special attention to what 
Heidegger called “world pictures,” the metaphors, figures, and pictures 
that constitute discourses of globalization, ancient, modern, and post-
modern. We need to begin, then, by asking ourselves: How do we imagine, 
depict, or know the global?
First, we might enumerate some of ways that we name the global, start-
ing with the figure of the “globe” or “sphere” as such, and going on to 
terms like the planet and the planetary, the cosmos and the cosmopolitan, 
2. Hardt and Negri, Empire (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2001).

W O R L D  P I C T U R E S  :  9 5
the world and worldliness, and, finally, the earth, which doubles as the 
name of the planet, the global, and as the concrete ground on which we 
stand, or into which we burrow.
1. The OED tells us that the Latin word globus designates “a round body 
or mass; a ball, sphere, etc.” The Middle English glob(be), glub(be), GLUB, 
is used by Wyclif (in the first English Bible) to render the Latin word glo-
bus in the sense “body of men.” So the name condenses the singular and 
multiple object in the same way that “body” can denote an individual or 
a collective. The contemporary idea of globalization is probably traceable 
to Marshall McLuhan’s image of the global village produced by instan-
taneous electronic communication. McLuhan’s catachresis of the large 
and small captures the fundamental point of the global as a figure of the 
concrete universal, the gigantic miniature. The globe is both the model or 
map, and the thing that is mapped and circumnavigated. It is the object 
that holds us in its gravitational field, while also appearing as a handheld 
object, as in the images of Christ (or the Christian emperor) as salvator 
mundi, cradling the Christianized world as a crystalline sphere in his hand. 
When the weight of the world grows (as it does for us today), the world 
may seem to crush the body that supports it, as in the famous emblems of 
Atlas holding up the globe. Spherical models of the universe predate the 
early modern navigation of the globe, as the ancient doctrine of the music 
of the spheres attests. If “the earth was without form and void” in the bib-
lical account of creation, it was easy to predict that the first created form 
would be the simplest, a Platonic object like a sphere or globe. Hence the 
rendering of creation as the inscription of a sphere in space, as in William 
Blake’s depiction of the creator as Jehovah- Urizen with his compasses, 
as a Vulcan- figure contemplating his fiery work, or (in a more radically 
original image) as a demiurge giving birth to a gigantic womb or “globe of 
blood.”
Figures 8.1, 8.2, and 8.3 capture three major ways of thinking the global, 
three “aspects,” as Wittgenstein would have put it, or ways of “seeing as”:
A. As a geometric, measurable construction, whether in terms of physical 
space or mappable, calculable quantities, from geographical regions, to-
pographies, and routes, to “flows” of capital, populations, and transitory 
cultural and atmospheric conditions— the passing weather of the medi-
asphere or the meteorological sphere. In the terms of Henri Lefebvre’s 
classic discussion, The Production of Space, this is the designed, adminis-

9 6  :  C H A P T E R  8
tered, “represented” space of the architect, urban planner, and landscap-
ist (figure 8.2).3
B. As a produced, made object, an artifice involving materials and technol-
ogy, the “man- made” worlds of physical models, the virtual worlds of dig-
ital technology, or the shaped, physical features of cultivation, urbaniza-
tion, and planetary deformation, from Chinese walls to dikes and dams to 
global climactic effects (global warming, most notably). This corresponds 
to Lefebvre’s notion of “practiced” space, the built environment of the 
engineer, the ploughman, or the worker (figure 8.3).
C. As a reproduced organic form, seen simultaneously as an organism and as 
the environment inhabited by that organism (figure 8.1). Thus, this final 
image can be read as a kind of embryonic form nourished by a placental 
network of veins and fibers descending from the body of its progenitor. 
3. Lefebvre, The Production of Space (London: Wiley- Blackwell, 1982).
8.2 William Blake, frontispiece to Europe:  
A Prophecy (1794). Lessing J. Rosenwald Col-
lection, Library of Congress. © 2015 William 
Blake Archive. Used with permission.
8.3 William Blake, The Song of Los (1795). 
Lessing J. Rosenwald Collection, Library of 
Congress. © 2015 William Blake Archive. Used 
with permission.

W O R L D  P I C T U R E S  :  9 7
The globe is thus, as environment, a kind of womb in which life- forms are 
gestating, or a biomedial4 “culture” like a Petri dish. As a singular body, on 
the other hand, it is the globus or “collective body,” as in the “body politic” 
of a nation; only in this case the political unity is that of species being, the 
“body of humanity” as such. This organic image of the global is surely 
the most fantastic and far- reaching in its implications. Globalization, in 
this view, becomes a totalizing biopicture of a “life- world” rendered in the 
most literal, corporeal terms, as if we were observing a spectacle of a birth- 
trauma, a multistable image of wounding and bleeding, reproduction, 
nourishing, and parturition. This corresponds to Lefebvre’s perceived or 
“secreted” space, the world as an embryonic and evolutionary eco- system.
2. Planet. The word planet comes from the ancient Greek for “wanderer,” 
applied to wandering stars, planets (cf. classical Latin stellae errant— to 
lead astray, [in passive] to wander, of uncertain origin), as opposed to the 
“fixed stars,” which guarantee a sense of cosmic order, harmony in the 
spherical structure of the cosmos. When the globe is seen within a larger 
framework, the wider perspective of astronomy, from the standpoint of 
the sun or Uranus, it becomes the wanderer through space, a “globe roll-
ing through voidness,” as Blake describes it. From this standpoint, the 
world becomes “a grain of sand” or a fragile island in the Sea of Time 
and Space, and the nomadism and fluid errancy sometimes attributed to 
globalization is applied to the globe itself. All three of Blake’s images of 
the globe render it as a planet still tethered to its creator: by surveillance, 
mapping, and modeling; by productive activity and artifice; or by bodily, 
biological dependence. But all of these images suggest as well a moment 
of distancing, detachment, and parturition, as if at some point the globe, 
the totality of the human life- world, comes to recognize its autonomous 
“island” status, its unique, rare status in a mainly lifeless universe. The 
moment of the first astronauts’ perception of the world from outer space 
is certainly a key moment in the planetary reframing of the global.
3. Cosmos. “The greater World is called Cosmos from the beauty thereof,” 
according to Humboldt’s Cosmos I.53 (1848). It is “the assemblage of all 
things in heaven and earth, the universality of created things, constitut-
4. On the concept of “biomedia,” see Eugene Thacker in Critical Terms for Media 
Studies, ed. W. J. T. Mitchell and Mark B. N. Hansen (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 2010).

9 8  :  C H A P T E R  8
ing the perceptible world.” Humboldt continues: “The Pythagoreans con-
ceived the Kosmos, or the universe, as one single system, generated out of 
numbers” (a view that undermines Heidegger’s notion that the Greeks had 
no world picture). Perhaps this explains why the “cosmopolitan” figure 
often stands outside or above the “global,” holding the globe in his hand, 
framing it in a larger Olympian perspective— the very perspective that in-
forms international conferences on globalization, where cosmopolitan 
men and women of the world gather to ponder the “global,” as if they held 
“the whole world in their hands,” as the African American hymn expresses 
it.5 The cosmos is depicted, generally, in highly abstract, schematic, even 
diagrammatic figures that leave all particularity to the sublunary realm of 
earthbound creatures. The world becomes an abstract form held in the 
mind, hand, or eye of a sovereign, imperial intelligence. Its contradictions 
are reduced to a figure of “harmony in opposition” or dialectics, and its 
complexity is rendered as a labyrinth seen from above. The cosmos is, 
as Alexander Pope imagines it, “a mighty maze, but not without a plan,” 
and the creation of actual mazes and landscape gardens is an attempt 
to depict, in the human scale of terrestrial spaces, the structure of the 
imperial, global totality. Thus Pope’s description of Windsor Forest treats 
it as a miniature emblem of the British empire (as well as of the original  
divine landscape, the “Groves of Eden”) and as a dialectical landscape 
that both embodies and resolves contradiction: “Here hills and vales, the 
woodland and the plain / Here earth and water seem to strive again / Not 
chaos- like, together crushed and bruised / But as the world, harmoniously  
confused.”6
It is striking, in this regard, to note that the very first sentence of Hardt 
and Negri’s Empire is a similar declaration: “The problematic of Empire is 
determined in the first place by one simple fact: that there is world order.” 
Hardt and Negri seem almost conscious of the neoclassical resonance of 
their claim, and quickly set out to correct it by insisting that this order is 
neither natural nor divine, but “juridical,” neither a “spontaneous” result 
“of the interactions of radically heterogeneous world forces,” nor “dic-
tated by a single power.”7 This third notion of world order as juridical, 
as a product of human consciousness and agency, is one thing that links 
5. That hymn moves from the hand- held world to the “little bitty baby,” a shift 
that offers an uncanny echoing of Blake’s vision of the globe as a fetus at the 
moment of birth.
6. Windsor Forest ll.11– 13 (1713), from Alexander Pope: Selected Poetry and Prose, ed. 
William K. Wimsatt Jr. (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1964).
7. Hardt and Negri, Empire, 1.

W O R L D  P I C T U R E S  :  9 9
their thought to the precedent of Blake, who shares their conviction that 
globalization and the world order are historical products of the human 
imagination, if not their “juridical” notion of it as governed by one law.
4. World, according to the OED, is “a formation peculiar to Germanic,  
f. wer-  man, WERE n.1 + al-  age (cf. OLD a., ELD n.2), the etymological 
meaning being, therefore, ‘age’ or ‘life of man.’” “World” expands to the 
universal and contracts to the particular— “this world” as opposed to the 
next; the lower, secular, earthly, and worldly, as opposed to the heavens. It 
is also a temporal state, not just spatial, a condition, not just a location. 
The world is another catachresis of part and whole, specific singularity 
and general totality. “The world is all that is the case,” says Wittgenstein,8 
but it is also a small subset of what is the case. “The world, the flesh, and 
the devil” are situated in a middle region, below heaven, but above the 
underworld of Hell or Hades, the subterranean realm where a universe of 
fire, torment, and destruction is to be found. A world can also denote a 
social or ethnographic region, as in “the Arab World,” or even the domain 
of a species, as in the concept of a “life- world.” Worlds, unlike the Kosmos, 
easily take the plural: there are many worlds, possible worlds, wars of the 
worlds, and different ways of world- making, as Nelson Goodman teaches 
us.9 There is one cosmic order, one juridical law that governs the numer-
ous worlds. One suspects that Derrida’s sensitivity to language made him 
prefer the term mondialization to globalization. Mondialization does not 
translate well, however, as “worlding”— perhaps we need a new term like 
“mundanization” or “mundanity” (though that would come perilously 
close to equating globalization with an epidemic of boredom and inanity).
The world as a planet is also “whirled,” if you will permit a Joycean 
pun, through space, rotating through the seasons and lives of its denizens. 
The spherical overtones of the global and the errant wandering of the 
planetary converge in the figure of the vortex or helix, the spiral trace left 
by any point on a globe as it wanders through space, or the track of the 
artist- creator’s inscribing hand as he draws a New World into existence. 
Saul Steinberg’s cartoon New World illustrates this scenario perfectly, as 
well as Heidegger’s notion of a “world picture” that is not a depiction of 
the world, but the world itself constituted as a picture.
8. This is the first line of Wittgenstein’s Tractatus Logico- Philosophicus (1921), trans. 
D. F. Pears and B. F. McGuinness, intro. Bertrand Russell (London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul, 1961), 5.
9. Goodman, Ways of World Making (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1978).

1 0 0  :  C H A P T E R  8
5. Earth, or terra. Again, the OED: “on the ground; no other non- Teutonic 
cognates are known to exist, the plausible connexion with the Aryan root 
*ar, to plough, being open to serious objection.” The ground, nevertheless, 
the place of burial and digging. But also the “whole earth” (as cataloged) 
and “middle earth” (as imagined), or the place where “earthlings” live 
(in science fiction). Earth’s version of the global dialectic is to vacillate 
between the proper and the common noun, the name of the planet and 
the name of that which covers its surface with a nourishing, fertile, and 
fecund substance.
Since I have been invoking the cosmology of William Blake as a frame-
work for the poetics and iconology of globalization, perhaps it would be 
helpful to put his most comprehensive statement on the structure of the 
universe into the record. His fundamental principle is, as I hope is evident 
at this point, to bring out the dialectical character of the whole concept of 
the world, the global, and the cosmic, to insist on the catachresis of part 
and whole, particular and general, the small “Minute Particular” and the 
“Infinite”: “To see a world in a grain of sand.” But here is his statement on 
the matter of the infinite:
The nature of infinity is this: That every thing has its
Own Vortex; and when once a traveller thro Eternity
Has passd that Vortex, he percieves it roll backward behind
His path, into a globe itself infolding; like a sun:
Or like a moon, or like a universe of starry majesty,
While he keeps onwards in his wondrous journey on the earth
Or like a human form, a friend with whom he livd benevolent.
As the eye of man views both the east & west encompassing
Its vortex; and the north & south, with all their starry host;
Also the rising sun & setting moon he views surrounding
His corn- fields and his valleys of five hundred acres square.
Thus is the earth one infinite plane, and not as apparent
To the weak traveller confin’d beneath the moony shade.
Thus is the heaven a vortex passd already, and the earth
A vortex not yet pass’d by the traveler thro’ Eternity.
BLAKE, Milton: A Poem (1803), plate 15, ll.21– 3510
10. The Poetry and Prose of William Blake, ed. David V. Erdman (Garden City, NY: 
Anchor Doubleday, 1965), 108– 9.

W O R L D  P I C T U R E S  :  1 0 1
This passage has attracted a large amount of commentary, but I only want 
to emphasize a couple of major points in this context. As an account of 
globalization, it suggests that the figure of totality as a globe is itself a 
transitional phase, not an endpoint. The globe is merely another “thing” 
that human consciousness encounters, and like all things, it “has its / Own 
Vortex,” which is to say, its own spiraling, doubled, dialectical identity, 
which alternates between opposite perceptions— singular objects such as 
“a globe itself infolding,” or an outward directing radiance like “a sun,” 
or “a moon” reflecting light; or an array of collective objects, a mass gath-
ering, “a universe of starry majesty.” Or (and this is the final visionary 
version of the nature of infinity) a “human form,” the Other, who contains, 
as a sovereign subject, all these worlds, these infinities, within himself. If 
there is a lesson in this passage for students of globalization, it is not to 
be fixated on the figure of the global as the privileged icon of the world, 
the earth, or the cosmos. As Blake puts it, “As to that false appearance 
which appears to the reasoner, / As of a Globe rolling thro voidness, it is a 
delusion.” The earth is rather to be seen as “one infinite plane” in which 
every particular object, and every living thing, contains a vortex that opens 
into yet another infinity.
The journalist Thomas Friedman has notoriously concluded that “the 
earth is flat,” that globalization means, paradoxically, that we have moved 
beyond Columbus’s discovery that the world is round into a wired uni-
verse of instantaneous virtual community— a community, as Friedman 
neglects to mention, of increasingly drastic economic inequality.11 Blake’s 
conclusion exactly opposes Friedman’s blasé neoliberal confidence in the 
homogeneous flatness of a world of cosmopolitan entrepreneurs flying 
business class from one world city to another, circulating along with im-
ages, information, and commodities. For Blake, it is the Minute Particular 
that is infinite, individual, and singular. The infinity of globalization is not 
to be found in the homogeneous air- conditioned world of neoliberalism, 
but in the sweatshops and dirty wars it administers, and in the unique 
human forms that inhabit all its levels.
One of the favorite scapegoats for the abstract character of globalization 
is technology and science. This is Heidegger’s argument in his famous 
1938 essay “The Age of the World Picture,” which argues that the modern 
11. Friedman, The World Is Flat: A Brief History of the Twenty- First Century (New 
York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 2005).

1 0 2  :  C H A P T E R  8
era has been a time in which the world itself has become a picture.12 It 
is not merely that modern cultures create pictures of the world, but that 
the world they present to themselves has been constituted as a picture, by 
which Heidegger means the measurable, calculable universe of mathemat-
ics and physics, of scientific research in its modern sense. For Heidegger, 
the ancient Greeks and medieval man did not have a world picture in this 
sense, one that splits Being into a totalizing object, on the one hand, and 
a totally perspicuous subject, on the other, who “gets the picture,” as if all 
the world were depicted “before” it, and yet also finds itself “in the pic-
ture,” as its total situation. “As soon as the world becomes picture,” argues 
Heidegger, “the position of man is conceived as a world view” (133– 34).
I’m going to leave aside the question of whether Heidegger is right that 
other ages had no world picture and therefore no world view.13 I’m more 
interested in whether he is correct about the modern, putatively scien-
tific Weltanschauung. Interestingly, the exact opposite to Heidegger’s claim 
was argued just six years earlier by Freud in one of his last essays, “The 
Question of a Weltanschauung.” Freud argued that scientific thought was 
inherently hostile to the notion of a comprehensive world picture or world 
view: it cannot “even draw us a coherent picture of the universe. . . . It gives 
us fragments of alleged discovery, which it cannot bring into harmony 
with one another. . . . Everything it teaches is only provisionally true: what 
is praised today as the highest wisdom will be rejected to- morrow and 
replaced by something else, though once more only tentatively.”14 Freud 
did not, of course, exempt the mind of man itself from this conclusion, 
arguing that, as one of the sciences, psychoanalysis could not claim to 
have a Weltanschauung, and that it must renounce any claim to provide a 
world picture.
Which of these views is correct? My own sense is that they are both 
wrong and need to be understood as expressions of deeply connected ideo-
logical fixations. Freud is attempting to overcome magical thinking and 
religion, which he understands to be the source of dogmatic world pictures 
and world views, an infantile stage in the evolution of human thought. 
Heidegger’s antagonist is precisely the opposite. He wants to blame tech-
noscience and instrumental reason for the modern disenchantment of 
12. Heidegger, “The Age of the World Picture,” in The Question Concerning Tech-
nology, trans. William Levitt (New York: Harper & Row, 1977).
13. But as one raised on E. M. W. Tillyard’s classic of intellectual history, The Eliza-
bethan World Picture (New York: Vintage, 1959), I can hardly accept it at face value.
14. “Lecture XXXV: The Question of a Weltanschauung,” in The Freud Reader, ed. 
Peter Gay (New York: W. W. Norton, 1989), 790.

W O R L D  P I C T U R E S  :  1 0 3
the world, and with it the construction of a comprehensive world picture. 
The one thing Heidegger and Freud agree on is that world pictures are bad 
things, though for completely opposite reasons.
My own sense of world pictures is that they are necessary, unavoidable, 
and always limited in one way or another. The question is, What are the 
limits? A good illustration might be provided by Google Earth’s marvel-
ous satellite photographs, which produce a digital and virtualized answer 
to the traditional spherical representation of the world as globe. With a 
mouse click, I can zoom in from thousands of miles out in space to a spot 
a few hundred feet above the earth’s surface, watching in amazement as 
continents and regions come into focus, followed by distinctive geographi-
cal formations like coastlines, until we find ourselves coming to rest above 
recognizable city streets and buildings. Like the crystalline sphere of the 
Salvator Mundi, everything is clear, transparent, and highly defined— that 
is, until we come too close, and then the world picture dissolves into pix-
els. This is the moment of Blake’s Minute Particular, the moment when 
the global image dissolves into the local, the passage into the vortex of 
dissolution and reframing of the image. This is also very like that moment 
when aerial surveillance convinces us of the certainty of a target, and we 
watch that target explode in the crosshairs, a “surgical strike” that almost 
invariably turns out to be a mistake, a catastrophic incident of “collateral 
damage.”
There is no way to “zoom” smoothly and precisely from the global to the 
local, in other words, or from the heights of abstract infinity to the min-
ute particular; the perspective must pass through a vortex that imposes 
a new regime of observation— up close and personal— on the spectator. 
The dangerous illusion of the contemporary world picture of neoliberal 
economics and militaristic adventurism is that technoscience has made 
this “smooth” zooming possible. That is the side on which Heidegger is 
correct. The fact that this Weltanschauung is always provisional and frag-
mentary is the side on which Freud is correct.
But there are other kinds of parallax views or jumps in the global per-
spective that need to be recognized. It is not just a question of scale, of 
the gigantic and miniature, but also the fundamental coding of the world 
picture as such. A perfect illustration may be found in the cover image of 
Hardt and Negri’s pathbreaking book Empire. Why should a book that in-
sists on a resolutely political, economic, and social construction of world 
order, the “juridical” formation of state, corporate, and NGO agents that 
constitute what they call “Empire” with a capital E, have a meteorologi-
cal event like a hurricane as the totalizing emblem of its message? The 

1 0 4  :  C H A P T E R  8
image is radically inappropriate to the text it illustrates. It would make 
much more sense as the cover of Al Gore’s An Inconvenient Truth, which 
treats globalization as an ecological and environmental process that (on 
its present course) is leading toward a global catastrophe. Global warming, 
as Gore argues (with the unanimous support of what can only be called 
the “world picture” of contemporary science), is threatening the entire 
life- world of the human species. It is as if Hardt and Negri were led, al-
most unconsciously, to the limiting breakdown of their world picture, a 
turbulent form of order and disorder, what Heidegger calls the “shadow” 
that haunts the world picture in the form of that ancient figure of trans-
formation, the vortex.15
Rather than conclude, however, with the relatively abstract and cosmo-
logical image of the vortex as the turbulent passage between world pic-
tures, I want to leave you with a few thoughts on the intermediate concept 
of the region, the “excluded middle” that tends to be left out in the polar-
izing concepts of the global and local. I think it is no accident that Hardt 
and Negri discount the importance of “geographical regions,” and Marx’s 
figure of the “Old Mole” of proletarian revolution that burrows through the 
earth, in favor of a highly virtualized Empire whose center is everywhere 
and circumference is nowhere. For them, all the different struggles against 
Empire are “incommunicable” one to another, an abstract “multitude” 
that resists an equally abstract “Empire” whose “virtual center . . . can be 
attacked from any point”(59).
If we learn any lesson from contemporary politics (in the Middle East, 
but also in the Americas and in Africa and Asia, for instance) it is that 
the region is a more potent factor in global politics than ever before. The 
military nightmare of our moment turns out to be not the ICBMs of the 
Cold War, which were genuinely global in their reach, but the short- and 
intermediate- range missile that may travel only ten or twenty miles but 
can be launched from the back of a pickup truck or the backyard of a cot-
tage. All warfare is now regional warfare, by which I mean it is almost never 
fought between nations with armies arrayed against one another; rather, 
it is a complex war of position fought over uncertain and shifting borders, 
contested terrains, and demilitarized zones with smuggled or improvised 
weapons. It is important in this regard to note that the notion of a “war on 
terror” with a shadowy enemy (al Qaeda) that has no determinate center 
in any nation state, but circulates as a global ideology that can strike any-
15. Of course I am assuming here that they chose their cover image, which may 
have been imposed on them by the book’s designer.

W O R L D  P I C T U R E S  :  1 0 5
where, is now being supplanted by the phenomenon of ISIL (the Islamic 
State in the Levant), which is waging a classic war of territorial conquest 
aimed at creating a new regional nation- state.
And these developments are entirely in keeping with the concept of the 
region. The word comes from regere, “to rule,” a sense echoed in related 
words such as “regime,” “regency,” and “reign”— something very like the 
“juridical” order postulated for Empire by Hardt and Negri. But the actual 
use of the term belies this image of a space ruled by law. The “regional 
imaginary” is likely to be constructed in terms of images of emancipation 
from political and governmental boundaries, and in general it denotes 
an area of relatively weak, contested, or divided jurisdiction. In Ameri-
can culture, regionalism is the name for forms of cultural resistance to 
what is seen as the oppressive dominance of the metropolitan regions. 
Thus, “Southern” or “Western” or even “Midwestern” literature provide 
alternatives to the cosmopolitan centers of New York and New England in 
American literary histories.
Like world pictures, regional imaginaries always display a double, di-
alectical face. The region is what is “ruled,” but it is also what is free of 
central rule, contesting the power centers, often in a struggle between the 
country and the city. Regions are ambiguous with respect to their status 
as parts or wholes, fragments or totalities: North America is a gigantic (al-
most) continental region that contains just two nations, the United States 
and Canada, yet each of these countries contains numerous regions within 
itself. China, located in the region known as East Asia, is itself composed 
of radically distinct geographical and cultural regions. I call these regional 
imaginaries in contrast to world pictures, however, because the region is a 
much more tentative and provisional entity than a nation or country. No 
one has ever been called upon to die for his region, but dying for one’s 
country or nation is absolutely commonplace.16
The regional imaginary does resolve into a picture, however, when it 
is exemplified in a specific site. The most vivid regional pictures are thus 
of zones of conflict and contestation, border areas, demilitarized zones, 
or set- aside spaces (what Foucault called “heterotopias”) that flaunt their 
double role as places or localities, on the one hand, and symbolic spaces 
16. On further reflection, I would want to qualify this claim. A powerful example 
of regional loyalty is the American South, which aspired to independent nation-
hood. Many southerners still believe that “the South shall rise again” and are 
therefore determined to save their Confederate money. Nevertheless, even this 
exception confirms the rule: the Southern aspiration was to escape from its “re-
gional” condition and to attain sovereignty as a nation.

1 0 6  :  C H A P T E R  8
that represent larger regional and even global meanings, on the other. 
Pope’s Windsor Forest is just such a heterotopia, a region set aside from 
use to transform a specific place into an emblem of the world, subject si-
multaneously to imperial rule and to a kind of public openness that is the 
predecessor of the modern institution of the public park.
From a global perspective, especially one driven by the rational calcu-
lation of cartography, the region emerges as the most stable, permanent 
feature of the earth, especially in its manifestation in the great regional 
landmasses known as continents. A vivid demonstration of this point is 
provided by Chinese artist Hung Hao in his fictional map entitled New 
Political World. This map shows us a world in which all the familiar conti-
nents and regions remain in the usual places, but all the names of political 
entities, such as cities and nation- states, have been displaced. Hung Hao’s 
map provides a useful way of thinking about the relations of spatial cate-
gories from the global to the regional to the local. At its most general level, 
it reminds us of the contingency and fragility of our national entities and 
their life- world (a point that could also be made by looking at a political 
map of the Balkans over the last century), while at the same time stressing 
the relative durability of continents and regions. “Continental drift” is one 
aspect of global reality that (unlike global warming) seems beyond human 
intervention. The volatility of the borders and national identities in Hung 
Hao’s map serves to remind us, at a moment when the United States is 
touted as “the lone superpower” and globalization is routinely equated 
with “Americanization,” that empires and superpowers may be even more 
ephemeral than tiny nation- states.
But the wit of New Political World lies in the details of displacement and 
dislocation as much as in this general point. Hung Hao moves the name 
“London” to a region of the north coast of Australia and relocates “Israel” 
to Canada, where presumably it will have plenty of room to spread out. 
China has been split up into many parts, Australia taking over its eastern 
seaboard, and Beijing seems now to be located in Algeria, while Portugal 
has taken over the western reaches of the Gobi desert. Only India retains 
its “proper” location in the subcontinent, with Lithuania moving into Sri 
Lanka.
The most striking displacement is of the People’s Republic of China, 
which finds itself in sole possession of the territorial United States (Alaska, 
evidently, has been added to Uganda). What does this mean? Is it a not so 
subtle prediction that China is now in position to become the world’s larg-
est economy and the dominant superpower of the twenty- first century? Or 
could it be a sly prediction that the US will become like China in a political 

W O R L D  P I C T U R E S  :  1 0 7
sense, a “one- party democracy” in which the Republican party abolishes 
all opposition?17 What does it mean that the United States seems to have 
been dispersed over what looks like the outlying islands of the Philippines, 
an archipelago that housed its former colony? And what are we to make of 
a world where oceans are traversed by sailing ships, tanks, and jet fighters, 
while carefree divers launch themselves into the South Atlantic from the 
coast of what was once Brazil but is now the Netherlands? Like all marvel-
ous works of art, Hung Hao’s New Political World is capable of generating 
an infinity of propositions and questions. And like all provocative world 
pictures, it produces a vortex of displacements and reorientations, drawing 
the beholder into a vertiginous reassessment of just what this world is, or 
is becoming.
17. This was written in August of 2006, just before the elections that drove the 
Republican Party from power. As I make final revisions in late 2014, when the 
Republicans have taken firm control of both the Supreme Court and Congress, it 
once again looks like an all too possible future.


PART TWO Grounds

9.1 Ferdinand de 
Saussure, “Lin-
guistic Sign,” from 
Cours de linguistique 
générale (1916).

9: MEDIA AESTHETICS
For those of us who like to think with our ears (as Adorno once put it), 
the phrase “media aesthetics” has a slightly jarring quality.1 It is not just 
the awkward conjunction of Latin and Greek; it is the forcing together 
of modern and ancient concepts, one term associated with mass society 
and information theory, while the other evokes the world of elite taste 
and fine art. As McLuhan would have put it, medium implies “message,” 
while aesthetics is about the massage of the body, its extensions, and its 
senses. Of course McLuhan went on to write and design a graphically ex-
perimental book entitled The Medium Is the Massage.2 He was not bothered 
by the shocking little pun; in fact puns, with their foregrounding of the 
nonsensical and hypersensuous character of speech itself, may well have 
been his favorite figure of speech. Aesthetics, the study of the senses and 
the arts that massage them, constituted the central hub around which 
issues such as communication, technology, and social forms circulated 
in his unified field theory of media. He thought that the only people who 
could really comprehend the impact of a new medium would be artists 
who were willing to play with and upon its sensory capabilities— to think 
with their ears, their fingers and toes. Those concerned primarily with 
content or messages, by contrast, would never be able to see (or hear or 
feel) how the medium was altering the ratio of their senses. And feeling, 
for McLuhan, was never merely a matter of sensuous apprehension, but 
rather of emotional and affective comprehension, of a body bathed in hot 
and cool media. Never mind which medium (television, radio, newspapers) 
is labeled hot or cool: the point is to take the temperature of a medium, 
which is to say the temperature of a body— individual or collective— in a 
world of sensory ratios.
McLuhan’s visionary legacy was, I think, largely forgotten in the de-
1. This was the opening observation of Adorno’s essay, “Cultural Criticism,” and 
of course he was much more emphatic, describing this phrase as a barbarism.
2. The Medium Is the Massage, coauthored and designed with Quentin Fiore (New 
York: Random House, 1967).

1 1 2  :  C H A P T E R  9
cades after his death. McLuhan himself was debunked as a crank who 
had been seduced into nonsensical proclamations by his rise as a media 
celebrity who could upstage the likes of Truman Capote on the Dick Cavett 
show. Filmmaker David Cronenberg, who had been in McLuhan’s classes 
at the University of Toronto, pronounced the epitaph for the father of me-
dia studies in his classic horror film Videodrome. The great media theorist, 
Dr. Brian Oblivion, a transparent caricature of McLuhan, is portrayed as 
the only person in the world who truly understands what media are doing 
to the human sensorium (“the television screen has become the retina 
of the mind’s eye; therefore, television is reality, and reality is less than 
television”). Dr. Oblivion is therefore singled out by the evil Videodrome 
corporation as “its first victim.”
After McLuhan, media studies were quickly balkanized into academic 
specialties that had little awareness of or interest in each other. Schools of 
communication, ruled by quantitative sociological discourse, paradigms 
of mass media advertising and journalism, and technical gadgetry did 
not talk to departments of art history; art history turned its back on phil-
osophical aesthetics in favor of historicism, and only grudgingly came to 
acknowledge its constitutive relation to language and literature; and lit-
erary studies, driven to distraction by overly literal readings of Derridean 
sayings such as “there is nothing outside the text,” settled into a linguis-
tically centered semiotics that began to rival Renaissance rhetoric in its 
proliferation of technical terms and distinctions. Meanwhile, McLuhan 
was eclipsed by the rising star of Walter Benjamin, whose concept of “me-
chanical reproduction”3 took over the humanities at precisely the moment 
that mechanistic paradigms were being replaced (as McLuhan foresaw) 
by electronic and biocybernetic models. One could say of media studies 
in the wake of McLuhan what the evil prison warden says of the stubborn 
inmate played by Paul Newman in Cool Hand Luke: “What we have here is 
a failure to communicate.”
A new synthesis in media studies seemed to be offered, however, in 
the 1990s by the appearance of Friedrich Kittler’s magnum opus, Grama-
phone Film Typewriter, a lively, experimental collage of stories, jokes, songs, 
and gadgets, woven into a dark narrative of the end of humanity and the 
3. I am aware, of course, that this translation of Benjamin’s concept has sub-
sequently been revised as “technical,” not “mechanical,” reproduction. Never-
theless, it was the metaphorics of mechanism that dominated discussions of 
Benjamin and media in the 1970s and 1980s.

M E D I A  A E S T H E T I C S  :  1 1 3
rise of the computer.4 Kittler offered media theory as Gothic romance, a 
tale of media history driven by war, “the mother of invention,” of “situa-
tion rooms” in which Dr. Strangeloves ponder the calculus of destruction 
and McLuhan’s sensory ratios are wired up to keyboard interfaces, head-
phones, and optical scanners.
Kittler’s brilliant intervention in media studies had the effect of open-
ing up a whole new media archaeology for historical investigation. It re-
oriented attention to computer software and hardware, and (to a lesser ex-
tent) to the new networks of interactive machines. Arriving along with the 
rise of the Internet, it provoked a wave of studies in so- called new media 
(led by Peter Lunenfeld and Lev Manovich, among others) that announced 
a “digital turn” in which the old analog- based “mechanical” media (es-
pecially photography and cinema) were to be replaced by binary codes, 
data bases, and self- executing algorithms. Reality, especially the kind de-
livered by analog photography with its supposedly “indexical” relation to 
the referent, along with notions of representation and mimesis, were all 
to be consigned to the dustbin of history.5 As Kittler put it, the sensory 
outputs provided by computers were to be regarded merely as “eyewash” 
and “entertainment” for the stunned survivors of humanity, something 
to keep them distracted “in the meantime” as they approach their final 
replacement by the machines they had built.
While this story, popularized by films like The Matrix and Johnny Mne-
monic, was beguiling, one can see immediately how it tended to minimize 
the question of aesthetics as a merely superficial matter that conceals the 
Real (understood in the Lacanian sense as trauma) of ones and zeros, of 
alphanumeric code. The return of something called “media aesthetics” to 
our attention, might be understood, then, as a refocusing on the superfi-
cial “eyewash” that was so central to McLuhan’s vision of media. One could 
already see this return coming in the key moment of The Matrix, when 
Neo (“the One” sent to save us from the Matrix) sees through the eyewash 
into the Real world of streaming alphanumeric code. As the still from this 
4. Kittler’s book was first published in German (Berlin: Brinkman and Bose, 1986). 
The English translation, with an excellent introduction by Geoffrey Winthrop- 
Young, was published by Stanford University Press in 1999.
5. For an argument that digital photography has lost the indexical relation with 
the real offered by chemical- based photography, see William J. Mitchell (no rela-
tion), The Reconfigured Eye: Visual Truth in the Post- Photographic Era (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1992). For a critique of this view, see chapter 5, “Realism and the 
Digital Image.”

1 1 4  :  C H A P T E R  9
moment reveals, however, this revelation is simultaneously a return to the 
analog. The agents of the Matrix are not merely programs or amorphous 
clusters of digits: they have recognizable human forms.
The digital turn will never be properly understood if it is not placed in 
a dialectic with the analog, and with what Brian Massumi has called “the 
superiority of the analog.”6 The digital is not an invention of the twentieth 
century, nor is it equivalent to computer codes. The digital has always been 
with us in the form of finite sets of discrete characters (e.g., alphabets 
and number systems) and in the graphic media, in everything from the 
Ben- Day dots of newspaper photos, to the medium of mosaic tile, to the 
granular and material equivalent of pixels in Australian sand painting. 
Eyewashing and brainwashing, sensory feeling and thought, have to be 
understood in their mutual interactivity. Every turn toward new media is 
simultaneously a turn toward a new form of immediacy. The obscure, un-
readable ciphers of code are most often mobilized, not to encrypt a secret, 
but to produce a new form of transparency.
Another problem with Kittler’s narrative is launched in the opening 
sentence of his book: “Media determine our situation.” This is followed 
by a detour into the “situation room” of the German high command in 
World War II, plotting the trajectories of air strikes in the Battle of Britain. 
When Mark Hansen and I were writing the introduction to Critical Terms 
for Media Studies, we immediately thought of using Kittler’s sentence as 
the opening epigraph.7 But our first second thought was to introduce a 
strategic revision, to insist that “media are our situation.” The implicit aim 
of this revision was to put into question the seductive rhetoric of media 
as outside agencies that cause things, the language of determinism and 
determination. Are media really the “determining instance” of a situation? 
Or are they better pictured as themselves the situation, the environment 
within which human experience and (inter)action take place? Would it not 
be better to see media, rather than as the determining factor in a cause- 
and- effect scenario, as an ecosystem in which processes may or may not 
take place? Like the old notion of God as the element “in which we live 
and move and have our being,” media surround us on every side. But it is 
a “we” that inhabits them, a “we” that experiences every medium as the 
vehicle of some form of immediacy or opacity.
6. See the chapter with this title in Massumi’s Parables for the Virtual: Movement, 
Affect, Sensation (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002).
7. Critical Terms for Media Studies, ed. W. J. T. Mitchell and Mark B. N. Hansen 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010).

M E D I A  A E S T H E T I C S  :  1 1 5
I would want to qualify the notion of medium- as- situation or environ-
ment even further by suggesting that it is never all of a situation. One 
of the deepest temptations of the concept of media is its tendency to-
ward totalization. Even the old model of media as communication device 
had this as a built- in tendency. Like an accordion, the model of sender- 
medium- receiver (call this the “telephonic” image) immediately expands 
to include the sender/receiver function as components of the medium.8 
Pretty soon everything is a medium, the old Derridean mantra comes back 
to haunt us, and there is nothing outside the media. I would prefer to say 
that there is always something outside the medium, namely, the zone of 
immediacy and the unmediated that it both produces and encounters. 
McLuhan, again, was a wise guide to this aspect of media, noting that the 
new media of his time, television especially, were arriving in a wide variety 
of cultural, political, and social situations. Television in Africa, he noted, 
did not produce or encounter the same situation that it did in the United 
States in the 1960s (for one thing, collective viewing situations were much 
more common, as distinct from the private domestic sphere of American 
households). Today the Internet encounters quite a different set of circum-
stances as it crosses national borders, at the same time that it facilitates 
McLuhan’s long anticipated “global village.” What people failed to under-
stand in McLuhan’s time (and our own) is that a village is not necessarily 
a utopia. Real villages, as those of us who grew up in rural America can 
testify, can be very nasty places.
Media aesthetics, then, promises to provide a salutary resistance to 
the all- or- nothing tendencies of media theory, and of that form of media 
history that treats everything as a consequence of some media invention. 
My version of media aesthetics would not treat the widely heralded “digital 
turn,” for instance, as a jettisoning of the analog, or a reduction to demate-
rialized and disembodied experiences. The digital is experienced in the ten 
fingers tapping on a QWERTY keyboard interface and moving a mouse, or 
brushing across a touch- pad or touch- screen. The computer introduces a 
new form of tactility, accompanied by new maladies such as carpal tunnel 
syndrome. The codes and algorithms of informatics are also encoded in 
the molecular structure of living organisms, so that the cybernetic model 
of “control” and the figure of the cyber as “steersman” is resisted by the 
stormy seas of life itself. The technical revolution of our time is not merely 
8. For a further account of the accordion effect in media theory, see my chapter 
“Addressing Media,” in What Do Pictures Want? The Lives and Loves of Images (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 2005).

1 1 6  :  C H A P T E R  9
cybernetic but biocybernetic, producing a world of machines infected with 
viruses and engineered life- forms tethered to increasingly complex pros-
theses.9 Smart bombs and suicide bombers, drones and clones populate 
our imaginary universe of “extensions of man,” and of highly ambiguous 
models of “agency.” What counts as a “free agent” in the age of biocyber-
netics? Consider, for instance, that one of the dominant espionage nar-
ratives of our time portrays the secret agent as an orphan (James Bond in 
Skyfall) or as an amnesiac who has escaped the control of his agency, as 
in the Jason Bourne films. Or that the Cold War figure of the brainwashed 
automaton deployed as an assassin (Laurence Harvey in the Manchurian 
Candidate), has been replaced in the war on terror by the religious convert 
motivated by moral outrage and true blue patriotism (Sergeant Brody’s sui-
cide video, in Homeland, shows him affirming his identity as a US Marine, 
festooned with all his decorations). Homeland transfers the position of 
madness to the prescient, Cassandra- like CIA agent, whose bipolar para-
noia and mania allow her to see impending threats that are invisible to 
everyone else. She is herself a medium, in the old sense of the seer at a 
séance, in the grip of intuitions that she cannot prove but that hold her 
with obsessive certainty.
The model of the free agent versus the agent of a higher power, free 
will versus determinism, shimmers with ambiguity in the environment of 
contemporary media systems, which is why it is so difficult to settle the 
question of whether (to re- cite Kittler) “media determine our situation,” 
or whether media serve as a passive, neutral background of potentials, as 
Nicklas Luhmann would argue.10 But perhaps contemporary media, the 
“extended sensorium” or global nervous system that McLuhan predicted, 
is simply the latest version of that image of the divinity in which “we live 
and move.” Perhaps that is why the rhetoric of religion is so deeply wo-
ven into the discourse on media, why concepts like media and mediation 
so easily turn into god- terms even in secular, technical contexts, why the 
concrete materiality of a medium is so easily abstracted and spiritualized 
by the terminology of media and mediation.
Media aesthetics, finally, produces an interesting convergence of the 
problem of singularity and multiplicity. We see this in everyday parlance 
in our tendency to describe “the media” as if they were a kind of collective 
9. For further development of this idea, see my chapter, “The Work of Art in the 
Age of Biocybernetics,” in What Do Pictures Want?
10. See Luhmann, “Medium and Form,” in Art as a Social System, trans. Eva M. 
Knodt (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2000).

M E D I A  A E S T H E T I C S  :  1 1 7
body, like Hobbes’s image of the sovereign as a single monstrous body con-
taining multitudes. In mass media, the figures of “talking heads” speak as 
agents of radically heterogeneous interests— corporate sponsors, adminis-
trative hierarchies, journalistic canons, market shares. All this condenses 
into something called “the media,” or (more prejudicially) the “Liberal 
Media.” Meanwhile, each medium is spoken of as if it were a unique, 
essential constellation of materials, techniques, and practices— its “me-
dium specificity.” This singular concept of the medium, a central feature of 
modernist aesthetics from Clement Greenberg to Michael Fried, is widely 
regarded now as a relic of the time when media aesthetics was a quest for 
purity— pure painting, music, poetry— and a rigorous avoidance of hy-
bridity and multimedia interplay among the arts. “What lies between the 
arts is theater,” insisted Fried,11 and that sort of theatricality is the enemy 
of any art form that aims to remain faithful to and compete with the great 
aesthetic achievements of the past. Postmodernism in the arts, then, was 
a movement that renounced the medium as a singular, essential forma-
tion in favor of the media understood precisely as the spaces between the 
arts, and as artistic practices that situated themselves between images and 
words and music, between concepts and performances, between bodies 
and spaces. That is why postmodernism was so deeply linked to the rise of 
interdisciplinarity, the emergence of new relations between the disciplines 
that study the arts and sciences. All the more paradoxical, then, that media 
studies itself was so balkanized, with so little communication between the 
study of mass media, artistic media, and technology. When Mark Hansen 
and I set out to produce Critical Terms for Media Studies, then, one of our 
central aims was to produce a conversation among the different disciplines 
that engage with media. We wanted to imagine a universe where Noam 
Chomsky’s Manufacturing Consent would be read alongside Paul Starr’s 
The Creation of the Media alongside Adorno and Horkheimer on the cul-
ture industry alongside David Graeber’s analysis of the history of money 
and exchange alongside Rosalind Krauss’s account of the “post- medium” 
condition in the arts.12 Media aesthetics would be, we hoped, a catalyst 
for that conversation.
The concept of media aesthetics has a personal resonance for me as a 
landmark in my evolution as a scholar. In the early 1990s I began to teach 
11. Fried, “Art and Objecthood,” first published in ArtForum, 1967. Reprinted 
along with other essays and reviews in Art and Objecthood (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1998).
12. See Graeber, “Exchange,” in Mitchell and Hansen, Critical Terms for Media 
Studies.

1 1 8  :  C H A P T E R  9
a course entitled “Visual Culture” and to write about this nascent field as 
a kind of “indiscipline” that would link art history to film, media studies, 
physical and psychological optics, and anthropology. Starting with a re-
view essay entitled “The Pictorial Turn” (prompted by the appearance of 
Jonathan Crary’s Techniques of the Observer at the same time as the first 
English publication of Erwin Panofsky’s classic “Perspective as Symbolic 
Form”) I found myself working directly against the tendency to “linguis-
tify” art history led by Norman Bryson and Mieke Bal in the 1980s.13 As an 
alternative to Richard Rorty’s “linguistic turn,” I turned in exactly the op-
posite direction, by way of a rereading of philosophy and theory grounded 
in an obsession with— and fear of— the image. My ambition for art history 
was to promote its primary theoretical object, the visual image, from its 
status as a secondary and subordinate element of culture, always to be 
explained by reference to language, into a primary datum of the human 
sciences. Rather than colonize art history with methods derived from the 
textual disciplines, I wanted to strike back at the empire of language, to in-
sist on the image or icon as a “firstness” (as Charles Sanders Peirce called 
it) in the production of meaning and emotion.
Around 2000 I began to reorient this initiative around the concepts of 
media, medium, and mediation, and to teach a course entitled “Theories 
of Media” that aimed to trace the specific development of media studies 
from Marshall McLuhan to Friedrich Kittler, with ample representation of 
earlier key texts on media, from Aristotle and Plato to Walter Benjamin and 
the Frankfurt School. Several things motivated this transition. First, it had 
become increasingly clear to me that the emphasis on vision and visuality 
(which I still find very productive for the study of culture) needed to be 
extended with a consideration of the other senses, particularly hearing 
and touch. Second, it had struck me that the role of visual culture all along 
had been to produce a series of mediations among disciplines that would 
ordinarily not be talking to each other. Since I had come to the study of 
the visual arts from the sphere of literature and literary theory, spurred, 
on the one hand, by a general interest in theory and, on the other, by a 
particular interest in the composite art of painter- poet William Blake, it 
began to be increasingly obvious to me that the real subject of my work 
13. Crary, Techniques of the Observer: On Vision and Modernity in the Nineteenth Cen-
tury (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990); Panofsky’s, Perspective as Symbolic Form 
was published by Zone Books in 1991 in an excellent translation by Christopher S. 
Wood. My review essay, “The Pictorial Turn,” appeared in Artforum in March 1992. 
For my discussion of visual culture as an indiscipline, see “Interdisciplinarity and 
Visual Culture,” Art Bulletin 77, no. 4 (December 1995): 540– 44.

M E D I A  A E S T H E T I C S  :  1 1 9
was the relations among different media, art forms, sensory modalities, 
and codes of signification, as well as the disciplines that addressed them.
As for theory as such, I was mindful of Fredric Jameson’s canny remark 
that theory is nothing more than a form of philosophy that is conscious 
of its own embeddness in language, including rhetoric and poetics. But 
it quickly dawned on me that one could extend Jameson’s observation 
by postulating a notion of medium theory, a form of philosophical reflec-
tion that is conscious of its embeddness in nonlinguistic media, such 
as music and the graphic arts. Medium theory is not the same as media 
theory. It does not come at media from outside, as an explanatory meta-
language. It is an immanent metalanguage— or more to the point— a set 
of “metapictures” that show us what pictures are, how they work, what 
they want. Instead of a “theory of pictures,” medium theory requires a 
picture theory,14 in which “picture” is ambiguously both an adjective and  
a verb.
It became clear to a group of my colleagues at the University of Chicago 
that media, understood in this sort of interdisciplinary framework, were 
essential to the fabric of a liberal education as well. As a result, around 
2005 we set about designing a new “common core” curriculum based pre-
cisely in the concept of media aesthetics. The idea of a common core of 
“great books” has been a fixture of undergraduate education at Chicago for 
many years, one that has been modified periodically to reflect new move-
ments in the humanities. For instance, during the rise of cultural studies 
in the 1990s, a new freshman core called “Reading Cultures,” developed 
by a group of young faculty members, specified as thematic emphases for 
the three terms of the academic year “Travel, Collecting, and Capitalist 
Cultures.” “Media Aesthetics” emerged in a similar way, as a collaboration 
among literary scholars, art historians, film scholars, philosophers, and 
musicologists. The thematic triad for the freshman year was now “Image/
Sound/Text,” the fall term focusing on visual culture, the winter on music 
and orality, and the spring on reading and textuality.
Needless to say, every term involved reading, listening, and looking. 
It is probably also needless to say that there was something deeply inev-
itable about the specific triangulation of media aesthetics that emerged, 
that it was not merely an artifact of Chicago’s three- term quarter system. 
One hears immediately the echo of Roland Barthes’s classic Image/Music/
Text, with “music” demoted to the status of a medium (sound) rather than 
14. See my Picture Theory: Essays on Verbal and Visual Representation (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1994), especially the chapter “Metapictures.”

1 2 0  :  C H A P T E R  9
an art form, putting it at the same level with images and words. But the 
logic of this triad goes deeper: it also echoes Kittler’s Gramaphone Film 
Typewriter— which divides the new technical media of the late nineteenth 
century into sound recording, optical recording, and the tactile/textual 
keyboard interface for the recording of writing— and even more deeply, 
perhaps, Aristotle’s division of the “means” or “media” of drama into the 
elements of melos (music), opsis (spectacle), and lexis (words).
There is something deeply conservative, then, about the logical di-
visions generated by media aesthetics. Instead of an endlessly prolifer-
ating list of “new media” accompanied by a breathless (and presentist) 
enumeration of all the new sensations offered by the new gadgets, we 
find a continual process of remediation of older forms. The great orders 
of aesthetics, classically represented in painting, poetry, and music, per-
sist even in the most hypermediated digital worlds: videogames consist 
of spectacular visual images, sound effects, and verbal elements such as 
speech and writing. The proportions of these elements of media aesthetics 
may vary, but their necessary co- presence does not. For media to change 
fundamentally, to move outside these persistent aesthetic registers, would 
require a radical transformation in the sensuous universe that we inhabit. 
We would have to become creatures with an entirely different kind of sen-
sorium, blind, deaf, and mute or illiterate, but capable of communicating 
in other modalities— perhaps by means of heat impulses (a variation of 
McLuhan’s hot and cool media?) and ultraviolet rays. Even the most exotic 
aliens in the wildest science fiction fantasies, however, seem to use media 
remarkably similar to our own. The ferocious mother of the Aliens saga 
recognizes that she shares DNA with Ripley (Sigourney Weaver) by means 
of her sense of smell.
We would also have to be creatures with entirely different ways of 
making meaning and feeling emotion. The image/sound/text triad is not 
only grounded in fundamental sensory/aesthetic modalities but in basic 
semiotic and psychological registers. Consider, for instance, that Kittler 
grounds his gramophone/film/typewriter triad in the Lacanian registers 
of the Real, Imaginary, and Symbolic. The Imaginary and Symbolic are, 
of course, the domains of the visual and verbal media: the phenomena of 
the mirror stage and the scopic (seeing/showing) drive, on the one hand, 
and the law of the Symbolic, the “non/nom” of the father and the vocative 
(hearing/speaking) drive on the other. But why should music be associated 
with the Real? Is it because, like the Real, it is the least articulate and repre-
sentational of the arts, expressing a longing for meaning that can never be 

M E D I A  A E S T H E T I C S  :  1 2 1
fully satisfied?15 Or does it have to do, as Kittler argues, with the physiology 
of the ear and the physics of sound recording as a direct physical trace or 
index, an automatic writing in which the stylus traces sense and nonsense, 
music, speech, and noise with the same slavish fidelity.
Kittler’s emphasis on the indexical quality of sound recording leads us 
inevitably into the great triad of semiotics mapped out by Charles Sanders 
Peirce: icon, index, and symbol.16 Here the sensory and aesthetic modal-
ities have been replaced by relations of signification and the production 
of meaning. Thus, the icon is not restricted to the sphere of visual imag-
ery but covers all sign- functions of likeness, similitude, resemblance, and 
analogy. So a metaphor, a simile, or an algebraic expression of equivalence 
or congruence can be an icon as well as a picture. The index includes the 
physical trace, the sign by cause and effect, like tracks in the snow, but it 
also circulates in the domain of language in the form of deixis, signs by 
pointing that depend upon the “existential context” of the utterance. Thus, 
the temporal indices “now” and “then,” and the spatial indices “here” 
and “there,” join the demonstrative pronouns “this” and “that” and the 
personal pronouns “I” and “you” as shifters whose meaning depends on 
who is speaking to whom at what time and place. The verbal index, like 
the physical trace, the wound inflicted on the body, is the closest that 
language comes to the Real. Peirce’s symbol, by contrast, is an artificial, 
arbitrary, and conventional sign. Like the signifier in Saussure’s linguis-
tics, it has no basis of resemblance to what it stands for (the word “tree” 
does not resemble a tree in any respect). It is what Peirce calls a “legisign,” 
a sign produced by a law or code, and thus a premonition of the Lacanian 
Symbolic as Law.
A Peircean reading of Saussure’s famous diagram of the linguistic sign, 
then, would reveal that language itself is a mixed medium, constructed 
out of the three elements of all possible signs. The signifier is a symbol, 
the word tree; the signified is an icon, the picture of a tree; and the entire 
structure is held together by a system of indices, including the arrows that 
15. This is the basic claim of Michael Steinberg’s marvelous essay “Music and 
Melancholy,” Critical Inquiry 40, no. 2 (Winter 2014): 288– 310.
16. Peirce, “Icon, Index, and Symbol,” in Philosophical Writings of Peirce, ed. Jus-
tus Buchler (New York: Dover Publications, 1955). Peirce’s famous remark that a 
photograph is both an index and an icon, since it is a sign by cause and effect as 
well as a sign by resemblance to what it represents, has been cited ad nauseum as 
his most important contribution to aesthetics. It is arguably his least important 
contribution.

1 2 2  :  C H A P T E R  9
indicate the circuit of meaning between the symbolic signifier and the 
mental image or signified, and the bar between them.
Media aesthetics, then, may have the potential to reveal a trans historical 
structure that is congruent with the insights of media semiotics, not to 
mention Aristotle’s Poetics, Lacan’s psychic registers, and Kittler’s techni-
cal media. It has not escaped my notice, as I type these words on my com-
puter, that the interface in front of me consists of words and typographic 
symbols, visual images and icons, and an ever- elusive pointer (the index) 
that shows me where I am located in the text. None of this would have 
surprised David Hume, who codified the fundamental laws of the asso-
ciation of ideas in terms of resemblance, cause and effect, and arbitrary 
connectedness. Or the philosopher Nelson Goodman, who rigorously re-
stricted himself to a description of notational systems in his Languages of 
Art, and came up with the alliterative triad “Score, Script, and Sketch.”17 
We return, then, to the table introduced in chapter 4 (“Image X Text”), 
now understood as a way of showing at a glance the triangulation of me-
dia aesthetics, semiotics, and psychology. Of course I recognize that these 
terms have their life in radically different systems of thought, articulated 
by thinkers who could not be more different in their ambitions. For me, 
the strong elements are the horizontal rows laying out the basic elements 
of these systems. The weak elements are the columns, each of which would 
require much more thorough argumentation to stand up as the supports 
of a theoretical architecture.
I recognize that the claim to have uncovered a transcendental schema 
underlying media aesthetics will be deeply unpopular in an age when we 
are admonished to “always historicize” and to respect the diversity, par-
ticularity, and specificity of cultures. I confess that I have never under-
17. Goodman, Languages of Art (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1976).
Aristotle
opsis
melos
lexis
Barthes
image
music
text
Lacan
Imaginary
Real
Symbolic
Kittler
film
gramophone
typewriter
Goodman
sketch
score
script
Peirce
icon
index
symbol
Foucault
seeable
[X]
sayable
Hume
similarity
cause and effect
convention
Saussure
(signified)
bar
arbor
(signifier)

M E D I A  A E S T H E T I C S  :  1 2 3
stood this fetishization of historical particularity and that, as a theorist, 
my deliberately perverse advice is “always anachronize.” We cannot see 
or sort particulars, in media or anything else, without generalities and 
universals. We cannot analyze mixtures and hybrid formations without 
an understanding of the elements that go into them. And we cannot his-
toricize, much less respect cultural diversity, or the multiplicity of media 
aesthetics, without some framework of differentiation and comparison, 
some way of thinking the relation of now and then, here and there. If you 
find this degree of systematic schematization toxic, consider it nothing 
more than a McLuhanesque “probe.”

10.1 René Descartes, engraving from Optics (seventeenth century). Photo-
graph: Special Collections Research Center, University of Chicago Library.

10: THERE ARE NO VISUAL MEDIA
“Visual media” is a colloquial expression used to designate things like 
TV, movies, photography, painting, and so on. But it is highly inexact and 
misleading. All the so- called visual media turn out, on closer inspection, 
to involve the other senses (especially touch and hearing). All media are, 
from the standpoint of sensory modality, “mixed media.” The obviousness 
of this raises two questions: (1) Why do we persist in talking about some 
media as if they were exclusively visual? Is this just a shorthand for talking 
about visual predominance? And if so, what does “predominance” mean? 
Is it a quantitative issue (more visual information than aural or tactile)? 
Or a question of qualitative perception, the sense of things reported by a 
beholder, audience, viewer/listener? (2) Why does it matter what we call 
“visual media”? Why should we care about straightening out this confu-
sion? What is at stake?
First, let me belabor the obvious. Can it really be the case that there are 
no visual media despite our incorrigible habit of talking as if there were? 
My claim can, of course, be refuted with just a single counter example. 
So let me anticipate this move with a roundup of the usual suspects, 
commonly proposed as examples of purely or exclusively visual media. 
Let’s rule out, first, the whole arena of mass media— television, movies, 
radio— as well as performance media (dance, theater). From Aristotle’s 
observation that drama combines the three orders of lexis, melos, and  opsis 
(words, music, and spectacle) to Barthes’ survey of the “image/music/text” 
divisions of the semiotic field, the mixed character of media has been a 
central postulate. Any notion of purity seems out of the question with 
these ancient and modern media, from the standpoint both of the sensory 
and semiotic elements internal to them and of what is external in their 
promiscuous audience composition. And if it is argued that silent film 
was a “purely visual” medium, we need only remind ourselves of a simple 
fact of film history— that the silents were always accompanied by music 
and speech, and the film texts themselves often had written or printed 
words inscribed on them. Subtitles, intertitles, and spoken and musical 
accompaniment made “silent” film anything but.

1 2 6  :  C H A P T E R  1 0
If we are looking for the best case of a purely visual medium, painting 
seems like the obvious candidate. It is, after all, the central, canonical 
medium of art history. And after an early history tainted by literary con-
siderations, we do have a canonical story of purification, in which paint-
ing emancipates itself from language, narrative, allegory, figuration, and 
even the representation of nameable objects in order to explore something 
called “pure painting,” characterized by “pure opticality.” This argument, 
most famously circulated by Clement Greenberg, and sometimes echoed 
by Michael Fried, insists on the purity and specificity of media, rejecting 
hybrid forms, mixed media, and anything that lies “between the arts” as a 
form of “theater” or rhetoric, dooming them to inauthenticity and second- 
rate aesthetic status.1 It is one of the most familiar and threadbare myths 
of modernism, and it is time now to lay it to rest. The fact is that even at its 
purest and most single- mindedly optical, modernist painting was always, 
to echo Tom Wolfe’s phrase, “painted words.”2 The words were not those 
of history painting or poetic landscape or myth or religious allegory, but 
the discourse of theory, of idealist and critical philosophy. This critical 
discourse was just as crucial to the comprehension of modernist painting 
as the Bible or history or the classics were to traditional narrative painting. 
Without the latter, a beholder would be left standing in front of Guido 
Reni’s Beatrice Cenci the Day before Her Execution, in the situation of Mark 
Twain, who noted that an uninstructed viewer who did not know the title 
and the story would have to conclude that this was a picture of a young 
girl with a cold, or young girl about to have a nosebleed. Without the for-
mer, the uninstructed viewer would (and did) see the paintings of Jackson 
Pollock as “nothing but wallpaper.”
Some will object that the “words” that make it possible to appreciate 
and understand painting are not in the painting in the same way that the 
words of Ovid are illustrated in a Claude Lorrain. And you might be right; 
it would be important to distinguish the different ways language enters 
painting. But that is not my aim here. My present task is only to show 
that the painting we have habitually called “purely optical,” exemplifying a 
purely visual use of the medium, is anything but. The question of precisely 
1. Greenberg’s arguments appear in his classic essays “Toward a Newer Laocoon,” 
Partisan Review (1940), and “Avant Garde and Kitsch,” Partisan Review (1939), re-
printed in Clement Greenberg: The Collected Essays and Criticism, ed. John O’Brian, 
2 vols. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986). Fried’s antitheatrical polemic 
first appeared in “Art and Objecthood,” Artforum (June 1967), reprinted in Art and 
Objecthood: Essays and Reviews (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998).
2. Wolfe, The Painted Word (New York: Bantam Books, 1976).

T H E R E  A R E  N O  V I S U A L  M E D I A  :  1 2 7
how language enters into the perception of these pure objects will have to 
wait for another occasion.
Suppose it were the case that language could be absolutely banished 
from painting? I don’t deny that this was a characteristic desire of mod-
ernist painting, symptomatized by the ritualistic refusal of titles for pic-
tures, the enigmatic challenge of the “untitled” to the viewer. Suppose for 
a moment that the viewer could look without verbalizing, could see with-
out (even silently, internally) subvocalizing associations, judgments, and 
observations. What would be left? Well, one thing that would obviously 
be left is the observation that a painting is a handmade object, one of the 
crucial things that differentiates it from, say, the medium of photography, 
where the look of mechanical production is often foregrounded. (I leave 
aside for the moment the fact that a painter can do an excellent job of 
imitating the machinic look of a glossy photo and that a photographer 
with the right techniques can, similarly, imitate the painterly surface and 
sfumato of a painter). But what is the perception of the painting as hand-
made if not a recognition that a nonvisual sense is encoded, manifested, 
and indicated in every detail of its material existence? (Robert Morris’s 
Blind Time Drawings, drawn by hand with powdered graphite on paper, 
according to rigorous procedures of temporal and spatial targeting that 
are duly recorded in hand- inscribed texts on the lower margin, would be 
powerful cases for reflection on the quite literally nonvisual character of 
drawing). The nonvisual sense in play is, of course, the sense of touch, 
which is foregrounded in some kinds of painting (when “handling,” im-
pasto, and the materiality of the paint is emphasized) and backgrounded 
in others (when a smooth surface and clear, transparent forms produce 
the miraculous effect of rendering the painter’s manual activity invisible). 
Either way, the beholder who knows nothing about the theory behind the 
painting, or the story or the allegory, need only understand that this is a 
painting, a handmade object, to understand that it is a trace of manual 
production, that everything one sees is the trace of a brush or a hand 
touching a canvas. Seeing painting is seeing touching, seeing the hand 
gestures of the artist, which is why we are so rigorously prohibited from 
touching the canvas ourselves.
This argument is not, by the way, intended to consign the notion of pure 
opticality to the dustbin of history. The point is, rather, to assess what its 
historical role in fact was, and why the purely visual character of modernist 
painting was elevated to the status of a fetish concept, despite abundant 
evidence that it was a myth. What was the purification of the visual me-
dium all about? What form of contamination was being attacked? In the 

1 2 8  :  C H A P T E R  1 0
name of what form of sensory hygiene and (as Jacques Rancière would put 
it) “redistribution of the sensible”?3
The other media that occupy the attention of art history seem even 
less likely to sustain a case for pure opticality. Architecture, the impurest 
medium of all, incorporates all the other arts in a gesamstkunstwerk, and 
it is typically not even “looked at” with any concentrated attention, but 
rather perceived, as Walter Benjamin noted, in a state of distraction.4 Ar-
chitecture is not primarily about seeing but about dwelling and inhabiting. 
Sculpture is so clearly an art of the tactile that it seems superfluous to 
argue about it. This is the one so- called visual medium, in fact, that has a 
kind of direct accessibility to the blind. Photography, the latecomer to art 
history’s media repertoire, is typically so riddled with language, as theo-
rists from Barthes to Victor Burgin have shown, that it is hard to imagine 
what it would mean to call it a purely visual medium. Its specific role in 
what Joel Snyder has called “picturing the invisible”— showing us what 
we do not or cannot see with the “naked eye” (rapid body motions, the 
behavior of matter, the ordinary and everyday) makes it difficult to think 
of it as a visual medium in any straightforward sense.5 Photography of this 
sort might be better understood as a device for translating the unseen or 
unseeable into something that looks like a picture of something we could 
see if we had incredibly keen eyesight or different habits of attention.
From the standpoint of art history in the wake of postmodernism, it 
seems clear that the last half century has decisively undermined any no-
tion of purely visual art. Installations, mixed media, performance art, con-
ceptual art, site specific art, minimalism, and the often- remarked return 
to pictorial representation have rendered the notion of pure opticality a 
mirage that is retreating in the rear- view mirror. For art historians today, 
the safest conclusion would be that the notion of a purely visual work of 
art was a temporary anomaly, a deviation from the much more durable 
tradition of mixed and hybrid media.
Of course this argument can go so far that it seems to defeat itself. How, 
you will object, can there be any mixed media or multimedia productions 
3. Rancière, “The Distribution of the Sensible,” in The Future of the Image (New 
York: Verso, 2009); Caroline Jones, Eyesight Alone: Clement Greenberg and the Bu-
reaucratization of the Senses (University of Chicago Press, 2008).
4. “Architecture has always offered the prototype of an artwork that is received 
in a state of distraction.” “The Work of Art in the Age of Its Reproducibility,” 
in Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
2002), 3:119.
5. Snyder, “Picturing Vision,” Critical Inquiry 6, no. 3 (Spring 1980): 499– 526.

T H E R E  A R E  N O  V I S U A L  M E D I A  :  1 2 9
unless there are elemental, pure, distinct media out there to go into the 
mix? If all media are always and already mixed media, then the notion 
of mixed media is emptied of importance, since it would not distinguish 
any specific mixture from any purely elemental instance. Here, I think, we 
must take hold of the conundrum from both ends and recognize that one 
corollary of the claim that “there are no visual media” is that all media are 
mixed media. That is, the very notion of a medium and of mediation already 
entails some mixture of sensory, perceptual, and semiotic elements. There 
are no purely auditory, tactile, or olfactory media either. This conclusion 
does not lead, however, to the impossibility of distinguishing one medium 
from another. What it makes possible is a more precise differentiation 
of mixtures. If all media are mixed media, they are not all mixed in the 
same way, with the same proportions of elements. A medium, as Raymond 
Williams puts it, is a “material social practice,” not a specifiable essence 
dictated by some elemental materiality (paint, stone, metal) or by tech-
nique or technology.6 Materials and technologies go into a medium, but 
so do skills, habits, social spaces, institutions, and markets. The notion 
of “medium specificity,” then, is never derived from a singular, elemental 
essence: it is more like the specificity (and plural singularity) associated 
with recipes in cooking: many ingredients, combined in a specific order 
in specific proportions, mixed in particular ways, and cooked at specific 
temperatures for a specific amount of time. One can, in short, affirm that 
there are no “visual media,” that all media are mixed media, without losing 
the concept of medium specificity.7
With regard to the senses and media, Marshall McLuhan glimpsed this 
point long ago when he posited different “sensory ratios” for different me-
dia.8 As a shorthand, McLuhan was happy to use terms like “visual” and 
“tactile” media, but his surprising claim (which has been mostly forgotten 
or ignored) was that television (usually taken to be the paradigmatically 
visual medium) is actually a tactile medium: “The TV image . . . is an exten-
sion of touch” (334), in contrast to the printed word, which in McLuhan’s 
view, was the closest any medium has come to isolating the visual sense. 
McLuhan’s larger point, however, was definitely not to remain content with 
6. Williams, “From Medium to Social Practice,” in Marxism and Literature (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1977), 158– 64.
7. Rosalind Krauss comes close to this account when she describes a medium as 
a “self- differentiating” entity in “The Post- Medium Condition.” Krauss, Voyage 
on the North Sea: Art in the Age of the Post- Medium Condition (New York: Thames 
and Hudson, 2000), 53.
8. Understanding Media (1964; Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994), 18.

1 3 0  :  C H A P T E R  1 0
identifying specific media with isolated, reified sensory channels, but to 
assess the specific mixtures of specific media. He may call the media “ex-
tensions” of the sensorium, but it is important to remember that he also 
thought of these extensions as “amputations” and continually stressed 
the dynamic, interactive character of mediated sensuousness. His famous 
claim that electricity was making possible an extension (and amputation) 
of the “sensory nervous system” was really an argument for an extended 
version of the Aristotelian concept of a sensus communis, a coordinated (or 
deranged) “community” of sensation in the individual, extrapolated as the 
condition for a globally extended social community, the “global village.”
The specificity of media, then, is a much more complex issue than rei-
fied sensory labels such as “visual,” “aural,” and “tactile.” It is, rather, a 
question of specific sensory ratios that are embedded in practice, experi-
ence, tradition, and technical inventions. And we also need to be mindful 
that media are not only extensions of the senses, calibrations of sensory 
ratios. They are also symbolic or semiotic operators, complexes of sign- 
functions. If we come at media from the standpoint of sign theory, using 
Peirce’s elementary triad of icon, index, and symbol (signs by resemblance, 
signs by cause and effect or “existential connection,” and conventional 
signs dictated by a rule), then we also find that there is no sign that exists 
in a “pure state,” no pure icon, index, or symbol. Every icon or image takes 
on a symbolic dimension the moment we attach a name to it, an indexical 
component the moment we ask how it was made. Every symbolic expres-
sion, down to the individual letter of the phonetic alphabet, must also 
resemble every other inscription of the same letter sufficiently to allow 
iterability, a repeatable code. The symbolic depends upon the iconic in 
this instance. McLuhan’s notion of media as “sensory ratios” needs to be 
supplemented with a concept of “semiotic ratios,” specific mixtures of 
sign- functions that make a medium what it is. Cinema, then, is not just a 
ratio of sight and sound, but of images and words and of other differen-
tiable parameters such as speech, music, and noise.
The claim that there are no visual media is thus really just the open-
ing gambit in the pursuit of a new concept of media taxonomy, one that 
would leave behind the reified stereotypes of “visual” or “verbal” media 
and produce a much more nuanced, highly differentiated survey of types 
of media. A full consideration of such a taxonomy is beyond the scope 
of this paper, but a few preliminary observations are in order. First, the 
sensory or semiotic elements need much further analysis, both at an em-
pirical or phenomenological level and in terms of their logical relations. 
It will not have escaped the alert reader that two triadic structures have 

T H E R E  A R E  N O  V I S U A L  M E D I A  :  1 3 1
emerged as the primitive elements of media: the first is what Hegel called 
the “theoretic senses”— sight, hearing, and touch— as the primary build-
ing blocks of any sensuous mediation; the second is the Peircean triad of 
sign- functions.9 Whatever sorts of sensory/semiotic “ratios” are deployed 
will be complexes of at least these six variables.
The other issue that would need further analysis is the question of “ra-
tio” itself. What do we mean by a sensory or semiotic ratio? McLuhan never 
really developed this question, but he seems to have meant several things 
by it. First, the notion that there is a relation of dominance/ subordination, 
a kind of literal realization of the “numerator/denominator” relation in 
a mathematical ratio.10 Second, that one sense seems to activate or lead 
to another, most dramatically in the phenomenon of synesthesia, but far 
more pervasively in the way, for instance, that the written word appeals 
directly to the sense of sight but immediately activates audition (in sub-
vocalization) and secondary impressions of spatial extension that may be 
either tactile or visual— or involve other, “subtheoretic” senses such as 
taste and smell. Third, there is the closely related phenomenon I would 
call “nesting,” in which one medium appears inside another as its content 
(television, notoriously, treated as the content of film, as in movies like 
Network, Quiz Show, Bamboozled, and Wag the Dog).
McLuhan’s aphorism, “the content of a medium is always an earlier 
medium,” gestured toward the phenomenon of nesting, but unduly re-
stricted it as a historical sequence.11 In fact, it is entirely possible for a 
later medium (TV) to appear as the content of an earlier one (movies), and 
it is even possible for a purely speculative, futuristic medium, some as yet 
unrealized technical possibility (like teleportation or matter transfer) to 
appear as the content of an earlier medium (I consider David Cronenberg’s 
The Fly the classic example of this fantasy, but the ritual request “Beam 
me up Scottie,” on almost every episode of Star Trek, renders this purely 
imaginary medium almost as familiar as walking through a door). Our 
9. Hegel, Lectures on Fine Art, trans. T.M. Knox 2 vols. (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1998), Vol. 2, 622. Charles Sanders Peirce, “Logic as Semiotic: The Theory of 
Signs,” Philosopohical Writings of Peirce, ed. Justus Buchler (New York: Dover, 1955).
10. The numerator is, of course, the subordinate element in a ratio. It is the de-
nominator that (as the word indicates) names the kind of fraction (thirds, fourths, 
fifths, etc.); the numerator simply tells you how many of those fractional elements 
are to be counted.
11. The most thorough exploration of this aspect of McLuhan’s thought is Jay 
David Bolter and Richard Grusin’s Remediation: Understanding New Media (Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000).

1 3 2  :  C H A P T E R  1 0
principle here should be: any medium may be nested inside another, and 
this includes the moment when a medium is nested inside itself— a form 
of self- reference that I have elsewhere discussed as a “metapicture” and 
that is crucial to theories of enframing in narrative.
Fourth, there is a phenomenon I would call “braiding,” when one sen-
sory channel or semiotic function is woven together with another more or 
less seamlessly, most notably in the cinematic technique of synchronized 
sound. The concept of “suture” that film theorists have employed to de-
scribe the method for stitching together disjunctive shots into a seemingly 
continuous narrative is also at work whenever sound and sight are fused 
in a cinematic presentation. Of course, a braid or suture can be unraveled, 
and a gap or bar can be introduced into a sensory/semiotic ratio, which 
leads us to a fifth possibility: signs and senses moving on parallel tracks 
that never meet but are kept rigorously apart, leaving the reader/viewer/
beholder with the task of “jumping the tracks” and forging connections 
subjectively. Experimental cinema in the 1960s and 1970s explored the de-
synchronization of sound and sight, and literary genres such as ekphrastic 
poetry evoke the visual arts in what we loosely call a “verbal” medium. 
Ekphrasis is a verbal representation of visual representation— typically a 
poetic description of a work of visual art (Homer’s description of Achilles’s 
shield being the canonical example). The crucial rule of ekphrasis, how-
ever, is that the “other” medium, the visual, graphic, or plastic object, is 
never made visible or tangible except by way of the medium of language.12 
One might call ekphrasis a form of nesting without touching or suturing, 
a kind of action- at- distance between two rigorously separated sensory and 
semiotic tracks, one that requires completion in the mind of the reader. 
This is why poetry remains the most subtle, agile master- medium of the 
sensus communis, no matter how many spectacular multimedia inventions 
are devised to assault our collective sensibilities.
If there is any shred of doubt lingering that there are no visual media, 
that this phrase needs to be retired from our vocabulary or completely 
redefined, let me clinch the case with a brief remark on unmediated vision 
itself, the “purely visual” realm of eyesight and seeing the world around us. 
What if it turned out that vision itself was not a visual medium? What if, as 
Gombrich noted long ago, the “innocent eye,” the pure, untutored optical 
organ, was in fact blind.13 This, in fact, is not an idle thought but a firmly 
12. See my “Ekphrasis and the Other,” in Picture Theory (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1994), chapter 5.
13. Gombrich, Art and Illusion (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1956).

T H E R E  A R E  N O  V I S U A L  M E D I A  :  1 3 3
established doctrine in the analysis of the visual process as such. Ancient 
optical theory treated vision as a thoroughly tactile and material process, a 
stream of “visual fire” and phantom eidola flowing back and forth between 
the eye and the object. Descartes famously compared seeing to touching 
in his analogy of the blind man with two walking sticks. (See figure 10.1). 
Vision, he argued, must be understood as simply a more refined, subtle, 
and extended form of touch, as if a blind man had very sensitive walking 
sticks that could reach for miles. Bishop Berkeley’s New Theory of Vision 
argued that vision is not a purely optical process but involves a “visual 
language” requiring the coordination of optical and tactile impressions 
in order to construct a coherent, stable visual field.14 Berkeley’s theory 
was based in the empirical results of cataract operations that revealed the 
inability of blind persons whose sight had been restored after an extended 
period to recognize objects until they had done extensive coordination of 
their visual impressions with touch. These results have been confirmed by 
contemporary neuroscience, most famously by Oliver Sacks’s revisiting of 
the whole question in “To See and Not See,” a study of restored sight that 
exposes just how difficult it is to learn to see after an extended period of 
blindness.15 Natural vision itself is a braiding and nesting of the optical 
and the tactile.
The sensory ratio of vision as such becomes even more complicated 
when it enters into the region of emotion, affect, and intersubjective en-
counters in the visual field— the region of the “gaze” and the scopic drive. 
Here we learn (from Sartre, for instance) that the gaze (as the feeling of 
being seen) is typically activated not by the eye of the other, or by any visual 
object, but by the invisible space (the empty, darkened window) or even 
more emphatically by sound— the creaking board that startles the voyeur, 
the “hey you” that calls to the Althusserean subject.16 Lacan further com-
plicates this issue by rejecting even the Cartesian model of tactility in “The 
Line and the Light,” replacing it with a model of fluids and overflow, one 
in which pictures, for instance, are to be drunk rather than seen, painting 
is likened to the shedding of feathers and the smearing of shit, and the 
principal function of the eye is to overflow with tears, or (in the case of 
“invidia” or the evil eye) to dry up the breasts of a nursing mother.17 There 
14. Berkeley, A New Theory of Vision (Dublin: J. Pepyat, 1709).
15. Sacks, “To See and Not See,” New Yorker, May 10, 1993.
16. Sartre, “The Look,” in Being and Nothingness, trans. Hazel E. Barnes (New York: 
Washington Square Press, 1966).
17. Lacan, in Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis, trans. Alan Sheridan 
(New York: W. W. Norton, 1998).

1 3 4  :  C H A P T E R  1 0
are no purely visual media because there is no such thing as pure visual 
perception, no “eye” that can be completely detached from the sensorium, 
in the first place.
Why does all this matter? Why quibble about an expression, “visual 
media,” that seems to pick out a general class of things in the world, how-
ever imprecisely? Isn’t this like someone objecting to lumping bread, cake, 
and cookies under the rubric of “baked goods.” Actually, no. It’s more 
like someone objecting to putting bread, cake, chicken, a quiche, and a 
cassoulet into the category “baked goods” because they all happen to go 
into the oven. The problem with the phrase “visual media” is that it gives 
the illusion of picking out a class of things about as coherent as “things 
you can put in an oven.” Writing, printing, painting, hand gestures, winks, 
nods, and comic strips are all “visual media,” and this tells us next to noth-
ing about them. So my proposal is to put this phrase into quotation marks 
for a while, to preface it with “so- called,” in order to open it up to fresh 
investigation. And in fact that is exactly what I think the emergent field 
of visual culture has been all about in its best moments. Visual culture 
is the field of study that refuses to take vision for granted, that insists on 
problematizing, theorizing, critiquing, and historicizing the visual process 
as such. It is not merely the hitching of an unexamined concept of “the 
visual” onto an only slightly more reflective notion of culture— that is, vi-
sual culture as the “spectacle” wing of cultural studies. A more important 
feature of visual culture has been the sense in which this topic requires an 
examination of resistances to purely culturalist explanations, to inquiries 
into the nature of visual nature— the sciences of optics, the intricacies of 
visual technology, the hardware and software of seeing.
Some time ago Tom Crow had a good laugh at the expense of visual 
culture by suggesting that it has the same relation to art history as popular 
fads such as New Age healing, “Psychic Studies,” or “Mental Culture” have 
to philosophy.18 Not only does this seem a bit harsh; it also rather inflates 
the pedigree of a relatively young discipline like art history to compare it 
with the ancient lineage of philosophy. But Crow’s remark might have a 
tonic effect, if only to warn visual culture against lapsing into a faddish 
pseuedoscience, or even worse, into a prematurely bureaucratized aca-
demic department complete with letterhead, office space, and a secretary. 
Fortunately, we have plenty of disciplinarians around (Mieke Bal, Nicholas 
Mirzoeff, and Jim Elkins come to mind) who are committed to making 
18. Tom Crow, response to questionnaire on visual culture, October, no. 77 (Sum-
mer 1996), 34– 36.

T H E R E  A R E  N O  V I S U A L  M E D I A  :  1 3 5
things difficult for us, so there is hope that we will not settle into the in-
tellectual equivalent of astrology or alchemy.
The breakup of the concept of “visual media” is surely one way of being 
tougher on ourselves. And it offers a couple of positive benefits. I have 
already suggested that it opens the way to a more nuanced taxonomy of 
media based in sensory and semiotic ratios. But most fundamentally, it 
puts “the visual” at the center of the analytic spotlight rather than treating 
it as foundational concept that can be taken for granted. Among other 
things it encourages us to ask why and how “the visual” became so potent 
as a reified concept. How did it acquire its status as the “sovereign” sense, 
and its equally important role as the universal scapegoat, from the “down-
cast eyes” that Martin Jay has traced, to Debord’s “society of the spectacle,” 
Foucauldian “scopic regimes,” Virilian “surveillance,” and Baudrillardian 
“simulacra.” Like all fetish objects, the eye and the gaze have been both 
over- and underestimated, idolized and demonized. Visual culture at its 
most promising offers a way to get beyond these “scopic wars” into a more 
productive critical space, one in which we would study the intricate braid-
ing and nesting of the visual with the other senses, reopen art history to 
the expanded field of images and visual practices that was the prospect 
envisioned by Warburgean art history, and find something more interest-
ing to do with the offending eye than plucking it out. It is because there 
are no visual media that we need a concept of visual culture.

11.1 Anne- Louis Girodet de Roussy- Trioson, The Origin of Drawing 
(1819). Engraving from Oeuvres posthumes. Photograph: Special 
Collections Research Center, University of Chicago Library.

11: BACK TO THE DRAWING BOARD
Architecture, Sculpture, and the Digital Image
Walter Benjamin remarks at the conclusion of his classic essay “Kunst-
werk” that “architecture has always offered the prototype of a work of art 
that is received in a state of distraction.”1 Count me among that distracted 
collectivity that recognizes, with Benjamin, that architecture’s history “is 
more ancient than that of any other art,” and that it is a “living force” that 
has importance in “every attempt to comprehend the relationship of the 
masses to art,” at the same time that I have to confess a fair amount of 
ignorance about the inner world of professional architectural practice. I 
write here as a consumer, a spectator and user of architecture, not as an 
expert.2
The fundamental question asked at the 2008 Bauhaus symposium was 
what the effects of digital imaging have been on the production and re-
ception of architecture. One hears on every side grand, utopian claims 
about the unlimited possibilities offered by “paperless studios” and di-
rect translation of computer design into the production of materials and 
modular units for construction. It seems, if one can trust the architecture 
magazines, that we have entered a brave new world where everything is 
possible and nothing is out of bounds: if it can be imagined, and “imagi-
neered” on a computer terminal, then it can be built.
I think there are good reasons for being skeptical about the more eu-
phoric claims that surround architecture in the so- called digital age. Al-
though it’s clear that the computer has made an enormous difference in 
certain aspects of architectural design and construction, it may not always 
be the emancipatory, progressive difference that it is often portrayed to 
be. Liberation from the material resistance of a medium may lead to a 
kind of architectural flatulence, a throwing up of ornamental effects and 
spectacle as nothing more than a manner or automatism of conspicuous 
1. “The Work of Art in the Age of Its Reproducibility,” in Walter Benjamin: Selected 
Writings (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002), 3:119.
2. I am very grateful to architectural historian Katherine Taylor of the University 
of Chicago Deparment of Art History for invaluable advice, and to Anthony Rayns-
ford for the key reminder that architecture is basically drawing.

1 3 8  :  C H A P T E R  1 1
consumption. I am reminded of the moment in the evolution of electronic 
music when the “classic studio” of wave- form generators and manually 
controlled tape decks was replaced by the Moog Synthesizer, which made 
all sorts of preprogrammed “special effects” available at the touch of a key, 
a breakthrough that led to the production of a great many predictable, 
cliché- ridden sound- effects. Sometimes the resistance of a medium is a 
good thing, and it may be (as copperplate engraving once showed us) the 
very condition of certain kinds of hard- won virtuosity and inventiveness.
So: my aim here will be to slow down the discussion a bit, and to urge 
a more patient analysis of claims that we live in a “digital age,” and that 
certain consequences flow ineluctably from this supposed fact. Since I 
speak as a nonexpert, and an outsider to the professional concerns of 
the architectural community, I offer these comments with considerable 
hesitation, and subject to correction. My own expertise is in the areas of 
image theory, media, and visual culture. My strategy, therefore, will be to 
reflect on some notable features of spectacular, attention- getting architec-
ture in our time, especially as it engages with two closely related media, the 
graphic and sculptural arts. These two media seem necessarily connected 
to the problem of architecture, if only because, on the one hand, so much 
contemporary architecture seems to aspire to the condition of sculpture 
and, on the other, architecture “proper” is primarily a graphic, imaging 
activity, and not the actual activity of erecting buildings. Even before the 
onset of the digital image, Thomas Creighton, the editor of Progressive 
Architecture, could argue that a “new sensualism” in architecture was being 
driven by the model of sculpture, with abandonment of “restraint” and its 
freedom to produce forms “that can be warped and twisted at will.”3 “This 
is not the application of sculpture to architecture,” argued Creighton, “but 
rather the handling of architecture as sculpture.”
On the other flank of architectural practice is drawing and draftsman-
ship, now undergoing the technical transformation summed up by the 
concept of the digital image and the techniques of computer- aided draw-
ing (CAD). But what is the digital image? The easiest answer is: an image 
that can be produced, manipulated, stored, and retrieved by a computer. 
But what does this really mean? How does this affect the quality of the 
image, any image? Is it the easy manipulability of the image? The pos-
sibility of morphing and transforming it in innumerable ways? Or is it 
the portability of the image, the ease with which it can be transmitted 
3. Quoted in Joseph Rosa, Folds, Blobs, and Boxes: Architecture in the Digital Era 
(Heinz Architectural Center, Pittsburgh, 2001), 9.

B A C K  T O  T H E  D R A W I N G  B O A R D  :  1 3 9
instantaneously around the globe? Is it the metadata that accompanies 
the image, making it a self- archiving bundle of information that carries 
with it not only the graphic analog content but a string of second- order 
information about its provenance and modifications?
All these are undoubtedly momentous changes in the way images func-
tion for us, but it is important to keep in mind one equally important way 
in which images have not changed under the digital regime: they are still 
images for us, for embodied human beings with standard sensory and 
perceptual equipment. It doesn’t matter whether they are representational 
or abstract, artistic or popular, technoscientific displays or children’s draw-
ings. At the end of the day, they are still dense, iconic signs that acquire 
their meaning within the framework of an analogical, not a digital code. 
(In a more extended discussion we would have to question in fact whether 
the analogical sign is “coded” at all, recalling Roland Barthes’s famous 
observation that photography produces “images without a code”).4 No 
matter how many computational transformations it goes through inside 
a computer, the digital image is, at the beginning and end of the day, an 
image, an analog presentation. Unless we are programmers, we are not 
really interested in the digits in the digital image. We are interested in the 
analogical input and output, the image, as a sensuous presentation that 
employs an infinitely gradated set of signs, marks, and colors (or, for that 
matter, sounds, tones, beats). Digitization betrays the same ineluctable 
tendency toward the “return of the analog” in the realm of both visual 
and sound images.5
So the phrase “digital image” is in a very precise sense a kind of oxymo-
ron: insofar as an image is perceived as digital, it is not an image at all but 
an array of arbitrary symbolic elements, alphanumeric signs that belong 
to a finite set of rigorously differentiated characters. At the simplest level, 
the digital is merely a string of ones and zeros that forms a statement 
or operation in a machine language; this is not an image, but a string of 
ones and zeros that can be translated into an image. The image is formed 
by, carried by, translated into digits, but it is not itself digital. One can 
see this clearly in the climactic scene of the mythic cinematic treatment 
of the digital age, The Matrix. When Neo sees through the veil of illusory 
4. Barthes, Camera Lucida trans. Richard Howard (New York: Hill & Wang, 1981), 
88; see also my discussion of the uncoded “wildness” of the iconic sign in What 
Do Pictures Want? On the Lives and Loves of Images (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2005), 9– 10.
5. See Brian Massumi, “On the Superiority of the Analog,” in Parables for the Vir-
tual (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002).

1 4 0  :  C H A P T E R  1 1
virtual images to the underlying digital reality, he understands that all 
those bodies and buildings were nothing but a flux of numbers and letters. 
But at the moment of this understanding there is a ghostly return of the 
displaced illusion in the form of the analog images of the agents, and the 
spectral traces of their illusory bullets. This is also the return of the image 
as such, the analog sign, the cinematic sign, that can never go all the way 
over to the digital without ceasing to be an image.6
This is also why we have to admit that, from a phenomenological stand-
point that pays attention to the perceptual flutter of digital and analogic 
representations, digital images existed long before the invention of the 
computer or binary code. Images have been digitized since Australian 
 Aboriginal painters developed a binary dot and line vocabulary of graphic 
characters suitable for sand painting. Grains of sand are the predecessors 
of pixels, with their indefinitely expanded reservoir of finitely differenti-
ated elements. In a similar way, the warp and woof of weaving processes 
the image- appearance through a grid of binary choices. Digitization of the 
image is a consistent technical feature from mosaic tile to the mezzotint 
to the Ben- Day dots of newspaper photographs. But when we look at the 
graphic image, we do not look— at least for a moment— at the grains of 
sand, or the threads, tiles, or dots or pixels: we look at the image, the 
analog sign that magically appears out of the digital matrix. This is the 
duck- rabbit effect of the digital image in its extended sense.7
It is important, then, to exert some pressure on the commonplace no-
tion that we live in a “digital age,” as if digitization and binary codes were 
unknown before the invention of the Turing Machine. Right alongside 
the Turing Machine is an equally powerful invention/discovery: the archi-
tecture of the DNA molecule. The technical impact of the computer is not 
simply its capacity to reduce everything to ones and zeros, but its equally 
powerful capacity to unreduce or expand those ones and zeros to analog 
appearances. The computer does not represent a “victory of the digital” 
but a new mechanism for coordinating the digital and the analog. And it 
is crucial to stress this point at the level of tactility as well as visuality: a 
moment’s reflection on the role of the human hand in relation to the com-
puter should remind us of Bill Brown’s tellingly nonredundant aphorism: 
“the digital age is the digital age,” the era of carpal tunnel syndrome and er-
6. One could say, however, that this would be an image of the digital as such, a 
spectacularizing of the look of code.
7. See the discussion of the digital image in “Image Science” and “Realism and 
the Digital Image,” chapters 3 and 5 above.

B A C K  T O  T H E  D R A W I N G  B O A R D  :  1 4 1
gonomic keyboards. Obsessive text messagers live in the age of the thumb, 
and of a generation that is “all thumbs.”8 We have invented in our time new 
forms of clumsiness along with new skill sets, automatisms, and habitual 
subroutines. What Friedrich Kittler has predicted as a “general digitization 
of channels and information” that will “erase the differences among indi-
vidual media” has in fact produced just the opposite: a new Tower of Babel 
populated by machines that cannot communicate with other machines.9 
As is well known, for any two machines, a third is required to translate, 
adapt, or coordinate them. How many useless adapters and power trans-
formers are cluttering your utility closet? How many remote controls that 
are supposed to be programmable to exert control (remotely) over other 
remote controls? How long does it take before the sense of control gives 
way to its opposite? How long before the copy and paste functions go mad 
and generate a virus or autoimmune disorder?
I have been speaking of machines, but (as the metaphor of the virus 
suggests) they are really stalking horses for something more like artificial 
life- forms— robots, cyborgs, and complex autopoetic systems as large as 
the Internet itself. If the digital age is the age of calculation, control, and 
programmability, it must be recognized equally as the age of incalculabil-
ity, loss of control, and unprogrammability. That is why, right alongside 
the rhetoric of cybernetics, the “science of control,” we are encountering 
the uncanny return of the archaic language of vitalism and animism in 
contemporary image theory. The digital age is the convergence of techno-
science with magic— with new forms of totemism, fetishism, and idolatry, 
with what Bruno Latour has called “factishes.”10 The technoscientific dom-
inant of our time, then, is not simply cybernetics but biocybernetics, the 
twin revolutions of information and life. The cultural icons of this double 
revolution are the computer and the clone, and, no doubt, the biomorphic 
forms of the architectural spaces they inhabit.11
One may question, of course, whether in the age of what has been called 
the “post- medium condition,” when all media are mixed, hybrid, and re-
mediated by digital technologies, there really is any such thing as a distinct 
medium. Hasn’t architecture always been a hybrid, mixed medium, and 
8. “All Thumbs,” Critical Inquiry 30, no. 2 (Winter 2004): 452.
9. Kittler, Gramaphone Film Typewriter (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 
1999)., 1.
10. Latour, On the Modern Cult of the Factish Gods (Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press, 2010).
11. See my essay “The Work of Art in the Age of Biocybernetic Reproduction,” in 
What Do Pictures Want?

1 4 2  :  C H A P T E R  1 1
hasn’t it now gone completely virtual, existing as much in speculative, no-
tional, and graphic or modular form as it does in actual building? And do 
not the buildings reflect this virtualization and liquidation, with the seem-
ingly absolute malleability of shapes, materials, surfaces, and spaces? And 
does this not make for a convergence of architecture, so that structures 
like Frank Gehry’s Bilbao Museum, or Daniel Libeskind’s Jewish Museum 
in Berlin become a kind of expanded field of sculptural gestures, while 
Peter Eisenmann’s Holocaust Memorial goes all the way over to the field of 
public sculpture, but in this case as plaza, a place of labyrinthine chasms 
and rolling contours, a landscape of monolithic gravestones, a social space 
of mourning and sunbathing, solemn contemplation and frivolous hide 
and seek.
As for drawing, with its connotations of manual production, primal 
“first steps” toward the fabrication of three- dimensional, material objects, 
or its secondary role as the trace, the image “drawn after” objects made by 
nature or art: drawing remains closest to the center of the vortex of image 
production, the “fissure” in which Henri Focillon saw “crowds of images as-
piring to birth.”12 Drawing is the crossroads of architecture and sculpture, 
emanating from and returning to the body. It remains linked directly to the 
hand/eye circuit, the scopic drive, and the Imaginary, even in the sphere 
of digital imaging and MacPaint. Think of Saul Steinberg’s world- making 
draftsmen, delineating their own environments. Or of William Blake’s 
Urizen, the divine, rational architect drawing the line between light and 
darkness as the fundamental structure of the visible universe. (See figure 
8.2). Think of the legendary origin of drawing and its relation to sculpture 
in Pliny’s Natural History: the Maid of Corinth traces the silhouette of her 
departing lover on the wall, thus inventing drawing, a medium grounded in 
desire, eros, and fantasy.13 But then her father, Butades the potter, goes on 
to invent sculpture by making a three- dimensional relief portrait out of the 
sketch as a gift to his daughter. Both the drawing and the sculpture, how-
ever, depend upon two prior conditions: (1) the presence of architecture in 
its minimal form— the silent, blank wall on which the two- dimensional 
image is cast, traced, and then sculpted in three dimensions of “relief” 
from flatness— and (2) the human body, as both the center and periphery 
of architecture, what envisions it from without and inhabits it from within. 
12. Focillon, The Life of Forms in Art, trans. Charles B. Hogan and George Kubler 
(New York: Zone Books, 1992) 11; original French publication, 1934.
13. See my essay “Drawing Desire,” in What Do Pictures Want (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 2005).

B A C K  T O  T H E  D R A W I N G  B O A R D  :  1 4 3
The body is not only what draws, but also what is drawn, both to sculpture 
and to architecture. The body is itself both building and statue, the temple 
and the statue of the god within. Whether body as building (as in the meta-
phor of the temple of the spirit) or building as body (complete with skeletal 
framework, outer skin, interiority, and orifices), whether clothed or naked, 
draped and ornamented or exposed and transparent, the body is both the 
thing that draws and what draws sculpture and architecture together.
The more these distinct media— architecture, drawing, and sculpture— 
seem to merge in these practices, the more indispensable becomes the 
invocation of their names, as though the ghosts of the traditional artistic 
media refused to be laid to rest. Architecture may now be nothing more 
than sculpture plus plumbing, and sculpture may be the homeless art, a 
superfluous ornament, or an annoying distraction. Ad Reinhardt famously 
defined sculpture as the thing you back into when you are trying to get a 
better view of a painting. Civic, public sculpture may now be reduced to 
a filigree, like the parsley next to the roast beef, or consigned to one of 
those aesthetic sanatoria known as the “sculpture park,” while architecture 
 muscles into the place formerly held by sculpture, establishing itself as 
an art of images, of iconic monuments that dominate the spaces around 
them, eye- catchers to the world.
But meanwhile above them all, drawing rules— in both senses of the 
word— as in the traditional rendering of the image of the divine architect, 
designing and ruling the world with his compasses. Architecture in its 
most archaic imaging was always more about drawing than building, and 
this drawing was from the first “digital” in both senses of the word— that 
is, a question of the fingers, of counting and measuring, and of a binary 
operation that divides the light from the darkness, inside from outside, 
the one from the zero. Even though critics have continued to claim (pre-
maturely, as always) that painting is dead, drawing has clearly never been 
more virulently alive, penetrating every aspect of the production of real 
spaces. In its mutated form as computer- aided drawing, coupled with 
animation and three- dimensional simulations, graphic production dom-
inates the world of design and construction, projecting a brave new world 
of supple, mobile forms that, when connected with industrial production, 
seem to “build themselves.”14 But before computer- aided drawing there 
14. See Luis Eduardo Boza, “(Un)Intended Discoveries: Crafting the Design Pro-
cess,” Journal of Architectural Education 60, no. 2 (November 2006): 4– 7, for a cri-
tique of CNC (“computer numeric controlled” fabrication machinery) and its 
relation to handcraft, intuition, and risk.

1 4 4  :  C H A P T E R  1 1
was another kind of CAD driven by desire and longing, a form of automatic 
drawing that predates the surrealists. Let us call it “Cupid- aided drawing” 
(see figure. 11.1).
So the truly strange thing about the ordering of contemporary media 
is that now, when technical instruments and codes seem to penetrate 
every aspect of reality, when grandiose architectural monuments rise on 
 every side, the most archaic medium of representation, the art that is clos-
est to the body, the one that expresses the intersection of the hand and eye 
in the most intimate of compositional spaces, should make a comeback 
as the dominant art form. And that it should be followed, as a close sec-
ond, by that other archaic medium, the art of sculpture— and a style of 
sculpture, it should be noted, that is not especially innovative in relation 
to the actual practices of contemporary sculpture. Contemporary archi-
tecture most often mimics the look of Baroque and modernist painting 
and sculpture, either by elaborating highly modulated organic forms (Greg 
Lynn’s Blobs), or by imitating the appearance of futurism, collage, and 
analytic cubism. The only thing being “rejected” by the new architecture 
is the modernist grid and the stable, rectilinear, perspectival structure of 
Cartesian space (invariably described in invidious terms as static and re-
strictive). Frank Gehry’s Wiseman Museum in Minneapolis, for instance, 
is clearly a kind of analytic cubist “duck” fastened on to an interior that is 
fundamentally the modernist white cube, as if the sculpture and painting 
that would have inhabited that cube had exploded outward and fastened 
itself to the exterior. Compare a view of the Wiseman with a Braque com-
position from 1913, and you will see what I mean.
Of course architecture has always had a relationship to the graphic and 
sculptural arts (and to numbering, measurement, and geometry), as any 
tour from the Greek temple to the Gothic cathedral to the Renaissance 
palazzo would demonstrate. Italian Renaissance architecture and urban 
design would be unthinkable without the invention of artificial perspec-
tive.15 But the ordering of the arts seemed to have a kind of stability in 
these styles. The walls (and even the windows) were for painting, and the 
atrium or apse or niche was the destined home of the statue or portrait 
bust. With modernism, however, something seemed to change, and a 
new dynamic entered into the ordering of the arts and media. Clement 
Greenberg, ever the proponent of “purity” in media, argued that “it is 
by virtue of its medium that each art is unique and strictly itself,” and 
15. See Marvin Trachtenberg, Dominion of the Eye: Urbanism, Art and Power in Early 
Modern Florence (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997).

B A C K  T O  T H E  D R A W I N G  B O A R D  :  1 4 5
 Michael Fried contended with equal passion that “what lies between the 
arts” in the realm of “intermedia” is a kind of meretricious  theatricality.16 
In this sense, modernism for these critics was a continuation of the classi-
cal values of “medium specificity” and propriety. But architecture played, 
for Greenberg, a strangely equivocal role in the new modernist synthe-
sis. Greenberg argued that modern architecture had to be led out of the 
“eclectic historicism” of the nineteenth century into an “independent 
contemporary style” by painting. Cubist painting in particular was able 
to “reveal the new style in architecture to itself,” and to emancipate it 
(along with sculpture) from its heavy materiality into a dynamic space of 
thrusts and energetic displacements. The international style of secular, 
rationalized spatial design, for Greenberg, united all the artistic media by 
treating “all matter, as distinguished from space, as two dimensional”— in 
short, as drawing or graphic design. All the modern arts were united, in 
Greenberg’s view, by becoming abstract and weightless, and the new archi-
tectural materials of steel, glass, and reinforced concrete were just waiting 
for the visual and graphic styles of pictorial modernism to show the way 
to escape the gravitational field.
But each art had to become abstract in its own way. Despite the lead-
ing role played by painting in Greenberg’s story of modernism, it is im-
mediately threatened by “the architectural and social location for which 
[the painter] destines his product.”17 There is “a contradiction between 
the architectural destination of abstract art and the very, very private at-
mosphere in which it is produced” that “will kill ambitious painting in 
the end.” Painting either has to become larger or smaller: the two- by- two 
framed easel painting is in crisis, leaving only two destinations: “the wall 
and the page”— in other words, the mural and the drawing. Greenberg’s 
conclusion: “The best work of Picasso et al. in the last 20 years has been 
in black and white and in reduced format, the etchings and the pen and 
ink drawings.” It is a strange Oedipal narrative of the relation between the 
graphic and architectural arts: modernist architecture is the prodigious 
offspring of modernist painting. But then the child kills the parent, or 
compels it to shrink down to its minimal form and play a merely orna-
mental role.
Are we now going through something similar with the invention of the 
16. Greenberg, “Toward a Newer Laocoon,” Partisan Review (1940); Fried, “Art and 
Objecthood,” Artforum (June 1967).
17. Greenberg, “The Situation at the Moment,” Partisan Review (January 1948); 
Collected Essays, 2:195.

1 4 6  :  C H A P T E R  1 1
digital image? Actually, I think not. Abstraction in painting, like the geo-
metric grid in architecture, was a stylistic movement that had a dialectical 
relation to a past that had to be negated and a utopian future that was 
about to be realized. Contemporary architecture, however much it may be 
facilitated by digital imaging, has no such programmatic coherence. It is 
resolutely eclectic, freely appropriating every known architectural mode, 
from the hovel, cave, and labyrinth to the mushroom to the artichoke to 
the skyscraper. Digital imaging, in contrast to the role of the modernist 
graphic arts, has had (so far) mainly a functional, not an inspirational, role 
to play. It occupies two crucial niches in the architectural process: mar-
keting and making. Digital imaging allows a kind of pre- viewing that was 
only dreamt of by the sculptural model builders, allowing the client a tour 
of the projected space that is almost invariably more wondrous than the 
actual experience of the built monument, in the sense that the consumer 
can enjoy an unlimited mobility and speed in relation to the architectural 
object, soaring between pedestrian and bird- eye views at the click of a 
mouse. (This reminds me of the way, in my childhood, that graphic ads for 
toys in catalogs and magazines always far outstripped the prosaic reality 
of the things themselves). Digital imaging and virtual- reality caves provide 
the ideal sales environment for architecture, an easy way to project a cin-
ematic simulation of the proposed edifice that will, as we say in Chicago, 
dazzle the rubes. They are also an ideal mechanism for involving a public 
in critical discussion, with the aim of sending the architect back to the 
drawing board.
The more interesting and profound effect of digital imaging is its role 
in facilitating the transition from design to construction.18 Here the in-
terface is not with the consumer, but with the structural engineer and the 
manufacturer of materials and modular components (panels, windows, 
structural elements). This is perhaps where another utopian moment en-
ters the picture: the sense of unbounded confidence that if something can 
be imagined, that is to say, drawn, it can be quantified and codified and 
realized materially. This is utopian, however, only in the positive sense of 
possibility, not in any critical sense of negation. It does not tell us what 
not to do, what to avoid; it only promises us freedom to do whatever we 
like, which is to say it tells us nothing about the most important questions: 
what should we like, and why? For that, we will have to wait until the rela-
tively new media of digital graphics have some artistic accomplishments of 
their own to demonstrate, a possibility that will not be realized primarily 
18. See Boza, op. cit., for a good discussion of this technology.

B A C K  T O  T H E  D R A W I N G  B O A R D  :  1 4 7
in architecture, but in cinema, video, photography, and painting, the arts 
of the screen and the two- dimensional surface.
This is why, when I hear cheery rhetoric about the wondrous architec-
tural breakthroughs made possible by digital imaging, I want to reach for 
my wallet. And even more emphatically, when I hear that architecture has 
now taken over the role of sculpture, I want to reach for my gun. Consider, 
as an example, the hooplah in my hometown of Chicago about Santiago 
Calatrava’s proposed (and, since 2006, suspended) “Spire” project. If this 
building is built, it may well achieve the (short- lived) goal of being the 
tallest structure in the world. It will no doubt become an iconic addition 
to— an exclamation point on— one of the most fabulous urban skylines 
in the world. But will it be a significant contribution to the world of sculp-
ture? Or will it simply be an inflated example of the most conventional, 
 clichéd item for sale in your local candle shop? (I will avoid the compari-
son to another familiar item available at your local hardware store).
Do we need digital imaging to imagine, draw, design, or build this 
building? Certainly digital imaging is helping to sell it, and would prob-
ably be important in producing the parts necessary to build it. But from 
the standpoint of imagination, invention, and drawing, it is utterly con-
ventional and predictable, and the fact that a smaller model (less than 
half the size) already exists in Malmo, Sweden only underlines this point.
If contemporary architecture, liberated by digital imaging, aspires to 
the condition of sculpture, then, it does so mainly in relation to Baroque 
and modernist precedents, not in relation to contemporary sculptural 
practices. One need only survey some of the salient productions of sculp-
tors over the last half century to see that sculpture has been involved in a 
paragone or debate with architecture, an ongoing deconstruction of its own 
history and of its inevitable architectural environment. Robert Morris’s 
“specific objects,” for instance, imitate the basic elements of architecture, 
such as the slab and beam, at the same time that it elevates the traditional 
support of sculpture (the plinth or pedestal) to the status of the primary 
object. Walter de Maria’s Earth Room in New York City elevates the ground 
on which architecture stands, transforming architecture into the support 
of earth. Gordon Matta Clark literally cuts through and across architec-
tural structures in a highly formalized demolition or vandalism, to reveal 
new angles on architectural spaces, what Terry Smith has called “the ar-
chitecture of aftermath,”19 and to deploy the cutout “discards” of the dem-
19. Smith, The Architecture of Aftermath (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2006).

1 4 8  :  C H A P T E R  1 1
olition process as sculptural objects in their own right. In works such as 
Ghost, Rachel Whiteread transforms the negative, empty space of a room 
into a solid cast object whose whiteness in turn renders this solidity as a 
spectral trace. Anish Kapoor’s Cloud Gate performs a virtual deformation 
of the entire urban skyline of Chicago, rendering it as a crowd- pleasing 
anamorphic spectacle. And Richard Serra’s Tilted Arc was designed to chal-
lenge, even to violate, the public space in which it was inserted— a viola-
tion that, far from being an accident, was essential to the ontology of the 
sculptural object, according to Serra. That is why removal of Tilted Arc from 
this specific site was, in his view, equivalent to its destruction.
In a tonality quite the opposite of Serra’s defiance is Antony Gormley’s 
sculptural engagement with architecture, from the elemental Brick Man, 
with its play on the reversible metaphor of building as body, to his declara-
tions of the abasement and abjection of the body before the architectural 
monument (see Close), to his humorous Home as an inversion of the scalar 
relation of body and building, to his (usually temporary) placements of 
cast bodies as dramatically dislocated, out of place, and homeless (Criti-
cal Mass, Total Strangers). Gormley has also gone beyond de Maria’s Earth 
Room by treating the flooded building as a sculptural object, or by invad-
ing architectural spaces in Field with thousands of tiny clay figures who 
remind us of a revolutionary mass pushing its way into the institutional 
space of the museum. He echoes Robert Gober’s wall- piercing and gravity 
defying bodies with works such as Edge and Learning to Think, and defies 
the notion that sculpture is just architecture without plumbing in the dis-
turbing cryogenic fantasy of Sovereign State, in which a bodily casket or 
pod becomes a kind of self- sustaining life support system, connected to a 
tangle of rubber hoses via the mouth and excretory organs. In the process 
photographs that accompany works like Still Leaping, we see the most vivid 
elaboration of Marshall McLuhan’s observation that the architectural me-
dium is an extension of the body, literally an outer shell serving as a kind 
of pod supported by a labyrinth of rafters and support beams extruded 
from hands and feet, head and groin. But it is probably in his Allotment 
series that Gormley comes closest to mirroring the widely acknowledged 
“bad object” of late modern architecture, namely Brutalism. Allotment is a 
series of concrete block castings that contain an inner negative space cast 
from an individual human body. This space is untouchable and invisible, 
except for the orifices provided for the ears, mouth, genitals, and anus. The 
overall impression is of a scale model Brutalist housing project, with one 
building per body— a body that (if one gives in to imaginative projection) 
has to be understood as completely paralyzed and immured in its cement 

B A C K  T O  T H E  D R A W I N G  B O A R D  :  1 4 9
overcoat. A terrifying image, to be sure, but one that requires at the same 
time a calm meditation on the minimal conditions of bodily existence as 
mere sentience and freely imagined interiority.
Gormley renders these conditions in ink drawings— emphatically 
nondigital in their use of pouring and staining pigments to saturate the 
paper— that capture three “views” of the body/architecture relation: the 
view from outside the building seen as life- support pod (Sovereign State); 
from the inside out, as a prison cell (Interior); and from a deeper inside or 
transcendent outside (Float), as a liberated body flying like Icarus above 
the globe.
But I will give the final word— and the final image— on architecture’s 
relation to drawing and sculpture to William Blake, whose figure of Urizen 
we have already seen, a model of the architect as divine draftsman, mea-
suring and dividing, drawing the circumference of the world, drawing a 
distinction between light and darkness, the inner and the outer (see fig-
ure 8.2). Blake provides us with a pair of related images to complete our 
picture of the human body’s production of space. One is the figure of Los, 
11.2 Antony Gormley, 
Interior (1991). Cour-
tesy of the artist.

11.3 Antony Gormley, Sovereign State I (1993). Courtesy of the artist.
11.4 Antony Gormley, Float II (1992). Courtesy of the artist.

B A C K  T O  T H E  D R A W I N G  B O A R D  :  1 5 1
the sculptor, resting on his hammer as he contemplates the glowing, fiery 
sun that he has forged on his anvil (figure 8.3). (In other compositions, 
Blake will transform Urizen’s compass into Los’s tongs, as if to enact in a 
graphic simile the transition from virtually drawn to materially realized 
form.) But the other, Blake’s final image of world- making (figure 8.1), is by 
far the most striking, original, and disturbing: it shows the artist/architect 
as a maternal figure, “brooding” over a globe of blood that can be read 
alternately as an embryo enwombed and connected to its parent by way 
of its placental life- support, or as a world created by a massive wound that 
draws off the life of its creator.
Perhaps this is the metapicture of the architect that we need to ponder 
with the most concentrated attention. It reminds us of Henri Lefebvre’s ar-
gument that the social production of space is not only a product of design-
ers and draftsmen— the “conceived space” of architects and planners— 
and not only a product of the engineers and builders who transform those 
designs into hard- edged material structures. Space is also lived and blindly 
“secreted” by human productive and reproductive practices. We often 
speak innocently of a “man- made world,” but there are other metaphors 
for the engendering of our world, as an organism and an ecosystem that 
has been gestating for the entire life- span of the human species, and which 
now seems engaged in a momentous labor to be born— or not. In an age, 
not of digital images but of biopictures, not of cybernetics but of biocyber-
netics, it would seem that architecture has a more demanding task in front 
of it than the erection of spectacular attractions and iconic monuments. 
Time to return to its original vocation of imagining a sustainable habitat 
for the survival and continued evolution of life- forms on this planet. Back 
to the drawing board!

12.1 Mahmud Hams, “Egyptian protesters carry an obelisk in Tahrir Square” 
(2012). Photograph: AFP/Getty Images.

12: FOUNDATIONAL SITES AND 
OCCUPIED SPACES
There is no way to establish fully secured, neat protocol statements as starting points 
of the sciences. There is no tabula rasa. We are like sailors who have to rebuild 
their ship on the open sea, without ever being able to dismantle it in dry- dock and 
reconstruct it from its best components.
OTTO NEURATH1
The idea of a “foundational site,” or Grundungsorte, is in a quite literal 
sense the most fundamental topos one could imagine. For a rhetorician, 
the topos, or topic, is itself a place or site, a topographical location or 
“commonplace” in discourse. But a foundational site raises the stakes, or 
drives them deeper than rhetoric. At the most general level it materializes 
and locates the long- standing philosophical question of the “grounds” of 
knowledge and of being, bringing all the questions of origins, beginnings, 
and births “down to earth.” Or perhaps placing them “up in the air” of a 
transcendental Absolute? Either way, the notion of a Grundungsorte raises 
the question of the site, of space, place, and landscape in the most basic 
terms, linking the commonplaces of location and site specificity to the 
origins of social space as such. Historical events must, as we say, “take 
place” somewhere, and those places are almost automatically sacralized 
and monumentalized as foundational sites: the “taking place,” as Native 
Americans say, requires a totemic “keeping place” to preserve memory and 
continuity.2 The three great religions of the Book, Judaism, Christianity, 
and Islam, all converge in the site known as Israel- Palestine, the “Holy 
Land” that is at the center of so many global conflicts today. The very 
1. Neurath, “Protocol Statements,” in Philosophical Papers, 1913– 1946, ed. R. S. 
Cohen and M. Neurath (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1983), 92. Accessed in Stanford Encyclo-
pedia of Philosophy, s.v. “Otto Neurath,” http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/neurath/ 
(accessed May 1, 2012).
2. See Jonathan Bordo, “The Keeping Place, Arising from an Incident on the 
Land,” in Monuments and Memory, Made and Unmade, ed. Margaret Olin and Rob-
ert Nelson (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003), 157– 82.

1 5 4  :  C H A P T E R  1 2
idea of democracy seems rooted in Athens. American independence and 
national unity have numerous symbolic founding sites: from Plymouth 
Rock to Independence Hall in Philadelphia to Washington, DC. The navel 
of the Australian aboriginal world is located at the magnificent sandstone 
rock called Uluru in the central desert. The delivery of the law (and Hebrew 
writing) occurred on Mt. Sinai. And every building of any significance re-
quires the ritual of “groundbreaking” and the laying of a cornerstone. I was 
taught in catechism that a specific person is designated as the cornerstone 
of the Catholic church: “Thou are Peter, and upon this rock I will build my 
church.” My seminars on space, place, and landscape always begin with an 
exercise in personal and private foundational sites, what I call “places in 
the heart,” the places that come to mind when someone is asked, Where do 
you come from? What place do you revisit in memory and dreams? What 
location do you regard as crucial to your identity?
Foundational sites, then, are both public and private, sacred and secu-
lar, monumental and trivial. My birthplace and the birthplace of a nation 
are both sites of the basic human experience of what Hannah Arendt calls 
“natality,” the appearance of newness in the world. As Arendt puts it:
What matters in our context is less the profoundly Roman notion that all 
foundations are re- establishments and reconstructions than the some-
how connected but different idea that men are equipped for the logically 
paradoxical task of making a new beginning because they themselves are 
new beginnings and hence beginners, that the very capacity for beginning 
is rooted in natality, in the fact that human beings appear in the world 
by virtue of birth.3
But birth, as we know, is an experience not only of newness, but of trauma, 
of a wounding that leaves often unreadable traces and scars, a forgetting 
that is sometimes beneficial, sometimes not, of the painful labor of found-
ing. The monuments to founding thus often involve a paradoxical fusion 
of memory and amnesia. The “foundation,” the “cornerstone” of an insti-
tution tends to erase the uncertainty and pathos of the founding process. 
The Wiesenthal Foundation’s notorious Museum of Tolerance in Jerusa-
lem, originally to be designed by Frank Gehry (who has now withdrawn 
from the project), is being built on one of the oldest Arab cemeteries in 
the Middle East, the burial site of the legendary Saladin, vanquisher of 
3. Arendt, On Revolution (New York: Viking Press, 1963), 203.

F O U N D A T I O N A L  S I T E S  A N D  O C C U P I E D  S P A C E S  :  1 5 5
Richard the Lion- Hearted’s Crusade.4 Foundational sites tend, in general, 
to be haunted. According to legend, the six Hawksmoor Churches in Lon-
don, designed by Nicholas Hawksmoor, a student of Sir Christopher Wren, 
were laid out in a pattern suggestive of a Satanic diagram and had the 
bodies of sacrificial victims buried under their foundations.5 The stability 
of the edifice erected on a “stable foundation” belies the quicksand that 
lies beneath it, and the struggle to establish footings. One motive, then, 
for studying foundational sites is the overcoming of this amnesia and the 
demystifying of the foundational moment, commonly presented as a his-
torical necessity and matter of destiny or fate, and not of human struggle, 
sacrifice, and trauma. Every act of founding is also an act of losing; every 
foundation is built upon destruction, the ruins of something prior, the 
ground beneath the foundation. As Nietzsche puts it in the Genealogy of 
Morals, “To enable a sanctuary to be set up, a sanctuary has got to be de-
stroyed: that is a law . . .”6
Some foundational sites are designed to preserve rather than erase the 
violence of their origins, as if the whole point were to keep the wound 
fresh, the trauma vividly in view. A case in point is the Israeli ritual of 
remembrance at Masada, the fortress overlooking the Dead Sea at which 
Jewish Zealots chose to commit collective suicide rather than surrender 
to the Roman legions. This site is commonly understood to be an em-
blem of modern Israel’s determination to destroy itself and its enemies 
in a nuclear conflagration rather than surrender its claim to the ethnic 
and racial nationalism of the Jewish state. The foundational “memories” 
reproduced at this site are, of course, remarkably selective. They depend, 
as a young Jewish woman noted in a recent Israeli documentary, on the 
erasure of a crucial fact: the women and children at Masada did not com-
mit suicide; they were murdered by their men to prevent their becoming 
4. See Saree Makdisi, “The Architecture of Erasure,” Critical Inquiry 36, no. 3 
(Spring 2010), the opening statement in a debate on this project that includes 
responses from Gehry, Jeremy Gilbert- Rolfe, Daniel Monk, and a team of scholars 
representing the Wiesenthal Foundation.
5. Peter Ackroyd’s novel Hawksmoor (New York: Harper & Row, 1985), builds upon 
the legend of the Hawksmoor Churches in London, in which sacrificial victims 
were supposed to have been buried under the foundations. See Susana Onega, 
Metafiction and Myth in the Novels of Peter Ackroyd (Columbia, SC: Camden House, 
1999), 52f.
6. Nietzsche, Genealogy of Morals, trans. Horace B. Samuel (New York: Dover, 
2003), 95 (II.24).

1 5 6  :  C H A P T E R  1 2
Roman slaves.7 It is hard to imagine a foundational site for a more omi-
nous national mythology, a monument to the victory of melancholia over 
mourning and working through.
Unless, of course, we consider the foundational site of what is some-
times called the “post- 911 era.” The memorial at “Ground Zero” in New 
York City, like Masada, is designed to keep the wound open and to facil-
itate melancholy rituals of selective remembrance. The event of 9- 11 has 
been generally regarded as both a global trauma and the foundational 
moment of a new world order. The site itself, starting with the misnomer 
Ground Zero, originally coined as the term for the location of a nuclear 
explosion, has been hyperfetishized and sacralized. The “footprints” of the 
destroyed twin towers are laid bare as inverted fountains cascading into 
darkness, as if the wounds were to be kept bleeding forever. And below the 
fountains, a descent into the underworld has been excavated, down to the 
bedrock, deep below the Hudson River to the original footings of the Twin 
Towers, as if it were necessary to see their deepest foundations to grasp 
the depth of the trauma. The 9- 11 Memorial, emblazoned with the words 
“Never Forget,” has at the same time been the centerpiece in a narrative of 
national amnesia that disavows the role of the United States in arming al 
Qaeda and other Islamic extremists during the Cold War, as a tactic to con-
tain the Soviet Union. The World Trade Center became the foundational 
site, moreover, for an entire strategic vision of a future, a “global war on 
terror” that by definition would never end and could never be won, but 
would nonetheless serve as the founding framework for American foreign 
policy in the twenty- first century.8
The foundational sites of birth trauma, of construction and destruc-
tion, building and tearing down, are most dramatically evident in that 
modern foundational event we call “revolution.” This was the kind of site 
that until recently we thought had been “taken off the map,” as a poet 
friend of mine has put it.9 Only the monuments and empty spaces are left 
7. Avi Mograbi, dir., Avenge but One of My Two Eyes (2005). Mograbi documents the 
Masada ritual, reenacted by the numerous tour guides to the site, which explicitly 
treats the fortress as a symbol of the modern Jewish state.
8. See Philip Bobbitt, Terror and Consent: The Wars for the Twenty- First Century 
(New York: Anchor Books, 2009). Bobbit gave the Arrow Lectures at Stanford in 
2008, arguing that “the war on terror is no metaphor.” http://www.law.stanford.edu 
/event/2008/03/06/stanford- center- on- ethics- arrow- lecture- series- on- ethics- and 
- leadership- philip- bobbitt- the- war- on- terror- is- no- (accessed December 24, 2014).
9. Janice Misurell- Mitchell, “ScatRap/Counterpoint” (1995), http://www.youtube 
.com/watch?v=ZaGm0OvxTss (accessed December 24, 2014).

F O U N D A T I O N A L  S I T E S  A N D  O C C U P I E D  S P A C E S  :  1 5 7
on the sites of revolution, and they are generally images of the failure or 
betrayal of revolution, its replacement by tyrannical regimes. The statues 
that dominate public squares in the Arab world— of Saddam Hussein in 
Iraq, of Khaddafi in Libya, of Assad in Syria, of Mubarak in Egypt— are 
testimony to the transformation of popular revolutions into despotisms. 
Tiananmen Square in Beijing, Red Square in Moscow, and the vast spaces 
of the Hitler’s Nuremberg rallies are transformed from places of public 
gathering into what Siegfried Kracauer called staging grounds for the 
“mass ornament,” enormous, disciplined crowds assembled to celebrate 
the cult of the founding father.10
The foundational sites of revolution are what Robert Smithson called 
“non- sites,” testifying to an absence. But recently, in movements such as 
the Arab Spring and Occupy Wall Street, new sites have been found, and 
acts of founding have occurred. Weddings were celebrated and babies 
were born in Cairo’s Tahrir Square. The imagery and rhetoric of popular 
insurgency and revolution have been revived. Whether these events will 
be foundational, serving as cornerstones for new forms of life, is still in 
doubt. What is certain is that, as Neurath insisted, they will be imperfect 
rebuildings of a ship on the open sea. I will return to them presently. But 
first I must take a detour through a metapicture of the ground itself, the 
place where the foundational site reveals itself as a visual sight, a space of 
appearance in the most literal sense, a space that might be occupied by a 
lone figure or an undifferentiated mass.
GROUNDING AND FIGURING
“Foundational site” in German is Grundungsorte. I hear this in English, 
not initially as “foundational,” but as “grounding” sites, places where a 
figure/ground relation is inaugurated. Of course much of modern art, espe-
cially abstract painting and minimal art, was devoted to the disappearance 
of the figure, its replacement by something that might be called “pure 
 grounding”— a color field, for instance; a slab or plinth without a figure to 
use it as a base; a blankness or emptiness in which beginnings or endings 
of painting and picture- making and figuration could be imagined.
As an iconologist, a student of images, I am drawn to see the subject of 
foundational sites initially as foundational sights, the image of the back-
ground or blankness in which figures make their appearance. And that 
leads me to the classic gestalt diagram of the dialectic between figure and 
10. Kracauer, The Mass Ornament (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995).

1 5 8  :  C H A P T E R  1 2
ground, the famous ambiguous picture known as “One Vase/Two Faces” 
(see figure 0.1). In this image, as we know, figure and ground change places. 
What was seen as empty space surrounding the vase suddenly “flips” and 
becomes the flesh of two faces confronting each other in profile. And a new 
space emerges between the faces. One figure disappears to be replaced by 
two. The location of the ground switches from outside to “between,” and 
the mise- en- scène switches from a singular object in space to an inter-
subjective encounter: one object/two subjects.
But there is one small, incidental detail, a third thing that is merely or-
namental to the image of the vase, and that is the two curved decorations 
that accent the shape of the vase, hinting at its three- dimensional form, 
insinuating a slight “bulge” in what would otherwise be a flat, schematic 
rendering of the object. What happens to these ornamental features when 
the aspect of the drawing switches to the faces? My suggestion is that they 
become indices or traces of the mediation between the faces, a doubly 
articulated mediation in the scopic and vocative registers. In short, they 
connect the eyes and mouths of the faces, transforming the empty space 
between them into a material substance, a medium through which optical 
and acoustic signals may be transmitted. What was ornamental, a surface 
decoration, becomes central and essential, the very condition of human 
sociability as such. Speech and depiction, sound and light, hearing and 
seeing, are constituted in the emptiness between the faces.
The difference between the two ornaments, moreover, suggests a 
structural and sensory distinction between the scopic and the vocative 
channels. The mouths are connected by a smooth ribbon, while the eyes 
are linked by a row of segmented frames, like a film strip, punctuated by 
tiny dots or periods on the edge of each frame. The contrast is uncannily 
reminiscent of Friedrich Kittler’s distinction between phonography and 
cinematography as, respectively, media constructed around “continuous” 
signaling/recording and around interrupted or punctuated signals. We 
might think of these as the technical expressions of the difference between 
the continuity of auditory perception and the blinking, jumpy character of 
the visual process, which sutures together numerous discrete “shots” of 
the visual field to produce the impression of stable visual space.11
And what if this was not only the constitution of the social, including 
11. Kittler, Gramaphone Film Typewriter (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 
1999). See his discussion of the differentiations between typewriter, cinema, and 
phonography in relation to the Lacanian triad of the Symbolic, Imaginary, and 
Real, 167– 71.

F O U N D A T I O N A L  S I T E S  A N D  O C C U P I E D  S P A C E S  :  1 5 9
of course so- called social media, which have been seen as central to con-
temporary revolutionary events, but of subjectivity as well? One can see 
this simply by multiplying the array of Vase/Faces, and noticing how, while 
the vases remain singular and stable, the faces become “two- faced” Janus 
figures, looking before and after simultaneously (figure 12.2). It is hard to 
imagine a clearer picture of what is commonly called the “split subject.” 
We could elaborate these splits at many different levels— the public versus 
the private self, consciousness versus unconsciousness, perception versus 
memory or imagination.
I linger over the One Vase/Two Faces image because I want to consider 
the problem of the Grundungsorte, the “foundational site,” as a figure/
ground problem. For whenever there is a founding, the laying of a foun-
dation, there is the clearing of a space for the construction of a figure, 
whether it is the erection of a monument or a building, or the clearing of a 
space between figures, a space of mediation in which subjects can appear 
to each other and communicate. One could, of course, say much more 
about this image of the ground, asking what it has to do with notion of 
“giving grounds” for an argument, establishing the ground of a philosoph-
ical position, or establishing the foundations of a discipline, a nation, a 
political order. For my purposes here, the aim is simply to provide a frame-
work for thinking about the occupation of space, and more precisely, the 
global Occupy Movement that has sprung up in our time in a number of 
foundational sites. We suppose that normally the figure is what occupies 
the ground. But what happens when the ground itself becomes the figure?
THE SPACE OF APPEARANCE
In The Human Condition Hannah Arendt characterizes the foundational 
moment of the political as a “space of appearance” in which human beings 
“speak and act together”:
12.2 Edgar Rubin, “Rubin’s Vase” (1921). 
One vase/two faces, multiplied.

1 6 0  :  C H A P T E R  1 2
The space of appearance comes into being wherever men are together in 
the manner of speech and action, and therefore predates and precedes 
all formal constitution of the public realm and the various forms of gov-
ernment. Its peculiarity is that, unlike the spaces which are the work of 
our hands, it does not survive the actuality of the moment which brought 
it into being, but disappears with the dispersal of men . . . [and] with the 
disappearance or arrest of the activities themselves.12
Arendt adds what we should have already noticed in One Vase/Two Faces: 
the dimension of temporality. The space of appearance is not permanent 
but transitory: “it does not survive the actuality of the moment.” We see 
this when the faces give way to the vase, “the work of our hands,” and 
vice versa. The whole point of the figure/ground image is appearance and 
disappearance. The power that “springs up between men when they act 
together . . . vanishes the moment they disperse.” Or, as Arendt notes, with 
the “arrest of the activities themselves.”
But the disappearance is never total. Something haunts the empty 
spaces that have hosted appearances of the political. As Michelet said of 
the French Revolution:
The Champ de Mars! This is the only monument that the Revolution has 
left. The Empire has its Column, and engrosses almost exclusively the 
Arch of Triumph; royalty has its Louvre, its Hospital of Invalids; the feu-
dal church of the twelfth century is still enthroned at Notre Dame: nay, 
the very Romans have their Imperial Ruins, the Thermae of the Caesars!
And the Revolution has for her monument: empty space.13
Michelet’s empty space is, of course, radically ambiguous. Is the Champ de 
Mars a monument to failure, to the feeling that the French Revolution “de-
voured its own children,” degenerating into a series of despotisms and left 
nothing behind? Or is it a testimony to the clearing of the “public space” 
where, as Arendt puts it, “freedom appears and becomes visible to all”? 
Everything depends, obviously, on the historical situation, the specific site 
of emptiness and potential where new foundations might be laid, and on 
the character of the men and women who occupy that space.
12. Arendt, The Human Condition (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1959), 199.
13. Michelet, preface to History of the French Revolution (1847), trans. Charles Coeks 
(London, 1847– 1848), 1.

F O U N D A T I O N A L  S I T E S  A N D  O C C U P I E D  S P A C E S  :  1 6 1
OCCUPATIO
It is not only nature that abhors a vacuum. An absolutely empty space is 
nearly inconceivable, if only because the most perfect void would still con-
tain a few stray atoms. And in fact, most human spaces, whether potential 
public spaces of appearance or the private closets and public streets of 
everyday life, are completely occupied. Filled with things— people, auto-
mobiles, plants, animals, stones, air, water, statues, buildings.
But some spaces are set aside, are kept open, designated as “public.” 
They are what Foucault called heterotopias: parks, squares, plazas, the 
agora or kiva where people gather for commerce, gossip, or entertainment. 
They are supposed to belong to no one, to be a kind of civic terra nullius 
that anyone may enter. In the American Constitution, the foundational 
document left behind by the American Revolution, the first amendment 
implicitly guarantees the empty space of appearance, a law against law 
that opens a site of freedom: “Congress shall make no law . . . abridging 
the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably 
to assemble, and to petition the government for a redress of grievances.”
The public square in America generally includes some monument to 
foundational violence (the war memorial) or construction— the statue of 
a city father. But it also holds a space open for assembly of the sort envi-
sioned in the first amendment. In practice, however, the first amendment 
is loaded down with secondary qualifications— asterisks and exceptions, 
requirements to secure a permit, and strict limitations on the activities 
that may occur in the public space. No loudspeakers, no camping; hence 
Mic Chec (in Zucotti Park) and Occupy, everywhere. The figure that ap-
peared against the ground in Cairo, Tel Aviv, and Wall Street was the tent, 
the encampment. And this was a rhetorical figure as well as a performative 
spectacle, literalizing the trope of occupatio, the seizure of the antagonist’s 
position, and the staging of an emptiness to be filled in later.
Occupatio generally stressed the refusal to speak of something, or the 
confession of an inability to describe or define. The refusal of the members 
of the Occupy Movement to state their demands is a precise performance 
of the trope of occupatio, which speaks by refusing to speak, opening a 
negative space in language itself with a form of “expressive conduct.”14 
14. See my essay “Image, Space, Revolution: The Arts of Occupation,” in Occupy: 
Three Inquiries in Disobedience, coauthored with Michael Taussig and Bernard 
Harcourt (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012).

1 6 2  :  C H A P T E R  1 2
It is just the opposite of the performative utterance in speech- act theory, 
which does something by saying it (blessing, cursing, administering an 
oath, declaring a verdict). In contrast, Occupy says something by doing 
it. Its refusal to delegate a sovereign, representative figure, a charismatic 
leader or “face” of the movement, is a declaration that real sovereignty has 
been redistributed for the moment in the assembled people in the space 
of appearance. Its refusal to describe or define the world it wants to create 
is accompanied by its manifestation of a nascent community, complete 
with differentiated roles— cooks, doctors, educators, builders, police— all 
assembled in a democratic, nonhierarchical polis.
Why did the tactics of Occupy go viral, spreading around the world, 
from Cairo to Madison, Wisconsin, from Damascus to Wall Street? The 
specific issues of each revolutionary site were quite distinct: authoritar-
ian regimes in the Arab world; economic inequality in the United States. 
Is it not because it performed a parodic mimesis of a preexisting con-
dition, namely the occupation of the world by a global system that has 
oppressed and impoverished the vast majority of the world’s population 
and degraded the environment at the same time, threatening spaceship 
earth with the possibility of foundering or running aground? Occupy per-
formed an uncanny reversal of the word “occupation,” which has become 
a synonym for the imposition of martial law on resistant populations. It 
also reversed, in the spectacle of the tent city, the meaning of the most 
iconic and viral image of occupied space we know of today, namely the 
camp or shanty town, the spaces set aside to incarcerate refugees, illegal 
immigrants, displaced persons, and resident aliens. Small wonder that 
Zucotti Park in New York became a haven for the homeless.
MONUMENTS AND MULTITUDES
When the masses depart from the foundational sites of revolution, what 
is left behind? Michelet’s answer is, empty space. But as he knew very 
well, a multitude of images, some of them memorable and monumental, 
remained behind in the archives and in popular memory. The Goddess of 
Reason, the Festival of the Supreme Being, and the ominous silhouette of 
the guillotine persist as icons of the Revolution. Delacroix’s Liberty Leading 
the People fixes the urban legend of the bare- breasted female revolutionary 
storming the barricades. Is it merely a coincidence that the spirit of pop-
ular, nonviolent revolution seems inevitably to be personified in a female 
figure? Consider, for instance, the Goddess of Democracy in Tiananmen 
Square, the Ballerina on the Bull of Occupy Wall Street, and the Woman 

F O U N D A T I O N A L  S I T E S  A N D  O C C U P I E D  S P A C E S  :  1 6 3
with the Blue Brassiere in Tahrir Square (which was transformed overnight 
from an image of victimage to a banner of militant gathering).
Could these images be suggesting a deeper, more radical form of revo-
lution than mere regime change, or even the foundation of a democratic 
constitution? Political theorist Bernard Harcourt has described the nov-
elty of the Occupy Movement as a strategy of “political disobedience.”15 
In contrast to civil disobedience, which deliberately violates laws in the 
name of freedom, and accepts the consequences of arrest, political dis-
obedience involves the refusal to work within the unwritten laws of the 
political game— electing representatives, stating a policy agenda, forming 
a party, and so on. Camping in a public park may be civil disobedience, 
but what happened within the Occupy camps was political disobedience. 
Instead of attaching to a party, an ism, or even a social movement, it does 
something simpler and more fundamental: it manifests and performs the 
foundational site of the political as such, the space of appearance where 
human beings encounter each other as equals. Prior to politics in the usual 
sense of parties and defined social movements, Occupy was the clearing 
or opening before the work of foundation. It was therefore necessarily 
transitory and transitional, and was accurately represented by the figure 
of the Ballerina on the Bull. The Ballerina is not a figure of revolution; she 
does not seek to kill the Bull but to “take him by the horns” and use him 
as a support, to transform Wall Street into a foundational site for the per-
formance of actually existing freedom and democracy.
The Egyptian Revolution, by contrast, attempted (unsuccessfully) to 
move from its rebellious stage to its constitutional moment. As Arendt 
puts it, “Revolution on the one hand, and constitution and foundation on 
the other, are like correlative conjunctions” (117). “The end of rebellion 
is liberation, while the end of revolution is the foundation of freedom” 
and the making of a new constitution. One could see this already in the 
moment when the multitude assembled in Tahrir Square attempted to 
erect a giant wooden obelisk with the names of the martyrs engraved on 
it. This act, which resonated with memories of Tiananmen Square, on the 
one hand, and the Washington Monument, on the other, was an uncanny 
image of return, given the obelisk’s original home as an Egyptian mon-
ument. Given the long history of removal and dislocation of the obelisk 
from Egypt to Rome to Napoleonic Paris to Washington, DC, it was as if 
the figure of constitutional foundation had been returned to its proper 
15. In Occupy: Three Inquiries in Disobedience, co- authored with Michael Taussig 
and myself. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012).

1 6 4  :  C H A P T E R  1 2
site. But instead of serving as a symbol of pharaonic and phallic power, 
it became, like the Washington Monument (whose individual stones are 
understood to represent the multitude of citizens), a symbol of the unity 
of a people.
CONCLUSION
The only way to conclude an essay of this sort is with the trope of occupatio. 
Since the events I have been describing are happening in the present, and 
are still unfolding,16 it would be foolish to predict final outcomes. And 
in fact, as Otto Neurath foresaw, there are no final outcomes in human 
history, only temporary and imperfect repairs to that leaky boat called 
“spaceship earth” in which we find ourselves. If space permitted, and I had 
a crystal ball, here is what I would have wanted to discuss:
— I would have discussed further the contrast between foundation and 
founding or grounding, between the base of an architectural structure and 
the acts of clearing and assembling that must precede it.
— I would have explored more fully the relation of violence and foun-
dation, particularly Walter Benjamin’s notion of “law- making violence” 
and Giorgio Agamben’s reflections on the “camp” as the enduring site of 
the state of exception and its place as a symptom of systemic violence that 
reduces populations to a condition of “bare life.”
— I would have elaborated this contrast further in terms of Edward 
Said’s distinction between “origins” and “beginnings”: origin as the 
mythic, fetishized foundation, the completed structure with all its aura; 
beginning as the modest but often decisively catalytic events that launch 
a movement and may produce a foundation. I would have linked this fur-
ther to Arendt’s “space of appearance” (as beginning) and the built public 
space that remains empty. And of course I would have linked this back to 
the image of One Vase/Two Faces.
— I would have reflected on the contrast between the images of found-
ing and foundation in terms of the architectural structure and the ship 
that can never reach a dry dock for total repair. Inevitably, these metaphors 
would have led to the language of running aground and foundering.
— I would have expanded on the totemic, fetishistic, and idolatrous 
character of foundational sites, their links with geomancy, sacrifice, and 
sacred space— the practice of idolatry of course associated with images 
16. Something called “Occupy Central” flared up with attempts to occupy multi-
national banks in Hong Kong as recently as June 2014.

F O U N D A T I O N A L  S I T E S  A N D  O C C U P I E D  S P A C E S  :  1 6 5
of the sovereign as a living god who contains multitudes within his body, 
and the rituals of mass ornament that reinforce the spectacular charac-
ter of power. This would necessarily lead to a consideration of “totemic” 
foundational sites of communal gathering, of which Occupy is clearly an 
instance. Note that Occupy gatherings are not merely “demonstrations,” 
but mini- communities; Occupy Wall Street provided food, clothing, shel-
ter, and medical aid to visitors.
And I would have raised these questions for further discussion:
— Are “foundational sites” only to be located as physical locations in 
real space? Could a foundational site be virtual and movable? Is a constitu-
tion itself a foundational site, a virtual structure of laws and governmental 
architecture that can sustain and prolong the space of appearance? The 
“founding fathers” of the American Constitution regarded themselves as 
“framers” of an architectural structure. But was that structure grounded in 
abstract “bedrock principles,” or was it more like the Ark of the Covenant, 
a ship of state launched on a voyage to a Promised Land?
— Is it possible to create foundational sites without deifying the images 
of “founding fathers” and initiating the inevitable Oedipal cycle that fol-
lows them? Could the spaceship earth be reframed as a mother ship, the 
womb in which a new humanity might be born?
— To what extent will be events of 2011 be remembered as revolution-
ary? Which of them will turn out to be foundational, and which will be 
remembered as merely gestural acts, performances of founding and 
grounding? Have cornerstones been laid for structures that will grow into 
durable spaces of appearance, nurseries for a rebirth of the political? Or 
will face- to- face encounters give way to the merely monumental, the vase 
as the funerary urn of failed revolutions?

13.1 Keystone 1947 photograph of the border line between the British and Rus-
sian sectors of Berlin. Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty Images.

13: BORDER WARS
Translation and Convergence in Politics and Media
As an iconologist I cannot think about borders without conjuring up an im-
age. The first that comes to mind is a line being painted down the middle of 
a Berlin street in 1947, inaugurating the fateful division of Berlin into Eastern 
and Western sectors. What does it show us?
We know that every border has two sides, an inside and an outside, divid-
ing us from them, natives from aliens, friends from enemies. The “drawing 
of a distinction” and the inauguration of a difference is (as discussed in the 
preface) the fundamental rule of systems theory in its abstract form. What 
may be less evident is that every border has a third aspect. This is more dif-
ficult to name, but it is easy to see in this picture. It is the actual white line 
and the act of painting it. A line that divides the East from the West, a line 
that may widen to become a district, zone, or region, or contract to become 
a mere abstraction on a map, an ephemeral line in the sand. The Berlin Wall 
was both a material fact and a symbolic object, expressing in miniature the 
global logic of the Cold War. Note the X within the scene, the intersection 
between two lines, the railroad tracks and the political border.1 In Israel- 
Palestine, a border hardens into a thirty- foot- high concrete wall, with killing 
zones, or “no man’s lands,” on either side. The so- called demilitarized zone 
that divides North and South Korea at the thirty- eighth parallel is about two 
and a half miles wide, a space that is (despite the name) the most heavily 
militarized border in the world. Sometimes an entire country can become 
the political equivalent of a border, as with certain “buffer states” that divide 
Russia from Europe.
In each of these cases the border is both a material thing— a physical 
place, a graphic mark on a street— and an imaginary, political- juridical 
concept that remains invisible to the naked eye. There are thus two basic 
kinds of borders: actual and virtual, literal and metaphoric, material and 
imaginary. It is important to stress, however, that these distinctions of kind, 
while seemingly obvious, themselves have permeable borders. Real, material 
borders can be erased; virtual and metaphoric borders can become actual.
1. See the discussion of the X in chapters 4 and 14.

1 6 8  :  C H A P T E R  1 3
In the following essay I want to explore the actual- virtual interface of 
the two kinds of borders: on the one hand, geographical- political bound-
aries; on the other, conceptual borders that distinguish different media and 
the disciplines that address them. I will also reflect on the role of conver-
gence at the sites of borders, and translations— or as I should prefer to say, 
transactions— that take place across them.
What is the logic behind this triad of terms: borders, translation, and 
convergence? At first glance, their triangulation suggests a kind of progres-
sive narrative, even a neo- Hegelian dialectic. First, the thesis of borders— 
between languages, cultures, nations, and geographical regions. Second, 
the antithesis of border crossing in acts of translation or, more generally, 
transactions between domains separated by borders— encounters, migra-
tions, diplomatic and commercial relations. And finally, the happy synthe-
sis that is convergence, in which everything becomes unified, borders are 
abolished, and translation becomes unnecessary since everyone speaks the 
same language.
A world of this sort exists only in the utopian imaginary of academia, 
which dreams of an interdisciplinary paradise where the sciences and the 
arts, history and philosophy, theoretical speculation and empirical research, 
lie down together in the comforting embrace of a unified uni- versity. As 
every academic can testify, however, this picture of a Happy Valley is belied 
by the realities of limited resources, competition for office space, appoint-
ments, and leave time, and more or less open conflicts between different dis-
ciplinary ideologies and what Immanuel Kant called “the contest of the fac-
ulties.” The 1980s were enlivened by “culture wars” between old- fashioned 
humanists and new theoretical and disciplinary initiatives. Deconstruction, 
feminism, Marxism, New Historicism, and cultural studies constituted an 
affront to the old emphasis on a limited canon of mostly white male au-
thors. At my own university, most of the transactions between the economics 
department and the humanities are conducted in an atmosphere of fixed 
borders and mutual distrust and incomprehension. The pages of Critical 
Inquiry, the journal I edit, are riddled with border wars, border crossings, 
and interdisciplinary convergences, not to mention frequent translations of 
key thinkers in a variety of languages. We have philosophers writing about 
film, photographers writing about philosophy, and literary scholars writing 
about anything and everything. But most important, we have what William 
Blake called “wars of intellect” that defend or contest the borders of disci-
plines. My own specialty of visual culture studies has been denounced, most 
famously by October magazine, as a conspiracy to undermine art history and 
to erase the borders between literature and the visual arts and between the 

B O R D E R  W A R S  :  1 6 9
fine arts and mass culture. I have been characterized at various times as, on 
the one hand, an anarchist working to eliminate these borders and, on the 
other, a policeman trying to regulate them.
It seems best, then, not to fall into an automatic progressive or utopian 
narrative around the notions of borders, translation, and convergence. 
Sometimes borders are a good thing (good fences make good neighbors), 
and sometimes they are not; translation comes, as we know, from traduire, 
or treachery and betrayal. And convergence looks like a good thing mainly 
to the more powerful partner who absorbs the weaker into an asymmetrical 
synthesis. Colonization and conquest can occur among disciplines as well as 
countries, and we should not forget the real- world academic consequences 
of the cultural studies movement in some institutions, where it abolished 
borders between traditional disciplines in the name of a highly desirable 
“interdisciplinary synthesis,” and in doing so became the pretext for down-
sizing and eliminating traditional programs in languages and literatures 
other than English.
As for “English language and literature,”2 we will certainly need to re-
flect on its curious and crucial relation to the whole question of borders, 
translation, and convergence. English is now, in a phrase that would seem 
to require an apology to the Italians, the “lingua franca” of our time.3 Lingua 
anglica, like the original lingua franca, is a pidgin tongue that has absorbed 
thousands of words from other languages and adds new ones everyday from 
the proliferation of technical jargon. English seems to cross all borders and 
invite all other languages to translate themselves into a monolingual conver-
gence, a process that may seem infinitely desirable to “native” English speak-
ers (whatever they are) but less attractive to speakers of minority languages 
whose existence is threatened by a linguistic version of social Darwinism.
The global hegemony of English, moreover, has to be seen as the out-
growth of a whole series of historical processes involving the overcoming of 
borders, the forces of translation, and the dynamics of convergence. To clar-
ify this point, we might contrast the global reach of “English” with the spa-
2. The original occasion of this paper was as the keynote address to the English 
Language and Literature Association of Korea (ELLAK) of December 2012, for 
which the topic was “Borders, Translations, and Convergences.”
3. As Wikipedia, our universal crowd- sourcing encyclopedia informs us, “Lingua 
Franca was a mixed language composed mostly (80%) of Italian with a broad vo-
cabulary drawn from Turkish, French, Greek, Arabic, Portuguese and Spanish. It 
was in use throughout the eastern Mediterranean as the language of commerce 
and diplomacy in and around the Renaissance era.” http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki 
/Lingua_franca (accessed July 15, 2014).

1 7 0  :  C H A P T E R  1 3
tial reach of the British empire, which is what made possible the worldwide 
circulation of the omnivorous language. “Britain” itself, as many historians 
have shown, was a product in the first instance of the English colonization of 
Scotland, Ireland, and Wales, the invasive crossing of borders by the English, 
the enforcing of English linguistic dominance, and the convergence of four 
different language groups into a new English- speaking unity named Britain 
that would ultimately expand into a “Britannia,” which would rule the waves, 
and many of the borders washed by them, from one end of the earth to the 
other. The ascendance of what the French call “perfidious  Albion” is equiva-
lent to William Blake’s prophecy of humanity’s convergence in a “Universal 
Man,” whose name resonates with the pun on “All Be One” and quite literally 
denotes an albino- esque domination of the world by white folks. “White as 
an angel is the English child,” is the sentiment attributed to the Little Black 
Boy in Blake’s poem by that title.
But I want to consider here something simultaneously more abstract and 
more concrete than the question of English borders, translations, and con-
vergences. I will rather reflect on the conceptual triad of borders, translation, 
and convergence and its application in the sphere of global politics and 
media. My aim here is to think through the logic that underlies this triad, 
why it seems like such a productive and inevitable conjunction of terms and 
ideational complexes.
The political meaning of borders, translation, and convergence is prob-
ably the most obvious and literal. Nation- states, by definition, have borders; 
it is what defines them as political- spatial entities in the first place. Transfers 
and transactions, whether peaceful or violent, friendly or hostile, automat-
ically “come with the territory” of border formations, and translation must 
be seen as simply one special case of the “trans- ”— the moment of border 
crossing between languages. Under the “trans- ,” then, we would want to 
include, not just words, but money, commodities, and organisms. “Trans- ” 
relations includes commerce, diplomacy, negotiations, and migrations of 
living things, including but not limited to people. Even when nations share 
a language, the question of translation must emerge: the famous joke de-
scribes the United States and Great Britain as “divided by a common lan-
guage”; on the Korean peninsula, a former colony of Japan, two nations 
united in language are divided by war, antagonistic political systems, and a 
long history of other hostile transactions.
Convergence occupies the place of the event of the “trans- ,” the moment 
of contact and encounter at the virtual or actual border between nations, 
states, populations, and cultures. Sometimes (rarely) convergence involves 
peaceful assimilation, a merging of political entities. More often it involves 

B O R D E R  W A R S  :  1 7 1
conquest, colonization, and the domination of one social group by another, 
the decline of one language (Irish, Welsh, Icelandic) at the hands of the 
dominant group, and sometimes the death of a whole people and nation as a 
result of ethnic cleansing or genocide. “Convergence,” then, is probably best 
seen as a euphemism for absorption, removal, and extinction, the collision 
between cultures or political systems, the swallowing up of the weaker by the 
stronger. But it may also involve the stabilization of a conflict, its reification 
in borders that are continually reinforced and reaffirmed, usually in the name 
of anxieties about another form of the “trans- ,” namely the “transgression” 
of a border. Obviously, Korea is a place that has long and painful experience 
of this phenomenon, whether the border is the thirty- eighth parallel, which 
hardened into a long- standing demilitarized zone (DMZ), or the momentary 
“last ditch stand” of the Allies at the “Pusan Perimeter” in 1950. Transactions 
across these borders have consisted mainly of violence, whether in the form 
of verbal polemics or actual military exchanges of gunfire.
I want to emphasize, then, the importance of seeing translation as merely 
a special, relatively peaceful version of a more general process of transaction, 
including not only the exchange of words and goods and gifts but the trading 
of insults, threats, blows, and bombs. This has been true even in the case 
of translation, as seen in the old Latin phrase for the conquest of the Rest 
by the West, the notorious translatio imperii, the “transfer of empire from 
East to West.” The most important force in the establishment of borders, 
aside from natural boundaries such as mountains, rivers, and oceans, is war. 
Could it be that all wars are fundamentally “border wars,” even when they 
range over a global field, as in the case of the Cold War and its contemporary 
successor, the global war on terror?
We see this clearly the moment we list some of the most famous border 
regions in modern history. The Rhine, the Maginot Line, the Mason- Dixon 
line, the “UN buffer zone” between Turkish and Greek Cyprus, the now- 
vanished border between North and South Vietnam, the Iron Curtain that 
divided Europe throughout the Cold War, the Green Line between Israel and 
the Occupied Territories of the West Bank, the border between Afghanistan 
and Pakistan.
Of these, the one I know best is the Green Line that divides Israel- 
Palestine, a boundary that may be taken as exemplary of many of the par-
adoxes that surround the question of borders.4 These paradoxes may be 
4. I rely here on Saree Makdisi’s masterful survey of Israel- Palestine, Palestine 
Inside/Out: An Everyday Occupation (New York: W. W. Norton, 2010). See also Ilan 
Pappe, The Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine (New York: One World Publications, 2007).

1 7 2  :  C H A P T E R  1 3
glimpsed in the variety of names and contested terms for regions within 
what radical Zionists call “Eretz Israel” or “Greater Israel,” a territory that 
includes the West Bank and Gaza— which they call “Judea and Samaria,” 
imposing biblical names on a modern region. I prefer to use the hyphenated 
term “Israel- Palestine” to designate the contested homeland of two peoples 
divided by religion, race, and language but united in a their obsession with 
exactly the same region, the “Holy Land” that lies at the center of the three 
great “religions of the Book,” Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.
Israel- Palestine, like Korea, is a partitioned by- product of the Cold War. 
Both originated in the period right after World War II. Both are sites of proxy 
wars, transactions of violence between the great powers that dominated the 
world during the last half of the twentieth century. This long stalemate pro-
duced a relatively static condition of stabilized borders and fixed enmity 
that, in both regions, endures long after the Cold War that created it was 
declared over and done with, won decisively by the “the West.” There the 
similarity ends, of course, since Israel- Palestine, far from being a stable pair 
of sovereign nations in a state of hostility, is actually one country in which 
approximately half the population lives under the military occupation of the 
other half. Gaza is not an independent nation facing Israel. It is under Is-
raeli military control, and Israel could annihilate its entire population quite 
easily. There is an illusion of “transaction” across an internal border that 
masquerades as “the peace process,” based in the transparent lie that Israel 
and Palestine are two nation- states engaged in protracted negotiations to 
produce a settlement. This so- called peace process has been going on for 
decades, with the only tangible results being the increasing degradation 
of Palestinian lives and the erection of a “security fence” (called an “apart-
heid wall” by the Palestinians). The rigidity of this wall, while superficially 
expressing the fixity of the border between the Israelis and Palestinians, is 
a manifestly deceptive illusion, concealing the fact that over a quarter mil-
lion Jewish settlers have established colonial outposts inside the occupied 
territories of Palestine, and a considerable number of Palestinians reside 
inside Israel “proper” as second- class citizens. The borders of Israel proper 
do not actually exist, and officially exist in a permanent state of contestation, 
which is why many Israelis refuse to call the West Bank the “occupied terri-
tories,” preferring the legalistic evasion of the phrase “disputed territories.” 
Palestinians live, moreover, inside their own country as if they were illegal 
immigrants, constantly subject to military checkpoints and border crossings 
where they may be detained, arrested, and searched. Palestinians live, in 
other words, as if they were constantly in a border zone, without any of the 
rights of independent citizens of a nation- state, a liminal condition in which 

B O R D E R  W A R S  :  1 7 3
all the transactions of daily life converge in the intolerable condition known 
as military occupation, with no end in sight.
The erection of borders and the waging of border wars, along with the 
transactions and convergences that inevitably accompany them, seems to 
be such a fundamental characteristic of human societies that it might be 
worth reflecting on the deeper logics and structures that produce them. I 
want to turn now from these examples of literal, empirical borders of nation- 
states to a consideration of the virtual and figurative borders that divide 
the realm of language, the media, and representation as such. The borders 
of this conference,5 for instance, are defined not just by “English” but by 
“literature and language,” a delimitation that suggests a certain exclusion. 
From the standpoint of media studies, the first thing that comes to mind 
is that the sphere of the so- called visual media is not included: cinema, 
the visual arts, and, with them, the emergent discipline of cinema studies 
and the venerable old discipline of art history. When I first heard the title, 
“Borders, Translation, Convergence,” my thoughts turned, not to political 
borders, but to their sublimated forms in the aesthetics and representational 
media. (I exclude music as nonrepresentational for the moment). I thought 
of Lessing’s famous words about the relation of poetry and painting:
Painting and poetry should be like two just and friendly neighbors, neither 
of whom indeed is allowed to take unseemly liberties in the heart of the 
other’s domain, but who exercise mutual forbearance on the borders, and 
effect a peaceful settlement for all the petty encroachments which circum-
stance may compel either to make in haste on the rights of the other.6
Lessing’s picture of the relations of verbal and visual arts is both ethical and 
political, fusing the personal relations of neighbors with the larger sphere 
of sovereign territories. The language of “domain,” “peaceful settlement,” 
and “borders” makes it clear that the arts, and indeed the verbal and visual 
regions of media— of language and literature, painting and image- making 
more generally— are something like countries, even nation- states, with 
distinctive political cultures. It will turn out that for Lessing, the realm of 
“bright eyes,” florid description, and other visual incursions into the arts 
of language is a French phenomenon, and that the superiority of the verbal 
5. The English Language and Literature Association of Korea (ELLAK), December 
2012.
6. Lessing, Laocoon: An Essay upon the Limits of Poetry and Painting, trans. Edith 
Frothingham (New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1969), 110.

1 7 4  :  C H A P T E R  1 3
arts is to be secured by an alliance between German and English literary 
cultures.
Lessing recognizes, of course, that these borders are metaphoric and 
playful, not absolute physical boundaries like national borders. But that 
does not mean they are unreal or “merely” metaphoric. In fact, Lessing will 
argue that they are grounded in the metaphysical categories of time and 
space, as well as the natural division of the senses between the visual and 
the auditory. And it will rapidly become evident that his ultimate aim is 
not to establish a border between separate but equal arts but to establish 
the dominance of one over the other. Poetry, Lessing will argue, has the 
“wider sphere” because of “the infinite range of our imagination and the 
intangibility of its images.” All the border transgressions he worries about, 
therefore, are being committed by painting, in its tendency to contaminate 
literature with descriptive techniques and to appropriate the techniques of 
writing in its tendency toward allegory. Lessing writes, in other words, as 
the border policeman on behalf of the republic of letters, not the visual arts. 
His position is roughly the reverse of that of Leonardo da Vinci, who argued 
in the paragone for the superiority of painting on the basis of its powers of 
immediacy and vivid effects on the spectator.7
We encounter echoes of these border wars in Michel Foucault’s rumi-
nations on the relations of verbal and visual representation in This Is Not a 
Pipe. Analyzing Magritte’s famous composition, Foucault characterizes the 
convergence between the text and the image as
a whole series of intersections— or rather attacks launched by one against 
the other, arrows shot at the enemy target, enterprises of subversion and 
destruction, lance blows and wounds, a battle.8
Foucault emphasizes, moreover, the phenomenology of the borderline be-
tween word and image, “the small space running above the words and below 
the drawing, forever serving them as a common frontier” (28). But Foucault’s 
border is much more— or less— than a line. It is more like the DMZ, a zone 
of indeterminacy or “no man’s land”:
The slender, colorless, neutral strip, which in Magritte’s drawing separates 
the text and the figure, must be seen as a crevasse— an uncertain, foggy 
7. Paragone: A Comparison of the Arts, trans. Irma A. Richter (Oxford University 
Press, 1949).
8. Foucault, This Is Not a Pipe, trans. James Harkness (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 2008), 26.

B O R D E R  W A R S  :  1 7 5
region now dividing the pipe floating in its imagistic heaven from the mun-
dane tramp of words marching in their successive line. Still it is too much 
to claim that there is a blank or lacuna: instead, it is an absence of space, 
an effacement of the “common place” between the signs of writing and the 
lines of the image. . . . No longer can anything pass between them save the 
decree of divorce. (28– 29)
Like Lessing, Foucault is being playful, even whimsical in his characteriza-
tion of the word- image relation as a border war, perhaps even a domestic 
“battle of the sexes” that can only end in divorce. Lessing had also character-
ized the relations of poetry and painting in terms of gender, with the “larger 
sphere” of language associated with men, the “narrower” domain of the vi-
sual arts with feminine display. But Foucault also has a serious agenda in his 
reflection on the borders of the visual and the verbal. As Deleuze has shown, 
these distinctions play the role of something like the Kantian categories in 
Foucault’s archaeology of knowledge, constituting the bands or “strata” of 
the “seeable and sayable,” the “visible and the articulable.”9
If we are in search of the logic of virtual, metaphoric borders within the 
realm of media and representation, however, there is no better place to turn 
than the classic picture of language provided by Saussure’s linguistics.10 
The basic diagram of the linguistic sign is a straightforward assemblage of 
the three elements of borders, translation, and convergence we have been 
tracing. The sign is divided into two domains, the signifier and the signified, 
with a bar providing the borderline between them. Convergence is depicted 
by the bubble or egg shape that resolves the duality of the sign into a single 
form. Translation is imaged by bidirectional arrows suggesting the transfer 
of meaning from one realm of the sign to the other. But most striking, of 
course, are the figures of the signifier and signified as the word and the 
image, respectively, denoting a tree. It is not especially important what the 
denotation is; the important thing is that, as in Foucault and Lessing, they 
are represented by pictorial and verbal forms, the two fundamental dimen-
sions of representation. The bar between them is thus a border, not between 
two things of the same order, but between incommensurable, mutually alien 
marks. They can no more be translated into one another than can Magritte’s 
linguistic and pictorial pipes. The word for “tree” in Saussure’s diagram 
9. Gilles Deleuze, “Strata or Historical Formations: the Visible and the Articulable 
(Knowledge),” in Foucault, trans. Sean Hand (Minneapolis: University of Minne-
sota Press, 1988).
10. See the discussion in chapter 4, “Image X Text.”

1 7 6  :  C H A P T E R  1 3
could as easily be written, “this is not a tree.” And the arrows that we took 
as signs for translation could as well be seen as signs of violent transactions, 
Foucault’s “arrows shot at an enemy target.”
There is a border war, then, at the heart of media and representation. It is 
not that language names the world, or that the signifier names the signified, 
but that language launches a war for and in the world, a struggle for meaning 
that can never be fully delivered over the bar of difference and otherness. 
Lacan glimpsed the gender coding of this bar when he “replaced [Saussure’s] 
illustration with another,” a picture of the sign as a pair of doors labeled “La-
dies” and “Gentlemen.”11 Two kinds of borders constitute the structure of 
this tableau: the linear bar between the words and the images, and the blank 
space between the doors. I hope by now we have learned to see this blank 
space as Foucault’s “foggy region,” in this case a no man’s or woman’s land 
of sexual difference over which nothing can pass but “a decree of divorce.” 
And to see in what Lacan calls “urinary segregation” the primitive basis for 
the inescapable border built into language:
Ladies and Gentlemen will be henceforth two countries towards which each 
of their souls will strive on divergent wings, and between which a truce will 
be the more impossible since they are actually the same country.
At the same time that Lacan elaborates the metaphor of two countries di-
vided by a border he immediately insists on their convergence in “the same 
country”— but a country that can never be at peace with itself. The harshest 
kind of border war is, of course, the civil variety, when a people finds itself at 
war with itself. In this case the border can become a killing field, and the bar 
is a mark, not merely of “segregation” of the other on the basis of difference, 
but in the register of enmity.
The border, then, is not just the bar between different peoples, but be-
tween enemy peoples, which does not rule out gender difference, the battle 
of the sexes, and the overwhelming temptation of penetrating the border 
and sleeping with the enemy. I want, therefore, to conclude with a brief 
snapshot of the question of borders in the era of the Cold War and the con-
temporary war on terror, the two wars that have dominated the world, and 
especially the American imagination of war, for the last sixty years. This 
snapshot will be focused on two narratives, one cinematic and the other 
televisual, John Frankenheimer’s The Manchurian Candidate (1962) and the 
11. Lacan, “Agency of the Letter in the Unconscious,” in Ecrits, trans. Alan Sheri-
dan (New York: W. W. Norton, 1977), 151– 52.

B O R D E R  W A R S  :  1 7 7
Showtime television series Homeland (2011– ). Both stories operate from 
the same schematic premise: a US soldier has returned from war as a he-
roic public figure carrying a deadly secret. He has been brainwashed and 
“turned” into the service of the enemy as an assassin and terrorist. Army 
sergeant and sharpshooter Raymond Shaw (played by Laurence Harvey) has 
been subjected to behavioral conditioning that renders him a robotic cyborg 
who kills on the orders of his operator. Marine sergeant and sniper Nicholas 
Brody (played by Damian Lewis) has been tortured and converted into an 
Islamic jihadist who is under orders to kill the vice president in a suicide 
attack. Both stories conjure with the image of the enemy within, one who has 
infiltrated the national borders, and with the even more ominous specter 
of the defender transformed into an enemy attacker. Both conjure with the 
disturbing fantasy of “sleeping with the enemy.” Sergeant Brody sleeps with 
the CIA agent who suspects him (Carrie Matheson, played by Claire Danes). 
Sergeant Shaw sleeps with the daughter of a man he is sent to assassinate 
and, in the even more perverse version provided by the novel, with his own 
mother, who turns out to be the “operator” who is giving him orders.
Most interesting, perhaps, is the common interest of Candidate and 
Homeland in the question of brainwashing, psychiatry, and induced psycho-
sis. The Manchurian Candidate features an evil Chinese psychiatrist, Dr. Yen 
Lo, a wisecracking sadist who uses sleep deprivation, drugs, and other mys-
terious forms of “behavior modification” to turn an entire squad of Ameri-
can soldiers into amnesiac automatons who can be induced by the power of 
suggestion to experience collective hallucinations. In the film’s most famous 
sequence, Dr. Lo inducts the film audience into this hallucination, segueing 
seamlessly between the soldiers’ delusion that they are attending a meeting 
of a ladies’ garden club and the reality that they are prisoners on display in 
a psy- ops theater somewhere deep inside North Korea.
Homeland employs a contrasting strategy. Sergeant Brody has not been 
brainwashed (though the word is mentioned) by modern psychiatric tech-
niques. He has been converted to Islam by a combination of old- fashioned 
physical torture and old- fashioned love and kindness lavished on him by 
his captor, the terrorist chieftain Abu Nazr. The modern model of mental 
illness is transferred to Carrie, the female CIA agent, who suffers from bi-
polar disorder aggravated by the paranoia and an obsessive commitment to 
her work that is the occupational hazard of spying as a profession. Carrie’s 
illness, however, leads her, not into delusion, but into an accurate intuitive 
grasp of what Sergeant Brody has become— a human time bomb, the key 
figure in a terrorist attack on the United States that will surpass 9- 11. As 
a madwoman, Carrie is just the opposite of the madmen Raymond Shaw 

1 7 8  :  C H A P T E R  1 3
and Nicholas Brody. They have been transformed by torture into merciless 
assassins; she has been transformed by 9- 11 and the war on terror into a 
Cassandra who foresees the violence to come, a true prophet whose curse 
is that no one believes her.
Together these two fictions provide a compelling diptych of the insane 
border wars that have dominated the world system since 1945. On the one 
hand, a Cold War characterized by rigid virtual borders between two ideol-
ogies, communism and capitalism, centered in specific nation states (the 
US, China, and the Soviet Union). The Cold War expressed itself in a global 
binary opposition between “the West,” or “Free World,” and “the Rest,” 
and in proxy wars in which very real borders were created (as in Korea) and 
destroyed (as in Vietnam). On the other hand, a war on terror that knows 
no borders and has no specific geographic center, no “frontlines,” and no 
massed war machines or “arms race.”
That does not mean that the concept of “border wars” has outlived its 
usefulness. On the contrary, the borders have now been disseminated over 
the entire globe; they are everywhere and nowhere at the same time, vir-
tual borders of encryption and surveillance of the sort pioneered by the Na-
tional Security Agency.12 The borders that divide Korea and Israel- Palestine 
remain as material proxies for larger conflicts between great powers and 
social movements. But the virtual and psychological borders erected by the 
war on terror are, if anything, even more dangerous than those of the Cold 
War. They betoken a massive collective borderline psychosis, complete with 
the classic symptoms of anxiety, paranoia, and delusional thinking.13 The 
Manchurian Candidate expressed what Peter Galison has called an “ontology 
of the enemy” as an unfeeling cyborg, the robotic manifestation of godless 
communism. Homeland, by contrast, portrays the enemy as a passionate, 
committed moral agent, a holy warrior bent on redemption through vi-
olence. If the appropriate acronym for the Cold War was MAD (mutually 
assured destruction), a product of rational game theories that guaranteed 
a stable equilibrium between equally powerful enemies, the war on terror 
possesses no such stabilizing feedback mechanism. It is more like schizo-
phrenia, not a “split” but a shattered personality. Terror war produces an 
unstable, out- of- control feedback system that postulates as its enemy an 
12. See Glenn Greenwald’s No Place to Hide (New York: Metropolitan Books, 2014), 
for a masterful account of the global surveillance system of the NSA, as exposed by 
Edward Snowden, the greatest whistle- blowing border- transgressor of our time.
13. Greenwald’s analysis of the NSA surveillance regime reveals an institution that 
is drowning in its own obsession with total gathering of data, and has as a result 
been completely impotent in preventing actual terrorist attacks.

B O R D E R  W A R S  :  1 7 9
emotion and a tactic— terror and terrorism. That is why the very idea of 
a war on terror is madness— specifically, paranoid schizophrenia— made 
operational. It creates an endless, unwinnable war in which the tactics of 
classical wars, the crossing of borders to invade and occupy other countries, 
only make things worse.
Jacques Derrida diagnosed the insanity of the war on terror as an auto-
immune disorder, a syndrome in which the border defenses of the body 
politic are unable to distinguish friend from enemy and begin to attack 
themselves.14 Terrorism has never succeeded in the military conquest 
of a country; it does not cross borders with invading armies. The idea is 
rather to set the country against itself, to induce panic, paranoia, and a self- 
destructive cycle of “emergency” measures that give absolute power over 
life and death to the sovereign. For a democracy that, by definition, locates 
sovereignty in the will of the people, this process can only end in the de-
struction of those essential structural borders that make up the separation 
of powers in a constitutional government. Barack Obama retired the phrase 
“war on terror” from the vocabulary of national security in his first four 
years in office, but he retained much of the extraordinary executive authority 
appropriated for the presidency during the Bush era. The war on terror has 
already crossed the border between the metaphorical and the literal, turning 
a rhetorical slogan into an operational reality.15 If it is not decisively repudi-
ated it will eliminate the border between rationality and madness, between 
self- preservation and self- destruction.
I have been speaking throughout this essay of two kinds of borders, the 
virtual and the actual, the metaphoric and the literal, the ideal and the ma-
terial. But I hope it is clear by now that both kinds of borders are very real, 
and are inseparably linked, necessary to each other. The real border is always 
two- sided, both virtual and actual, a product both of words and of images— 
and the gap or zone between them, the nonplace where an increasing num-
ber of human beings actually live. Maps, measurements, descriptions, state-
ments, declarations, and images clear the way for actual physical things such 
as walls, fences, and districts. Add to this the sets of practices and rituals 
that are conducted at borders, and it becomes obvious how deeply the virtual 
and the actual, the metaphoric and the literal, converge, and are translated 
into one another, at the borderlines we inhabit.
14. For a fuller discussion of Derrida’s autoimmunity thesis, see my Cloning Terror: 
The War of Images, 9- 11 to the Present (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011).
15. See Cloning Terror, xviii.

14.1 Nicolas Poussin, The Plague at Ashdod, Palestine (1630). Oil on canvas, 148 × 
198 cm. Musée du Louvre, Paris. Photograph: Alfredo Dgli Orti/The Art Archive 
at Art Resource, New York.

14: ART X ENVIRONMENT
Extreme Landscapes, Poussin in Gaza
This essay began its life with an invitation to consider the relation of “Art 
and Environment,” a topic we were told could be interpreted in the broad-
est possible way: “art” as the whole range of artificial means of acting upon 
an environment, from planting an Inuit nukchuk on the tundra, to the 
human activities that are causing the melting of the polar ice caps; “envi-
ronment” as a triangulation of space, place, and landscape— that is, the 
dynamic interaction of a space or ecosystem constituted by forms, forces, 
and flows, with the specificity of a place— a particular location, region, 
or planetary system, with the perceptual and conceptual frameworks of 
representation that make that space and place come into focus as a world 
picture or landscape.1
But I find my attention drawn first to the word that stitches the topic 
together, the “and” that connects art to environment, artifice to nature, 
human activity to spaces, places, and landscapes. In keeping with the stan-
dard practice of the hip world of art and design, a 2008 conference on this 
subject at the Nevada Museum of Art replaced the “and” with a plus sign 
and came up with “Art + Environment.”2 The humble little conjunction 
“and” was thus promoted to a logical, even a mathematical operation. As 
the designated respondent to this conference, I urged a slight modifica-
tion to this operational term, replacing the plus sign with a times sign, 
the + with an X.3 My immediate concern was to question the idea that art 
is or should be merely an “addition” to the environment, an ornament to 
1. On the concepts of space, place, and landscape, see the preface to the second 
edition of Landscape and Power, ed. W. J. T. Mitchell (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 2002).
2. The Art + Environment Conference, held October 2– 4, 2008, at the Nevada 
Museum of Art, Reno, Nevada, included presentations by artists, critics, and en-
vironmentalists, plus an unforgettable “field trip” to Pyramid Lake, complete with 
storytelling by two Paiute Indian elders. I am especially grateful to Bill Fox for his 
masterful orchestration of this event.
3. See chapter 4, “Image X Text,” for further thoughts (some of them repeated 
here) on the X as Joycean verbo- voco- visual pun.

1 8 2  :  C H A P T E R  1 4
the space, place, or landscape in which it appears. I wanted to consider 
the more complex and dynamic relation of multiplication, manifested in 
forms of art that transform a place, restructure a space, and intervene in 
a landscape.
The X that I introduce into the relation of art and the environment, 
then, can take on a number of meanings. As the multiplier effect, it reflects 
the way the simplest intrusion of human artifice into a place can utterly 
transform it, as in Wallace Stevens’s wonderful poem “Anecdote of a Jar,” 
where the act of placing a jar “in Tennessee” has the effect of transform-
ing it as profoundly as the Tennessee Valley Authority, taming the wilder-
ness, opening a “port in air,” and of reorienting the whole state around 
something alien to its natural order: “it did not give of bird or bush / Like 
nothing else in Tennessee.” As a sign of crossing (as in a railroad crossing), 
it may remind us of arts that seem to traverse or cut across a space, dis-
rupting and interrupting habitual patterns of behavior and perception, as 
in Richard Serra’s notorious Tilted Arc, which cut across the Federal Plaza 
in New York City, with such dramatic effects that it was ultimately taken 
down. Or Robert Morris’s Grand Rapids earthwork, which takes the X quite 
literally, transforming a natural hillside into trapezoidal support for the 
inscription of a giant X.
We should also bear in mind the meaning of the X as the “times sign” 
and the way works of art introduce the element of time into space, with 
monuments, memorials, temporary installations, or even (as Robert 
Smithson was the first to insist) the foregrounding of nature’s own time 
arts as manifested in geological strata and fossils.4 Alan Sonfist’s Time 
Landscape, at the corner of La Guardia and Houston streets in Manhattan, 
might be taken as the exemplar of this temporal operation, in which a tiny 
environment is set aside as a natural heterotopia5 to remind us of a time 
before human artifice had made its mark on this place, at the same time 
that the steady flow of trash tossed into Sonfist’s little park produces a 
jarring sense of anachronism.
We should, finally, consider two other senses of the X. First, as the 
4. See especially the work of Antony Gormley, which routinely insists on the tem-
porality and temporariness of sculpture. Works such as Event Horizon, Another 
Place, and Time Horizon insist on the dislocation and homelessness of the sculp-
tural object in time and space. See my “What Sculpture Wants: Placing Antony 
Gormley,” in What Do Pictures Want? On the Lives and Loves of Images (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2005).
5. On heterotopia, see Michel Foucault, “Of Other Spaces,” in Diacritics (Spring 
1986), 22– 28.

A R T  X  E N V I R O N M E N T  :  1 8 3
“unknown” or variable, in which case the X is less an operation than an 
absence, a gap or black hole in the landscape, a mysterious cipher like 
the X on Morris’s earthwork, or the enigmatic inscription on the hillside 
in Thomas Cole’s painting, The Oxbow, which turns out to be the Hebrew 
cypher for “Shaddai,” indicating that this is God’s country, a promised 
land for European conquest and colonization. Second, X as the sign of 
signing, countersigning, and the removal or destruction of signs, from 
the signature of the illiterate, to the marker of interest and destination on 
a map (“X marks the spot”), to the erasure of signs and inscription in the 
act of “crossing out.”
To summarize: the relation of “Art X Environment” must be read as 
multiplicative, not additive; as crossing or passing through rather than 
dwelling; as anachronistic displacement rather than historical fixity; as 
a violent marking and equally violent erasing rather than the secure per-
manence of the monument. The inscription on Shelley’s ruined statue of 
Ozymandias in the desert might be thought of as the total emblem of the 
Art X Environment relation: “My name is Ozymandias, King of Kings: / 
Look on my works, ye mighty, and despair” meant one thing to Ozyman-
dias and the artist he commissioned for this work, quite another for the 
traveler who encounters it in the Egyptian desert in 1817.
But there is one further X that links art to the environment, and that is 
the notion of the outer boundary or “ex- ”— the “extraordinary” landscape, 
the place or space of natural and social extremity, what I want to call “ex-
treme environments.” It is well known that, since the 1960s, many artists 
have felt the call to work in what might be called “extreme natural environ-
ments,” and that much of the earth art movement was understood as an 
attempt to escape the familiar precincts of the gallery and the museum in 
order to explore the outback, the desert, and the polar regions. The gene-
alogy of this movement, as William Fox has shown, could be traced back 
to the sublime landscape arts of the nineteenth century, which were often 
at the leading edge of imperial expansion. These “extreme” environments 
have their antithesis in what was identified at the Reno conference as the 
“ordinary” landscapes of Generation X, what J. B. Jackson used to call the 
“vernacular” landscape: the yards of the suburbs and their endless lawns. 
Fritz Haeg’s Take Back the Lawn project is precisely an intervention in these 
sterile, depressing, and ecologically disastrous environments.6
But my topic in this paper is not quite covered by any of these rubrics, 
6. See Haeg’s website, http://www.fritzhaeg.com/studio.htmlvades, for an over-
view of his remarkable work.

1 8 4  :  C H A P T E R  1 4
or perhaps more precisely, it gathers all of them together in a phenomenon 
that I want to call “extreme social environments.”7 Instead of natural sites, 
earthworks, landscape or sculpture gardens, or other operations of art and 
artifice on environments, I want to consider zones of extreme social pres-
sure and conflict— areas of high population density, occupied territories, 
and spaces under siege. Extreme social environments— slums, favelas, 
shanty towns, ghettos, DP and refugee internment camps— are among 
the fastest growing environments on the planet, and I cannot pretend to 
be an expert on them. Extreme social environments are generally sites of 
extreme inequality and uncertainty, often outside any government control, 
ruled by paramilitary gangs and supervised by a kind of feudal, patriarchal 
justice system of revenge and reprisal. They are, needless to add, sites of 
extreme violence and rampant crime, homelessness, and shattered fam-
ilies. The film Slum Dog Millionaire provides one kind of window into the 
massive slums of Mumbai, and the combination of extreme poverty and 
ethnic violence that permeate them.
The arts play a crucial role in extreme social environments, countering 
the notion that art is merely an ornamental addition, a luxury that de-
pends upon economic surplus. Of course this may not be the kind of art 
that appears in mainstream galleries: it may take the form of street art, 
performance and graffiti, or (from outside) of documentary film, photog-
raphy, and journalism. In Northern Ireland they say that the Protestants 
make the money and the Catholics make the art. The relation of rap music, 
fashion, and visual art to the black ghettos of the United States has been 
amply documented. Indeed, one is tempted to hypothesize that extreme 
social environments are often a seedbed for remarkable cultural and ar-
tistic achievements, and that there is no direct correlation between socio-
economic disaster areas— what used to be called “cultural wastelands.” 
On the contrary, if there is a cultural wasteland in the US, it is probably 
located in suburbia and exurbia, where the rise of mall culture, architec-
tural homogeneity, the abolition of pedestrian traffic, and the lawn fetish 
create a landscape that is depressing to the spirit.
One last generalization that may be pertinent to the topography of 
extreme social environments. They never exist in isolation from what 
might be thought of as their dialectical counterpart of wealth, security, 
7. See Brent K. Marshall, “Sociology, Extreme Environments and Social Change,” 
in Current Sociology 45, no. 3 (1997): 1– 18. Marshall’s concept stresses the way en-
vironmental disaster and rapid technological change disrupt communities; my 
emphasis is on the way already disrupted communities (refugees, immigrants, 
displaced persons) address their environments.

A R T  X  E N V I R O N M E N T  :  1 8 5
and privilege— the gated community, the affluent suburb.8 The South 
African shanty town of Khayelitsha (meaning “new home” or— as I was 
told— “beautiful place”) occupies a massive coastal region bracketed by 
affluent Cape Town on the north and equally affluent coastal suburbs to 
the south.9 David Harvey notes the significance of the spatial adjacency of 
the elite neighborhood of Rowland Park in Baltimore to the black ghetto.10 
Columbia University occupies what comedian George Carlin called “White 
Harlem” (a.k.a. “Morningside Heights”). My neighborhood of Hyde Park in 
Chicago has historically been an island of middle- class contentment and 
racial integration in the midst of the mostly segregated and impoverished 
black South Side.
But these are modest and moderate versions of contradictions in social 
environments. The true “art” of these environments emerges when one of 
the oldest artificial modifications to the environment is erected, namely, a 
wall, and a whole population is fenced in like cattle. The security wall, the 
border fence, the checkpoint, the frontier, the physical or virtual barrier 
that separates extreme social environments from the ordinary landscapes 
of human habitation, has become the site of some of the most compelling 
artistic expressions in our time. Comedian Bill Maher has suggested that 
the notorious Bush administration proposal for a 750- mile- long barrier 
between the United States and Mexico be constructed, not as a wall, but 
as a Wal- Mart. As Maher notes, this would involve building a Wal- Mart of 
no more than average size; it could have a northern entrance for American 
shoppers and a southern entrance for the Mexican workers, each of whom 
would return to their proper locations at the end of the day.11
In a more practical address to the flourishing of walls directed at popu-
lations, murals have made a comeback, and not simply murals that com-
memorate or adorn or embellish, but murals that deconstruct their own 
support, resisting separation and attacking the walls on which they are 
painted, imagining a world of open borders and the free, unobstructed 
movements of human bodies. A binational group called “Artists without 
8. On bad utopias, see Mike Davis and Daniel Bertrand Monk, eds., Evil Paradises: 
Dreamworlds of Neoliberalism (New York: New Press, 2007).
9. The population of Khayelitsha was estimated at over a million when I visited in 
the 1990s. See Steven Otter, Khayelitshad: uMlungu in a Township (London: Penguin 
Global, 2008).
10. Harvey, Justice, Nature, and the Geography of Difference (Oxford: Blackwell, 1996). 
See especially chapter 11, “From Space to Place and Back Again,” 291– 326.
11. See chapter 13, “Border Wars.”

1 8 6  :  C H A P T E R  1 4
Walls” in Israel- Palestine12 has conducted numerous actions, perfor-
mances, and site- specific interventions to resist the notorious Israeli bar-
rier known euphemistically as the “security fence” (actually a ten- meter- 
high wall of concrete slabs that slices through Palestinian villages, cutting 
farmers off from their fields, merchants from their markets, teachers from 
their students, and families from their relatives). These artists employ mu-
ral painting, video, and performance art to dramatize the inhumanity of 
the wall and to make it disappear. Sometimes this is an act of self- delusion, 
as in the now- famous mural at Gilo, which literally (or is it figuratively) 
“disappears” the real Palestinian village of Beit Jala, while causing a fan-
tasy landscape of a depopulated Arabian pastoral to take its place. But it 
can also take the form of a resistance that testifies to the failure of even the 
most brutal military occupations to completely eradicate artistic creativity.
The wall, then, has become the central architectural manifestation of 
the extreme social environments of our time, along with the watchtower. 
It has become so central, in fact, that a kind of intertextuality has arisen 
between different walls, so that the Berlin Wall and the Warsaw Ghetto find 
themselves reinscribed and memorialized in the graffiti on Israel’s wall, 
and some walls even echo the political symbolism of another, quite distant 
structure. The paintings on the wall between Protestants and Catholics on 
Falls Road in Belfast aligned the parties with Israelis and Palestinians. I 
will leave it to you to guess how this alignment went.
Of all the extreme social environments we might single out on this 
planet, the tiny region known as the “Gaza strip” must be paradigmatic 
for our time. It combines all of the extreme elements in one compressed 
space: a strip of land about twice the size of Washington, DC, with one and 
a half million inhabitants, one of the most densely populated environments 
on the planet. The degradation and poverty in which Gaza’s Palestinians 
live, and the ways in which sudden and unpredictable violence can shatter 
what meager lives they have managed to create for themselves, is well docu-
mented. Gaza is, in effect, a giant prison camp, arguably among the largest 
in human history, in which a sizeable civilian population is quarantined, 
embargoed, surveilled, fenced in, starved, humiliated, and (now and then) 
massacred. Despite all the talk of Israel’s withdrawal from Gaza, the strip 
remains, in every technical sense of the word, under military occupation.13
12. See Charlotte Misselwitz, “The Wall Jumpers” in Qantara.de 2005. http://www 
.qantara.de/webcom/show_article.php/_c- 310/_nr- 245/i.html
13. See Rashid Khalidi, “What You Don’t Know about Gaza,” New York Times, which 
points out that the CIA officially regards Gaza as under military occupation, de-

A R T  X  E N V I R O N M E N T  :  1 8 7
My only access to Gaza, like that of most people, is via the media. It 
is an environment that few Americans or Europeans have entered or ex-
perienced directly, and so one has to rely on representations, narratives, 
and descriptions in words, photographs, drawings, and moving images. 
In short, it is an environment that is, for almost everyone, a product of 
art in the extended sense I have been giving it, an art that ranges from 
journalism to propaganda to mural paintings and performances. Gaza is 
perhaps the perfect demonstration of my claim that art is not an ornamen-
tal “addition” to social life but a necessity for the maintenance of human 
sociability and the willingness to resist, especially in the most extreme 
circumstances.
The most salient fact about the extremity of Gaza that emerges in its 
representations is that it is not a kind of accidental condition, a deplorable 
result of Palestinian intransigence, stubbornness, or refusal to recognize 
the state of Israel. Of course Hamas should recognize Israel, just as a mat-
ter of practical survival. When a bully has his foot planted on your throat, 
and he demands that you acknowledge that he is in the right, what else are 
you to do? But I also find it understandable that some people would rather 
die than yield their claim to acknowledgment and respect.
So Gaza is not a tragic side effect of misunderstanding. It is actually 
the clearest manifestation we have of contemporary long- range strategies 
of ethnic cleansing. The real objective of Israel since its founding, as Ilan 
Pappe has shown, has been the removal of the Palestinians from Eretz 
(Greater) Israel.14 The kind of ethnic cleansing that we have recently seen 
in Kosovo and Darfur was carried out in Palestine in 1948. Approximately 
half of the people of historic Palestine were driven from their homes, en-
couraged by assassinations, demolitions, beatings, and the occasional 
massacre, all authorized by the Israeli government. Israeli general Rafael 
Eitan put it most clearly when he expressed a wish that the Palestinians 
would die off like “drugged roaches in a bottle.”15
Although ethnic cleansing is a clearly defined crime against humanity, 
involving a “policy of a particular group of persons to systematically elimi-
nate another group from a given territory on the basis of religious, ethnic, 
spite the removal of the settlements in September 2005. See http://geography 
.about.com/library/cia/blcgaza.htm.
14. See Pappe, The Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine (Oxford: One World Publications, 
2006).
15. See Steven Erlanger’s obituary of Eitan, New York Times, November 24, 2004, 
http://www.nytimes.com/2004/11/24/obituaries/24eitan.html (accessed July 15, 
2014).

1 8 8  :  C H A P T E R  1 4
or national origin,”16 it is not a static, single event but a dynamic process 
that is continually evolving new strategies, ranging from outright massa-
cres to embargoes, quarantines, and policies designed to destroy the fabric 
of civil society in the target population. The Israeli policy of destroying or 
closing Palestinian schools, bombing government buildings where tax and 
census records are kept, and continually disrupting the infrastructure of 
daily life (markets, roads, communication networks, hospitals, electricity, 
clean water) is a strategy designed to make normal communal life impos-
sible. Ethnic cleansing need not, in other words, involve direct and visible 
violence. It can operate, as it does in Gaza, as a systematic violence against 
everyday life and the deliberate production of an extreme social environ-
ment that will (if all goes according to plan) ultimately self- destruct. The 
role of Israel and the United States in encouraging an ongoing civil war 
between Hamas and the Palestinian Authority is perhaps the most dra-
matic evidence of this strategy.
When one looks at Gaza in this framework, as a peculiar and almost un-
precedented combination of features, it becomes intelligible as an extreme 
social environment. It is, at one and the same time, a small coastal region 
with a temperate climate and a mainly agricultural economy, a prison or 
refugee camp, an ethnic ghetto, a quasi- sovereign nation with a democrat-
ically elected government, a failed rogue terrorist state, a gigantic slum 
ruled by criminal gangs and paramilitary thugs, a military adversary that 
is portrayed as launching unprovoked attacks against the most powerful 
military machine in the Middle East, and a symbol of humiliation and out-
rage to the entire Arab world. Photography cannot capture the complexity 
and density of this world, though it can produce iconic moments, to which 
I will return. The most eloquent testimony comes in the art of the moving 
or sequential image, in documentary films, and in the graphic documen-
taries of Joe Sacco, which range from the tiny detail to Brueghelesque pan-
orama, all punctuated by the most vivid transcriptions of conversations 
with Gazans. Curiously (or maybe it is not so curious) Palestinian films 
tend to be mythic, filled with magical realism, while Israeli filmmakers 
tend toward the documentary.17 If you want to see the moral horror of 
the occupation from the Israeli side, you need only look at the plethora 
16. Drazen Petrovic, “Ethnic Cleansing— An Attempt at Methodology,” European 
Journal of International Law 5, no. 3 (1994): 342– 60. Cited in Pappe, Ethnic Cleans-
ing, 1.
17. Compare Catholic and Protestant mural art in Belfast: the Catholics tend 
toward romantic and mythical subjects, while the Protestants prefer a rough, 
direct realism.

A R T  X  E N V I R O N M E N T  :  1 8 9
of documentary films (including the animated documentary Waltz with 
Bashir, dir. Ari Folman, 2008) to see the combination of guilt, anxiety, bad 
faith, good faith, and helplessness that afflicts Israelis of conscience, who 
find themselves tethered by blood, ethnicity, nationality, and history to a 
monstrous repetition of the horrible crimes committed against them by 
the Nazis. The thought has crossed the mind of many Israelis, I’m sure: 
we have become what we beheld. We have met the enemy and he is us.
I want to conclude with two iconic photos and one painting that I hope 
will put in perspective the aspects of Gaza that reveal its nature as an 
extreme social environment. The first is a straightforward landscape pan-
orama (not reproduced here) of Gaza City under bombardment at twilight, 
with the congested center of the city exploding in a massive firestorm.18 
With an image like this in circulation, it becomes rather difficult to sustain 
the fiction of humane “surgical strikes” that avoid casualties to civilians. 
No doubt any civilians caught near government buildings in Gaza were 
being used as “human shields.” Fortunately for the Israeli military strate-
gists, these shields offer no deterrence whatsoever against its exercise of 
superior firepower.
The second image is not from the 2009 bombing of Gaza but was taken 
by photographer Mahmud Hams two years earlier, in 2007. It is a close- up 
of a dead mother with her two dead babies draped across her body (figure 
14.2). The man in the background is trying to keep one of the babies from 
rolling off her mother’s body. I know that someone will bring up the fact 
that the photographer has been accused of doctoring photographs and 
producing tendentious, prejudicial images. In short, this picture will be 
dismissed as “Arab propaganda.”
I remain agnostic on this question and accept the possibility that the 
photo might be fabricated or staged. But let’s admit, then, that this makes 
it art of a certain kind— not a routine form of representation but an ef-
fort to create a memorable image, to compose a scene. Indeed, the hand 
steadying the dead baby is a clear signal that the picture has been ma-
nipulated in the most literal sense of the word: the photographer or his 
assistant in a sense “shows his hand.”
But why does this image work? And why did it come back out of the 
archives in 2009, two years later? First, and most obviously, because it is a 
recurrent scene that is inevitable in any large- scale attack on a congested 
18. As I wrote these lines in July 2014, images of the current bombing of Gaza City 
were appearing on all the American news networks. No doubt new morgue photos 
are being taken right now.

14.2 Mahmud Hams, “Gaza City Morgue” (2009). Photograph: AFP/Getty  
Images.
14.3 Nicholas Poussin, The Plague at Ashdod (1630) (detail). Oil on canvas. 148 × 
198 cm. Musée du Louvre, Paris. Photograph: Alfredo Dgli Orti/The Art Archive 
at Art Resource, New York.

A R T  X  E N V I R O N M E N T  :  1 9 1
urban environment and, second, because of an incident in January 2009 
that was only reported in verbal descriptions. The headline of a January 8, 
2009, story in the New York Times reporting on the Israeli incursion into 
Gaza a few weeks before the inauguration of Barack Obama could almost 
be the caption of the 2007 photograph: “Gaza Children Found with Moth-
ers’ Corpses.”19 In fact, when I tried to follow up this story by searching 
for photographs associated with it, the Google search engine immediately 
lead me to Hams’s morgue photo. But this anachronistic verbal relay could 
just as easily lead me to an even more remote and unlikely tableau found 
in one of the great classics of Renaissance painting, Nicholas Poussin’s The 
Plague at Ashdod (see figures 14.1 and 14.3).
Poussin’s painting depicts the plague brought on the Philistines in 
the city of Ashdod, a town about halfway up the coast between Gaza and 
modern- day Tel Aviv. The Philistines have just defeated the Israelites, kill-
ing thirty thousand men. And now the plague has descended upon them, 
killing the guilty and the innocent without discrimination. We see a stat-
uesque tableau vivant of terror and panic, with figures appropriated from 
Poussin’s hated rival, Caravaggio. The most prominent of these is in the 
center foreground: a dead mother with her still living infants starving at 
her breast.
I don’t bring Poussin out of the past to argue for influence. The pho-
tographer may or may not have known he was composing a group that 
echoes a whole tradition of pietas, martyrdoms, and scenes of massacre 
and catastrophe in Western painting.20 My aim is rather to let Poussin’s 
painting open a window into the unconscious of Judaeo- Christian Europe, 
and to link Gaza’s present with a deep history that is made visible in this 
picture. As we pull back from the detail, we see that there is a secondary 
scene inside the temple on the left rear of the picture. We see the impassive 
Ark of the Covenant, which the Philistines have captured in the battle, and 
the fallen statue of their idol, Dagon, with his head and hands cut off. We 
19. See Alan Cowell, “Gaza Children Found with Mothers’ Corpses,” New York 
Times, January 8, 2009.
20. Probably the ur- source of this motif of the dead mother with infants is to be 
found in Pliny the Elder’s Natural History, in his description of the legendary 
painter Aristide of Thebes, who is supposed to be the first painter to show ethe, 
or “soul and the emotions,” in a painting. Pliny describes Aristide’s painting of 
“the capture of a town, showing an infant creeping to the breast of its mother who 
is dying of a wound.” For further discussion, see my essay “Idolatry:  Nietzsche, 
Blake, Poussin,” in Seeing Through Race (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 2012), chapter 6.

1 9 2  :  C H A P T E R  1 4
are to understand, so Poussin tells us, and most art historians, that this is 
the primary subject, the real subject, and the scene of the plague is an alle-
gorical shadow of the real story, which is the miracle at Ashdod— the mag-
ical destruction of Dagon, the shattering of the enemy’s idol by the more 
powerful god of the Israelites. The Ark’s dangerous resemblance to an 
idol generally goes unremarked or is explained away by references to the 
hidden, secret, invisible interior.
From this point of view what we are beholding in the foreground is, 
indeed, a representation of a human catastrophe; but it is also a direct 
result of divine justice, which has an incorrigible tendency to exert collec-
tive punishment, encouraging massacres, expulsions, and even (in the ep-
isode of the Golden Calf) the murder of thousands of one’s own people.21 
All these are manifestations of divine law and justice, frequently within a 
discourse of idolatry and iconoclasm that turns the enemy— that is, the 
native inhabitants of the land— into brutish materialists who engage in de-
praved sexual practices and worship mute stone idols. But the real motive 
of the destruction is not really this moral judgment. As Moshe Halbertal 
and Avishai Margalit note in their masterful study Idolatry, “the ban on 
idolatry is an attempt to dictate exclusivity, to map the unique territory 
of the one God.”22 The mandate of iconoclasm is made explicit by Joshua 
in Numbers 33:52– 53: “When you cross the Jordan into Canaan, drive out 
all the inhabitants of the land before you. Destroy all their carved images 
and their cast idols, and demolish all their high places. Take possession 
of the land and settle in it, for I have given you the land to possess.”23 The 
“idols” of the Philistines and Canaanites play the role of what the Romans 
called the genius loci, or “genius of the place.” They are local deities like 
the famous baalim, which are simply gods of the oasis that establish the 
claim of a nomadic tribe to return to that place seasonally. The accusation 
of idolatry and the practice of iconoclasm has a double purpose, then. Its 
practical aim is to erase all historical traces of the native inhabitants, to 
conduct an ethnic cleansing of all images, monuments, and symbols of 
prior possession, and thus to erase all evidence of rival claims on the land. 
But its idealistic or ideological aim is equally important: it is to lay claim to 
21. See my discussion of the Golden Calf and the massacre of the Israelites in 
What Do Pictures Want?, 132– 35.
22. Idolatry (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1992), 5. See also the dis-
cussion of idolatry in chapter 6, “Migrating Images.”
23. See my essay, “Holy Landscape,” in Landscape and Power, 2nd ed. (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2002), 281.

A R T  X  E N V I R O N M E N T  :  1 9 3
being an instrument of divine justice, to portray ethnic cleansing as God’s 
will to purify the land.
Modern Zionism did not invent this convenient fusing of religion, 
conquest, and colonization. It inherited it from the entire tradition of 
Christian anti- semitism that Poussin is channeling in his painting of the 
plague (or is it the miracle?) at Ashdod, an event that occurred just a few 
miles from Gaza. This is a peculiar form of anti- semitism that is capable 
of transferring its animus from Arabs to Jews, from internal pogroms to 
Middle Eastern crusades, without missing a beat,24 and Poussin is squarely 
in the middle of it in early modern Europe, as art historian Richard Neer 
has demonstrated. The clearest evidence of this is the way that Poussin 
recycles the figure of the mutilated, fallen Philistine idol to represent the 
body of a fallen Israelite in his later painting The Destruction of the Temple 
in Jerusalem (1638). As Neer notes:
The idol of Dagon has reappeared here, in the heart of Jerusalem. It lies 
at the dead center of the picture, with its head once again on the ground 
nearby. This time, however, blood trickles from the severed neck: although 
the pose is the same, the figure is no longer a broken idol but a murdered 
Jew. The marginal statue has moved to the center; the pagan has become 
Jewish. The figure even retains its greenish hue, which no longer signifies 
statuary but death . . . . Interpreted thematically, this allusion might be 
taken to suggest that the Jews are, in the age of grace, de facto idolaters. 
This position was not uncommon in the seventeenth century.25
What does this picture say to us in the twenty- first century? Why does 
it seem to resonate so strongly, peeling away its many layers of allusion 
and citation to connect with a contemporary environment of extremity. 
Certainly it shows without flinching the central, iconic feature of ethnic 
cleansing, namely the slaughter of the innocents. The program of ethno-
cide is never confined to the killing of a military enemy. It involves the 
cutting off of human reproduction, the punishment not just of one’s adult 
enemies but of their children and their children’s children. The second 
thing the painting reveals is the point of view from which these crimes 
are seen as the acts of divine justice, the punishment of evildoers defined 
24. See Gil Anidjar, The Jew, the Arab (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 
2003), for a masterful account of the parallelism of these two objects of Christian 
anti- semitism.
25. Neer, “Poussin and the Ethics of Imitation,” in Memoirs of the American Acad-
emy in Rome, ed. Vernon Hyde Minor, vols. 51– 52 (2006– 2007): 297– 344; 323.

1 9 4  :  C H A P T E R  1 4
as idolaters. The second commandment makes this clear when Jehovah 
declares that he will not be content with smiting idolaters but will bring 
vengeance down on them even “unto the third and fourth generation.” And 
the third thing the painting reveals is the fantasy of technical superiority 
and omnipotent power that accompanies the fantasy of absolute justice. 
The Ark of the Covenant is not merely the repository of the law, but of 
the irresistible power to enforce that law. It is, as the leading Hollywood 
fantasies about it testify, a weapon of mass destruction.26
But Poussin is a great painter, and I did not bring him to Gaza simply 
to make explicit the messages that are perhaps less clear in the contem-
porary media coverage of that extreme environment. Although Poussin 
was no doubt a pious Christian anti- semite in his personal views, and in 
the artistic subjects prescribed for him, he was also an avid student and 
lover of classical art. His hatred of idolatry is deeply compromised by his 
love of Greek art, an art riddled with idolatry. He could not have known 
that the Philistines were probably not Arabs but Myceneans who had mi-
grated down the coast from Greece to dwell in Ashdod and Gaza.27 But his 
artistic eye and hand could not represent them any other way. Poussin’s 
Ashdod is a Greek city, and its citizens are Greeks as well, a city where the 
arts of architecture and sculpture are flourishing— up till the moment 
of destruction that he depicts for us. Poussin’s anachronism ultimately 
overcomes his historicism. He is a true artist, and of the idolaters’ party, 
without knowing it.
26. This is the basic premise of Raiders of the Lost Ark (dir. Stephen Spielberg, 1981).
27. I owe this factoid to my colleague, Richard Neer.

15: THE HISTORICAL UNCANNY
Phantoms, Doubles, and Repetition in  
the War on Terror
Most people are familiar with the psychoanalytic concept of the uncanny. 
It is focused on individual experiences of the strange, the fantastic, the 
weirdly disturbing. It also concerns more specific phenomena: (1) The un-
certainty about whether something is merely accidental and contingent, or 
obeys a structure of causality that is not immediately evident; this is often 
exemplified by the observation that something is “merely coincidental” 
or (conversely) that it is “not a mere coincidence.” (2) The appearance of 
something strange that, on reflection, turns out to be quite familiar— thus 
the relation of what Freud called the unheimlich and the Heimlich (homely), 
and a feeling that something long forgotten or repressed has returned. 
(3) The appearance of the double, the mirror image or twin, the figure 
known as the “doppelganger” as well as, more generally, the phenome-
non of doubling and redoubling that goes by the name of repetition. And 
(4) the appearance of a ghost or specter that produces an uncertainty about 
whether one is witnessing a supernatural event or something that has a 
rational explanation, and particularly the moment when something that 
we suppose should be dead or inanimate (a doll, a corpse, a wax figure) 
has come to life.
The uncanny is not originally a psychoanalytic concept but comes, as 
Freud notes, from aesthetics and literature. (There is no entry on the un-
canny in Laplanche and Pontalis’s The Language of Psychoanalysis.) It is a 
kind of transitional phenomenon in literary history between what Tzvetan 
Todorov called “the fantastic” (stories filled with magic and supernatural 
events) and the detective story, in which mysterious and strange events 
turn out to have a rational explanation.1 Edgar Allan Poe is generally rec-
ognized as the great master of the uncanny, precisely in his location be-
tween fantasy and detective fiction. The uncanny is, then, a literary genre 
that emerged historically in a transition between fantastic and realistic, 
supernatural and naturalistic fictional modes. It is the genre of ambiguity 
1. Todorov, The Fantastic: A Structural Approach to a Literary Genre, trans. Richard 
Howard (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1975).

1 9 6  :  C H A P T E R  1 5
par excellence, exploring the boundary between imagination and reality, 
metaphoric and literal expression. It therefore concerns some of the most 
durable uncertainties in human life; it is difficult to imagine that there is 
anyone who has not experienced one of its manifestations. (Recall Freud’s 
famous disavowal that he doesn’t personally have much truck with the 
uncanny— except for one time, his “mirror moment”— or maybe getting 
lost in a red light district that he is trying strenuously to escape.)
But the question I would like to raise is the following: would it make 
sense to speak of a historical uncanny, an experience that is not merely 
individual but shared collectively, and shared in relation to a collectively 
experienced event? An event that is not merely literary, but concerned with 
factual historical narratives? And further, an event that is collectively un-
derstood to mark a turning point or significant moment in a historical pe-
riod? Certainly historians have not shrunk from thinking of their subject 
in literary terms: historical ironies and tragedies are legion; narratives of 
national founding seem invariably to take on mythic and epic dimensions; 
and (as Marx insisted) every historical event seems to require repetition, 
the first time as tragedy, the second as farce. A certain old- fashioned ver-
15.1 Forkscrew Graphics, “iRaq/iPod” (2004). Silkscreen poster inserted into 
iPod billboard, new Bleeker Street station, New York.

T H E  H I S T O R I C A L  U N C A N N Y  :  1 9 7
sion of historiography known as Geistesgeschichte with its search for the 
“spirit of the age,” or Zeitgeist, might be thought of as the moment when 
the historical uncanny veers back toward its origins in the ghost story.2
So perhaps we should consider the usefulness of the notion of an un-
canny historical epoch, one characterized by strange coincidences, repe-
tition, doubles and ghosts, and uncertainty about whether events are in 
the control of fantastic or realistic images, metaphors or literal statements 
about the facts. The most common example of this would be a historical 
event (and of course we will have to interrogate what is meant by this 
phrase as well)3 that produces widespread uncertainty as to whether it is 
accidental or causally determined. In addition, the event that marks the 
onset of a distinct historical epoch would have to take on the status of a 
public icon, a widely recognized image that circulates across the media 
with “no caption needed” to explain its importance.4 Perhaps it is “no co-
incidence” that the present moment, the aftermath of the period of world 
history dominated by a “global war on terror,” bracketed by the events of 
9- 11- 2001 and the global financial crisis of 9- 8- 2008, qualifies, not only as 
an example of the historical uncanny, but is the very moment when the in-
evitability of this concept became obvious. Certainly 9- 11 has many of the 
generic qualifications: the sense of repetition and déjà vu in the perception 
of the event itself; the return of the repressed or forgotten friend and ally 
as an implacable enemy; and an overabundance of conspiracy theories 
contending with realist narratives that stress the role of accident, luck, 
and timing. At the other end of the period we find the financial crisis of 
September 2008, which could be seen, on the one hand, as the result of nu-
2. When I asked Carlo Ginzburg if historians have a theory of coincidence, his 
immediate response was to mention the largely discredited notion of a “spirit 
of the age.”
3. Consider Alain Badiou’s concept of the event— the moment when one must 
“decide upon the undecidable”— as the occasion of revolutionary action, and the 
onset of the event to come— the “eventual rupture” in love, science, politics, and 
art. For a provocative alternative, suggesting that revolution is not so much an 
“event” as a language, see Ariella Azoulay’s essay “The Language of Revolution— 
Tidings from the East,” on the Arab Spring, in Critical Inquiry, http://critical 
inquiry.uchicago.edu/features/special.shtml.
4. See Robert Hariman and John Lucaites’s important book, No Caption Needed: 
Iconic Photographs, Public Culture, and Liberal Democracy (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2011), on the emergence of news photographs as iconic events in 
modern history.

1 9 8  :  C H A P T E R  1 5
merous acts of individual irresponsibility (on the part of mortgage lenders, 
financiers, and ratings agencies) or, on the other, as a dark conspiracy of 
insiders exploiting a predictable and systematic product of deregulation.
It may be the case that any historical event will have something un-
canny about it, to the extent that there is some uncertainty— that is, a 
debate— about its necessary or contingent status. On the one hand, con-
spiracy theory; on the other, mere bad luck, incompetence. Evildoers hid-
den behind the scenes that need to be unmasked, or mere human frailty 
and stupidity combined with Fortuna. On the one hand, a systematic prac-
tice that produces predictable results; on the other, a glitch, a mistake, an 
exception to “standard operating procedure.”
The historian committed to rational explanation of historical events 
will tend to see patterns of repetition, and will note historical analogies— 
for instance, between the conditions that led up to the Great Depression 
of the 1930s and those preceding the Great Recession of 2008. The system-
atist will argue that the purpose of historical research is, as the proverb 
has it, to prevent repetition by learning from history and thereby helping 
to head off the unpleasant experience of the uncanny return of the same. 
The historian of contingency will start from the premise that historical 
analogies are always of doubtful usefulness, that history is a series of par-
ticular occurrences that obey no discernible design or pattern. History, as 
Richard Rorty insisted (echoing Henry Ford),5 is “one damn thing after 
another,” and therefore its narrative shape is determined by the literary 
form of irony rather than the uncanny, though this difference may itself 
become uncertain under the right conditions. Often the judgment that 
we are witnessing a “historical irony” amounts to a perception of the un-
canny. Isn’t it ironic, for instance, that in the same week of September 2008 
that the world’s financial system crashed, the artist Damien Hirst put up 
for auction a solid gold calf— ancient symbol of greed, materialism, and 
idolatry— that fetched millions of pounds, a dramatic display of the un-
canny linkages between the bursting bubble of financial speculation and 
a wildly inflated and deeply cynical art market?
An even more striking example of the historical uncanny in our time 
would have to be the miraculous election of Barack Obama in 2008, an 
event that probably depended upon the coincidence of the financial col-
lapse, and marked, with a distinctiveness rare in historical periodization, 
5. Thanks to Jim Chandler for reminding me of this source for Rorty’s remark. 
Other sources include Winston Churchill, Arnold Toynbee, and Edna Saint Vin-
cent Millay.

T H E  H I S T O R I C A L  U N C A N N Y  :  1 9 9
what looked like a bright line ending the era of the Bush administration. 
Of course, subsequent events have suggested that the event was perhaps 
less of a game- changer than was initially imagined (Obama continues 
many of the same policies, and his administration is riddled with the same 
actors), but at the level of the imaginary, Obama’s election had something 
undeniably uncanny about it. Not merely the visual spectacle of a cer-
tifiably African American politician rising to the highest office in what 
remains a racially divided country, but the even more striking features of 
the acoustic image conjured by Obama’s name, which is a synthesis of the 
names of the principal enemies of the United States during the preceding 
era. Saddam Hussein and Osama bin Laden are synthesized, as it were, in 
the name Barack Hussein Obama, fusing not only the terrorist and the ty-
rant but the Muslim as well, a synthesis that was repeatedly emphasized in 
caricature and political polemic to turn Obama into an illegal immigrant 
and a figure comparable to Stalin, Hitler, and the Joker. It was as if all the 
enemies of America in the twentieth century had been fused into a single 
caricature, and (even more improbably) elected by the first clear popular 
majority in over a decade.
But all these examples of the historical uncanny are relatively shallow 
and schematic. They are merely instances of ironic reversal coupled with 
a kind of affect— ambivalence, an alternation between curiosity, wonder, 
and anxiety. Rather than accumulate examples, an exercise that is a bit like 
playing tennis with the net down, I want to focus on a specific historical 
period, the recent past of the Bush presidency, and the “war on terror,” 
which dominated American foreign policy and still does today, despite 
attempts to replace the phrase with the euphemism “overseas contingency 
operations.” Many (including the chief officials of the Bush administra-
tion) have argued, of course, that the war on terror, despite its patently 
metaphoric character, is not a metaphor and a “public relations locution” 
but (as historian Philip Bobbit describes it) a literal truth, and the only 
rational framework for strategic thinking in the twenty- first century.6
My argument has been that this period, the very recent past, has all 
the characteristics of the narrative and aesthetic features of fantasy, irony, 
and the peculiar mixture of them known as the uncanny. Poised between 
6. Bobbitt dismisses the notion (common within the Bush White House) that the 
phrase “war on terror” was a metaphor coined for purposes of public relations. He 
provides the most systematic argument to date for the literal truth of the phrase, 
entitling the lectures he gave in 2009 at Stanford University “The War on Terror Is 
No Metaphor.” See also his book Terror and Consent: The Wars for the Twenty- First 
Century (New York: Anchor Books, 2009).

2 0 0  :  C H A P T E R  1 5
the genres of the fantastic and the detective story, this period has brought 
onto the historical stage not only the tropes of repetition and return, but 
a quite vivid phantasmagoria in the form of what documentary filmmaker 
Rory Kennedy has called “the ghosts of Abu Ghraib.” It has also produced 
a new, updated, and technoscientific version of the uncanny doppelganger 
in the form of the clone, the figure of the indefinitely duplicated life- form 
exemplified at the low end by stem- cell research and the virus or cancer, 
at the upper end by the image of the terrorist as a faceless, anonymous, 
indefinitely reproducible organism that inhabits the body politic in sleeper 
cells, exactly like a cancer or virus. The global war on terror has, as I have 
argued, had the effect of “cloning terror.” It is a cure that has accelerated 
the progress of the disease, a medicine that increases rather than arrests 
the proliferation of pathogens.
My larger argument, much more provisional and speculative, concerns 
the question of theory and method raised by the notion of the historical 
uncanny. A full engagement with this issue would require going back to 
the classic reflections by Hayden White, Louis Mink, Paul Ricoeur, and 
Paul Veyne on the role of literary tropes and narratives in the construction 
of historical accounts. In Metahistory, White documents in encyclopedic 
detail the battle between empirical historiography and the “philosophy 
of history” that marked nineteenth century reflections on history, relying 
primarily on Northrop Frye’s four narrative categories of irony, romance, 
tragedy, and comedy to describe the possible literary framing of history.7 
So far as I know, he does not ever consider Todorov’s transitional genre 
of the uncanny, poised between fantasy and empiricism. Could it be that 
the uncanny would provide, not just a model for the narrative shaping 
of specific historical events (most notably, the present), but that it could 
offer some insight into the aporia that historians invariably confront, the 
moment of undecidable decision between history as doubtful romance 
and as unresolved detective story?
I will leave these questions to the historians, at least for the moment, 
in order to focus on another, rather more literal, exemplification of the 
historical uncanny that goes beyond literary narrative into the realm of 
public spectacle and visual culture. In the history of media technology, 
the phenomenon that corresponds most directly to the historical uncanny 
is the phantasmagoria, the use of optical projection devices to produce 
7. Metahistory: The Historical Imagination in Nineteenth- Century Europe (Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1973). I am grateful to Hayden White for his gen-
erous comments on an earlier draft of this essay.

T H E  H I S T O R I C A L  U N C A N N Y  :  2 0 1
public spectacles involving phantoms, ghosts, and apparitions of all sorts. 
As Tom Gunning has shown, the nineteenth- century phantasmagoria is 
the medium of the specular uncanny par excellence, precisely because it 
does not simply continue the tradition of magic shows and popular fantasy 
but stages its spectacles “on the threshold between science and supersti-
tion.”8 In the earliest and most elaborate phantasmagorias, such as those 
of Etienne- Gaspard Robertson, the subject matter ranged across literary 
and historical narratives, from the Gothic novels of Monk Lewis, to his-
torical dramas of the very recent past, notably, the principal figures of the 
French Revolution. The figures of Danton, Marat, and Robespierre were 
mingled with those of contemporary scientific inventors such as Benjamin 
Franklin, whose glass harmonica often provided eerie musical accompani-
ment, and whose experiments in electricity and “galvanism” were linked 
to Mesmerism and the reanimation of dead bodies.
If the nineteenth- century phantasmagoria was situated on the historic 
borderline between “enlightenment and terror,” as Gunning puts it (24), 
what are we to make of the contemporary media spectacle of the global 
war on terror? Is it possible in an age of new media that the old technology 
of the phantasmagoria has a new role to play? How has the spectatorial 
reception and use of the technologies of spectacle changed in our time to 
produce a new version of the historical uncanny?
First we might notice a few salient points of similarity between the 
era of the early phantasmagoria and our contemporary media situation. 
Perhaps most obvious is the shared sense of technophilia, the feeling that 
we are in the midst of a media revolution as profound as the invention 
of the printing press,9 an outpouring of media innovations that seem to 
promise, on the one hand, the utopian prospects of McLuhan’s wired 
world and global village and, on the other, the self- mesmerizing dystopia 
of distracted multitasking, twittering, and texting, and complete loss of 
privacy, accompanied by a massive case of attention deficit disorder, es-
pecially when it comes to history and politics. The return of the 3- D cine-
matic spectacle after a period of quiescence seems to mark a new appetite 
for illusionism, and the revival of political modes of magical thinking, 
best exemplified by the reliance of films like James Cameron’s Avatar on 
8. Gunning, “The Long and the Short of It: Centuries of Projecting Shadows from 
Natural Magic to the Avant- Garde,” in The Art of Projection, ed. Christopher Ea-
mon, Mieke Bal, Beatriz Colomina, and Stan Douglas (Ostfildern: Hatje Cantz 
Verlag, 2009), 24.
9. See Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s remark on the printing press and the phantoms 
it produces. See note 12 below.

2 0 2  :  C H A P T E R  1 5
narratives of white, first- world heroes rescuing colonized native peoples 
from the genocidal resource wars in which they serve as soldiers, a plot 
type that might be called “The Return of the Broken Arrow,” alluding to 
Jimmy Stewart’s classic Hollywood sojourn among the Apaches.10 Or we 
might point to increasingly illusionistic and immersive video games that 
position the player as the top gun in the war on terror, GI Joe roaming the 
streets of Kandahar, Baghdad, and Gaza to mow down the anonymous 
clones of Osama bin Laden. The best antidote to these games that I know 
of is September 12, a point- and- shoot game that positions the player as a 
controller of drone attacks, hovering over the crowded streets of an anon-
ymous Arab city, picking out armed masked fighters for assassination.11 
When the player kills a fighter, however, he inevitably takes out a number 
of innocent bystanders, women and children, and the scene of destruction 
quickly gathers a crowd of wailing mourners who morph before our eyes 
into more armed, masked fighters. I cannot imagine a more vivid demon-
stration of the way that the war on terror has the effect of cloning terror. 
The whole point of this game is to resist immersion in the phantasmagoria 
of “point and shoot,” and to quit playing the game.
Perhaps the most obvious difference between nineteenth- and twenty- 
first- century historical phantasmagoria is the fact of real- time broadcast 
media. The closest thing the nineteenth century had to offer was the il-
lustrated newspaper and magazine, and perhaps the “circulating library,” 
which disseminated radical opinions to the populace and, according to 
Coleridge, amounted to “a sort of mental camera obscura manufactured 
at the printing office, which . . . fixes, reflects, and transmits the moving 
phantasms of one man’s delirium, so as to people the barrenness of a hun-
dred other brains.”12 The onset of the contemporary historical uncanny, by 
contrast, did not need to wait for the printing office or the deliberate pace 
of the circulating library. The destruction of the World Trade Center on 
9- 11 was transmitted instantaneously, in real time, throughout the world, 
and it was the uncanny spectacle par excellence, striking spectators as the 
repetition of a scene that they had already witnessed in numerous disaster 
films of the preceding decade. The event, moreover, seemed to be staged as 
an uncanny repetition in the very moment of its unfolding, with the brief 
10. With Jeff Chandler as Cochise, and Debra Paget as the beautiful Indian Prin-
cess; directed by Delmer Daves, 1950.
11. My thanks to Patrick Jagoda for bringing this game to my attention.
12. Biographia Literaria (1817), chapter 3, Collected Works (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1985), 7:48. See my discussion of the camera obscura of unli-
censed printing in Picture Theory (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994), 120.

T H E  H I S T O R I C A L  U N C A N N Y  :  2 0 3
interlude between the impact of the two airplanes guaranteeing maximum 
media attention to the second strike. Déjà vu seemed doubly inscribed in 
the event itself, as well as in its numerous premonitions.
As for the images that were fixed, reflected, and transmitted in the wake 
of 9- 11, they constituted, as I have argued in Cloning Terror, a paradigm 
shift in the phenomenon known as “the pictorial (or iconic) turn,” from the 
Benjaminian model of mechanical reproduction (epitomized by chemical- 
based photography and the assembly line) to a new era of “biocybernetic 
reproduction,” characterized by the twin revolutions of high- speed com-
puting and genetic technology and epitomized by the digital image, on the 
one hand, and the cloned organism, on the other. This “biopictorial” turn 
is incarnated repeatedly in what has become the central icon of the war 
on terror, the notorious “Hooded Man of Abu Ghraib,” an image for which 
not only is “no caption needed” but in some sense no adequate caption is 
possible because it captures so eloquently all the contradictions of the age.
Cloning Terror documented the full range of mutations of the Hooded 
Man, from protest image to omen of defeat, from endlessly cloned chorus 
lines to corporate logos in the flow of images interrupting the icons of 
narcissistic pleasuring with the self- absorption of the tortured body, from 
the Bionic Abu Ghraib Man at Mount Rushmore to the Statue of Liberty 
electrified in Baghdad, from helpless victim to conquering sovereign in the 
political- religious iconography of Moses, Jesus, and Mohammed. Perhaps 
now it is enough to say that the Hooded Man is the spirit of the age of the 
war on terror, capturing perfectly its links with cloning, with iconoclastic 
defacement, with the ecce homo sacer of a holy war and a crusade against 
terror. A perfect dialectical image of “history at a standstill,” the Hooded 
Man captures the uncanny mirroring, the doubling relation of the terrorist 
and the sovereign, a relation that is also seen in the doubling of Uncle Sam 
by Uncle Osama, or the hooded Saddam mirrored in the hoodwinked Star 
Gazer of America’s blind faith in its own idealism.13
But what precisely is the point of staging this phantasmagoria of im-
agery from the war on terror? What use is it to make the Spirit of the 
Age visible for all to see? To me the most obvious answer is, to prevent 
historical amnesia and the recurrence of an American innocence that is 
continually “shocked, shocked” to discover the obscene relics hidden in its 
13. For more on Walter Benjamin’s concept of the dialectical image, see 
“Metapictures,” in Picture Theory (University of Chicago Press, 1994), 45– 46. For 
the “Star Gazer,” see my discussion of Hans Haacke’s work by this title in Cloning 
Terror (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011), 109– 10.

2 0 4  :  C H A P T E R  1 5
own ideological closet. The revelation of the spirit of the age is only half 
the task, however, of the historical uncanny. The other half is the comple-
tion of the detective story that is at the far end of the uncanny’s narrative 
trajectory. The incompleteness of this process is vividly on display in  Errol 
Morris’s documentary film about the Abu Ghraib photographs.14 As a for-
mer detective himself, Morris has established a reputation as the most 
gifted forensic documentarian of our time, taking his camera and sound 
recorder all the way into the heart of darkness that lurks in historically 
significant crimes. But in Standard Operating Procedure, Morris found him-
self stalled in the midst of the uncanny. His techniques of documentary 
reenactment served not as a tool for the forensic testing of hypotheses, as 
they had to such memorable effect in The Thin Blue Line (which led to the 
reversal of a false murder conviction), but only to immerse the spectator 
in a phantasmagoria in which the old technique of double exposure allows 
“ghost interrogators” to stalk the surreal spaces of a haunted Abu Ghraib 
prison, reconstructed down to the tiniest detail on a Hollywood sound 
stage. This is a detective story so obsessively focused on the evidence, 
the visible traces of a crime, that it refuses to follow the invisible trail of 
criminality that would lead directly to the top level of the US government.15 
Instead, it plunges us into cyberspace, where the fantastic photo archive 
of Abu Ghraib is arrayed like a starry firmament waiting to be organized 
into a constellation.
In what is arguably the most memorable scene in the film, Morris rec-
ords the testimony of Brent Pack, the forensic analyst employed by the 
army to establish the exact provenance of all the Abu Ghraib photos. This 
marvelous scene reveals precisely what is new about the digital photo-
graph, and utterly discredits the commonsense myth that digital photos 
have a less firm grip on the real than old, “indexical” chemical photos. 
What Morris shows is that the digital photograph has a doubly or triply 
indexical claim on the real by virtue of the “metadata” that is automatically 
encoded along with the file that allows production of an analog image. 
The digital camera encodes time as well as visual space; it also identifies 
the camera that took the picture, and today it routinely uses GPS to pin-
point the location where the picture was taken. And yet what this scene 
also reveals is that, despite this unprecedented technical access to the 
14. Standard Operating Procedure (2008).
15. To be fair, this would have been the more conventional documentary approach 
to the Abu Ghraib scandal, it was followed precisely in Rory Kennedy’s The Ghosts 
of Abu Ghraib (2007). Perhaps Morris felt that the hidden story of high- level cover- 
ups had already been done sufficiently.

T H E  H I S T O R I C A L  U N C A N N Y  :  2 0 5
exact particulars of a historical event, the truth of these images seems to 
recede ever farther from view, leaving the spectator in the uncanny space 
of a cyber- phantasmagoria. The detective story that would solve the mys-
tery of Abu Ghraib, and of the war on terror, remains, like so many ex-
amples of film noir, suspended in uncertainty. The real criminals have 
gone free, while a few scapegoats trapped in the Wax Museum of Uncanny 
History— Charlie Graner, Sabrina Harman, Lynndie England— have paid 
the price. The American Constitution is also paying the price, in the ongo-
ing cover- ups and subversion of the justice system fostered by the Obama 
adminstration’s naïve insistence on “looking forward,” refusing not only 
the imperatives of memory and history, but of justice as well.

16.1 J. R. Eyerman, audience wearing 3- D glasses (1950s). Photo-
graph: Life Picture  Collection/Getty Images.

16: THE SPECTACLE TODAY
A Response to Retort
The spectacle today, in the summer of 2014, is not what it was when this 
essay was first written in 2005. Image science in that period was obsessed, 
quite naturally, with the spectacle of two American- led invasions, the first 
in Afghanistan, the second in Iraq. Both of these invasions were responses, 
of course, to the spectacular destruction of the World Trade Center on 9- 11. 
Both were accompanied by massive propaganda campaigns that crushed 
antiwar sentiment and cynically misled the American public into a belief 
that Iraq was somehow implicated in the attacks of 9- 11. George W. Bush’s 
political advisers quite deliberately staged the run- up to the invasion of 
Iraq in 2003 as one would an advertising campaign,1 selling the war as an 
expedition that would pay for itself by seizing the richest oil reserves of 
the Middle East. The exchange of “blood for oil” was presented as a deeply 
rational calculation that overwhelmed moral reservations and political 
resistance.
Consider, then, the difference today. It is not spectacle but surveillance 
that dominates the mediasphere. The collapse of the Arab Spring and the 
hideous civil war in Syria has not awakened any yearning for American 
intervention. On the contrary, Americans, and much of the first world, 
seem thoroughly weary of war, longing only to be left alone. The efforts 
of Barack Obama and British prime minister David Cameron to muster 
enthusiasm for an enforcement of international law and humanitarian 
moral standards are greeted with a shrug or outright dismissal. And there 
is little evidence that anyone in the Middle East is eager for American 
intervention. The United States is no longer in control of the spectacle, as 
it was during the run- up to the invasion of Iraq. It has basically become 
a spectator, a passive witness to historical events. At the same time, the 
closest thing to a spectacular scandal is the revelation that, alongside the 
1. “From a marketing point of view you don’t introduce new products in August,” 
said White House chief of staff Andy Card on September 7, 2002. See Mother Jones 
comprehensive timeline of the run- up to the Iraq war, http://www.motherjones 
.com/politics/2011/12/leadup- iraq- war- timeline.

2 0 8  :  C H A P T E R  1 6
withdrawal of American troops from the Middle East, a new regime of mas-
sive surveillance has been installed that places the entire population of the 
world inside a kind of virtual panopticon. Michel Foucault’s concept of a 
“civilization of surveillance” (The Punitive Society, 1973), distinct from Guy 
Debord’s “society of the spectacle,” seems to have now been fully realized.
But I would not want to suggest that a simple choice between spectacle 
and surveillance, or an alternation of dominant modes of media power, 
would be adequate to understanding either phenomenon today. For one 
thing, surveillance has itself become a spectacle. If there is little appetite 
for a spectacular renewal of Western military adventures in the Middle 
East, there is a vast market for the simulation of these spectacles in war 
games.2 And the US surveillance regime of phone and e- mail monitoring, 
BOSS (Biometrical Optical Surveillance System), facial recognition soft-
ware,3 and remote control drone attacks has now been subjected to spec-
tacular exposure by the countersurveillance actions of Edward Snowden 
and Chelsea (formerly Bradley) Manning.
Spectacle and surveillance must be understood, in other words, not as 
mutually exclusive alternatives, but as dialectical forces in the exertion of 
power and resistance to power. Spectacle seeks to take power over subjects 
by distracting them with illusions; surveillance, by contrast, functions in 
the register of realism, taking power over subjects by treating them as ob-
jects subjected to a penetrating gaze that knows where they are and hears 
what they are saying. The old model of the spectacle- surveillance dialectic 
was the telescreen of George Orwell’s 1984, which transmitted a constant 
stream of military propaganda replete with spectacles of mass gathering 
(the Hate rallies) and mass extermination of enemies, while at the same 
time functioning as a monitor allowing the private lives of all members of 
the Party to be observed. This two- way model of spectacle and surveillance 
is never completely dominant, even in Orwell’s dystopian fantasies. Dark 
2. My colleague Patrick Jagoda describes the situation vividly: “Games have expe-
rienced an accelerated transformation from a minority hacking practice of univer-
sity labs in the 1960s and the arcades of the 1970s to a global multibillion- dollar 
industry. . . . Players spend considerable money but also substantial time with 
contemporary games. In early January 2011, for instance, Activision announced 
that players of its hit game Call of Duty: Black Ops (which earned 360 million dol-
lars in the first 24 hours after its release) logged 600 million hours of gameplay 
collectively (the equivalent to 68,000 years) during the first 45 days after release 
(Orland)” (Jagoda, personal correspondence).
3. See Ginger McCall, “The Face Scan Arrives,”op- ed, New York Times, August 29, 
2013.

T H E  S P E C T A C L E  T O D A Y  :  2 0 9
little niches remain out of sight of the telescreen, and Winston Smith’s 
private notebook records countermemories that resist the disappearance 
of history into the Memory Hole at the Ministry of Truth. Gossip, conver-
sation, and other lateral modes of communication cut across the media 
dominance of the telescreen.
But today, a third media force has emerged that opens a new front in 
the power struggle with spectacle and surveillance. This is the social me-
dia, epitomized by Facebook, Twitter, and all the forms of lateral text- 
voice- video messaging. Like the postal system, graffiti, and unauthorized 
mass gatherings, the social media have the potential to produce forms 
of counterspectacle and countersurveillance, as we see in contemporary 
phenomena such as the Occupy Movement and WikiLeaks. That is why I 
have consistently argued against the monolithic application of either the 
Frankfurt School’s “culture industry” thesis or Guy Debord’s “society of 
the spectacle.” It is not that I have some naïve trust in “affirmative culture” 
of the sort that Hollywood provides or the art world promises. It is rather 
that I want to insist on critical discriminations that examine the actual 
functioning of artistic and media practices that aim to resist the dominant 
modes of spectacle and surveillance. World of Warcraft is not the only 
video game on offer, and corporate baubles are not the only artistic prod-
ucts available. No account of spectacle as a mere expression of the nefar-
ious forces of Capital is going to be adequate to the actual media politics 
of our time, much less the moment at the height of American war fever a 
decade ago. That is why the following critique of the spectacle hypothesis, 
written at the peak of that fever, will, I hope, still be relevant today.
The Retort Collective’s book Afflicted Powers: Capital and Spectacle in the 
New Age of War was an important critical intervention in the discussions 
of the war in Iraq, and the whole strategic vision of the so- called war on 
terror inaugurated by the events of September 11, 2001.4 The origin of this 
book in the 2003 global demonstrations against the US- led invasion of 
Iraq, remains a moment of spectacular optimism and defeat at one and the 
same time. The authors issued a pamphlet at that time, Neither Their War 
Nor Their Peace, which was crucial in its insistence on identifying deeper 
structural issues than the isolated question of “peace versus war” in Iraq. 
It provided an important reminder that the so- called peace of the previous 
4. I am deeply grateful to my colleague Lauren Berlant, who dropped everything 
to perform a heroic editorial cleansing of the mess this essay amounted to in an 
earlier draft.

2 1 0  :  C H A P T E R  1 6
decade, the era of the “peace dividend” at the end of the Cold War, had 
been a low- level war leading inexorably to the outbreak of the war on terror. 
The sanctions were not a “peace” in any sense of the word.
Afflicted Powers is also a deeply felt meditation on the increasingly mar-
ginal position of the Left as a political movement. It is especially useful 
in its analysis of structures of overdetermination, as in the multilayered 
account of the “blood for oil” equation and the “future of the illusion” 
known as US policy toward Israel. As a die- hard Blakean I of course ap-
preciate the identification with what Blake would call “the voice of the 
devil,” speaking from its downcast state on the burning lakes of hell— an 
all too prescient image of burning oil fields in the Middle East, as well 
as a reminder of Milton’s defeated rebel angels, convening to plot their 
next move and mobilize their “afflicted powers.” And needless to say, I am 
especially fascinated with the effort to link the contemporary problem of 
“the Image and Spectacle” to the present war on terror. I believe that it is 
essential to work through these concepts, from Marx’s figures of the com-
modity fetish and the camera obscura of ideology to Walter Benjamin’s 
“exhibition value,” Adorno and Horkheimer’s “culture industry” to Guy 
Debord’s “spectacle”— the fundamental Imaginary structures of capitalist 
modernity.
But I worry that Afflicted Powers has constructed another enemy, a straw 
enemy, not nearly as powerful as the military neoliberalism it correctly 
identifies as the major force for a new round of “primitive accumulation” 
and neocolonialism. This enemy bears a large burden of the blame the vol-
ume assigns to forces that present obstacles to the Left. It hovers around 
the fetish concepts of Spectacle, Capital, the State, and Modernity. These 
concepts frame Retort’s analysis of the contemporary political situation 
in what must be called highly spectacular terms, as the mobilizing of vast 
abstractions contending for power in a mythic struggle, a “Holy War” 
against “Mammon” and “Moses and his Law,” waged on the battlefield of 
a contemporary “hell on earth.” All of the terms (including Spectacle itself) 
should be capitalized. They are proper names. They are regularly person-
ified, treated as agents with intentions, choices (or not), necessities, and 
actions. The State has “anxieties” and “obsessions” (20). The Spectacle, 
as Guy Debord always insisted, even has “plans” for “self development” 
(Society of the Spectacle, 16). “Spectacular power can . . . deny whatever it 
wishes to . . .” (22). But Afflicted Powers claims to argue substance against 
spectacle. What’s really going on?
Apocalyptic rhetoric of this sort is probably unavoidable, if only because 
it is the operative language of the contestants themselves in the war on 

T H E  S P E C T A C L E  T O D A Y  :  2 1 1
terror. This war is the millennial showdown that Y2K failed to provide, the 
last battle between Good and Evil. It is the modern Crusade, and so the lan-
guage of premodern war comes back to haunt even the most self- reflexively 
critical discourse, along with inflated fantasies of the satanic enemy. It 
would take more time than I have here to account for the way Retort frames 
its entire project in the language of Milton and the English Civil Wars. The 
usual resource for historical analogies has been medievalism, whether it 
is in the curious upsurge of Augustinian, Franciscan, and Pauline rhetoric 
in Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri’s Empire, or in the writings of Giorgio 
Agamben and Slavoj Zizek.5 This language, needless to say, finds its pop-
ular counterpart in the current sense that “Christendom” is threatened 
once again by an Islamic horde. Could it be that Retort’s use of the highly 
ambiguous language of Milton’s Paradise Lost (is Milton on the side of 
the devils or of the angels? Is Satan conducting a liberation struggle or an 
imperial venture?) reflects some confusion or at least ambivalence about 
the moral and political grounding of Left politics at this time?
Along with the Miltonic and apocalyptic modes that haunt this vol-
ume is the anachronism we call the 1960s, and May ’68, signaled in the 
centrality of Guy Debord and the Situationist International’s concept of 
the “Spectacle” as the volume’s satanic foe. To be fair, we must note Re-
tort’s insistence on a critical distance from the categories of Debord: if 
his version of the spectacle was “an exultant, world- historical force,” Re-
tort’s is characterized as “minimal, pragmatic, and matter of fact.” But 
somehow these disclaimers ring hollow. Retort seems just as convinced of 
the “alchemy of spectacle” (130) as Debord was, and this is why they have 
to deny that they are “sectaries of the spectacle” (17) and claim that “no 
one concept, or cluster of concepts” can “get the measure of the horror 
of the past four years,” even as they declare that the spectacle is just such 
a totalizing force: “a social process”; “a form of violence” that (like Mao’s 
political power) “comes out of the barrel of a gun” while artfully hiding 
itself as “a deadly simulacrum of community” (21), a “manufacture of de-
sire” into “the lifeless bright sameness . . . of the market,” and a “pattern 
of small (saleable) addictions.”(20). The spectacle is, in other words, both 
the macro- and micro- structure of contemporary ideology, both the center 
and the circumference, the cause and the effect. It is what is hidden and 
what shows itself; it is what produces the agony of a colonized everyday life 
and its numbing anesthetic; it generates a “Prozac state” and an “empire 
5. See Bruce Holsinger’s essay “Empire, Apocalypse, and the 9/11 Premodern,” 
Critical Inquiry 34, no. 3 (Spring 2008): 468– 90.

2 1 2  :  C H A P T E R  1 6
of shock and awe,” while at the same time it “agonizes” (131) at its own 
internal contradictions and its vulnerability to the sort of “spectacular 
defeat” it suffered on September 11 (a defeat which, of course, is magically 
transformed into a spectacular victory for neoconservatism).
While I feel deep solidarity with the fundamental political commit-
ments of Afflicted Powers, I find myself less interested in the invocation of 
old arguments from Marxist thought or reverential repetitions and detour-
nements of Situationist slogans. So I agree with the claim that “capitalism” 
and “primitive accumulation” are not outmoded concepts but take on a 
whole new set of important meanings in our time of “neo- liberal mili-
tarism” (9); I agree with the genealogy that links al Qaeda to a Leninist 
revolutionary vanguard, and thus makes knee- jerk agitprop rhetoric (like 
knee- jerk reactionary rejections of “modernity”) highly suspect. What I 
don’t care about so much is, thus, precisely the need to wave the banner 
of the Left. I want to be in solidarity and continuity with the heritage of 
leftist thought but without the need to rewage old sectarian struggles or 
to wave the tattered old battle flags, especially when the actually existing 
Left in American politics constitutes (at an optimistic estimate) 3 percent 
of the electorate, and that 3 percent is divided against itself over its relation 
to actual party politics. We also have to be candid about our own roman-
ticism of the Left, the grudging admiration for the Leninism of al Qaeda 
that seems to strike a recurrent undertone in Afflicted Powers. As Hal Foster 
notes, this nostalgia for Leftist vanguardism puts the remnants of the Left 
in a position of “enemy- twinship with revolutionary Islam” (201), and that 
strikes me as exactly the wrong posture.
Therefore I’m glad to see paragraphs like the one on page 10, where the 
authors renounce the notion of capital as a “magic shaping power, pulling 
the strings of everything in the world around it,” in favor of a concept that 
makes sense in the Wall Street Journal and the McCain- Feingold Act, and 
that does not need to explain the obvious as if it were the solution of a 
deep mystery, “solving crimes the criminals have never bothered to con-
ceal” (10). I am also happy to see that the “totalizing closure” of Debord’s 
concept of the spectacle is being dissented from, that an important qual-
ification on the power of the spectacle is its tendency to self- limit: “once 
the running of the state involves a permanent and massive shortage of 
historical knowledge, that state can no longer be led strategically” (22). The 
“eternal present” of the spectacle is deadly, not only to resistance to the 
state and the spectacle, but to the state itself (23). But I would want to in-
sist on some realism about such “strategic” claims. It strikes me as highly 
likely that the Bush administration’s ill- advised war in Iraq is laying the 

T H E  S P E C T A C L E  T O D A Y  :  2 1 3
groundwork for the collapse of the American empire later in this century, 
just as current Israeli policies are laying the groundwork for the eventual 
demise of the Jewish state. But neither of these long- term strategic failures 
prevents these states from engaging in shorter- term strategic leadership, 
however incompetent and flawed. In fact, the persistence of neocolonial 
illusions is precisely what enables these states to be led strategically and 
to pursue imperial military adventures with disastrous strategic conse-
quences, as well as horrific short- term consequences for multitudes of 
ordinary people.
So there may be some fundamental problems with Debord’s concept 
of the spectacle as the framing concept for contemporary political anal-
ysis (not that it exactly swept the world before it in its own proper time!). 
Debord’s spectacle is too powerful, too all- explanatory. Like every idol, it 
seems to take on a life of its own. It becomes precisely the figure of that 
“magic shaping power” of capital, as well as of modernity and consumer-
ism. Spectacle is the face, the avatar, the image of capital. Its “totalizing 
closure” seems unavoidable.
So what is to be done? What should we do with these fetish- concepts? 
I don’t imagine that they are open to any straightforward demystifying 
tactics, any ruthless critique that will restore them to some kind of ab-
stract purity, descriptive passivity, or analytic rigor. We are stuck with the 
language of Modernity, Capital, and Spectacle as the “idols of the mind” 
we have inherited. I propose, then, that we treat these as “eternal” idols 
in the Nietzschean sense, as icons that can be sounded but not smashed 
with the hammer— or better, the tuning fork of critical reflection.6 What 
this entails in practice is, first, an acceptance that no amount of polemical 
critique is going to make these words disappear, along with the impossibly 
vague, ambiguous pictures they conjure up; second, a recognition of the 
way they lure us into magical thinking, melodramatic scenarios of immi-
nent crisis, and oversimplified histories (I am heartened here by Retort’s 
own remarks on the need to “desacralize” the concept of the spectacle); 
and third, an attentiveness to their multiple tonalities, as well as their 
eternal or timeless character. Could it be that Bruno Latour’s argument 
6. I am alluding here to Nietzsche’s preface to Twilight of the Idols, in which he 
urges “philosophizing with a hammer,” or (even better) a “tuning fork” to “sound” 
the “eternal idols” that have bedeviled philosophy. It has been insufficiently re-
marked, in my view, that Nietzsche is here arguing for a nondestructive form of 
iconoclasm, one that does not dream of destroying the idols it confronts. For 
further discussion, see my What Do Pictures Want? On the Lives and Loves of Images 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 8, 95.

2 1 4  :  C H A P T E R  1 6
that “we have never been modern” is functionally equivalent to saying that 
“we have always been modern”? In my view we must sound the images of 
the spectacle, not dream of smashing them. We must reconceive the spec-
tacle as the site of struggle, the contested terrain, and stop personifying it 
as a Baudrillardian “Evil Demon of Images” that will be dissolved by our 
ruthless criticisms or trumped by our long- term predictions that history 
will ultimately vindicate us.7
In this spirit, let me address a few particulars:
1. The fetishizing of the Left. I’m not so attached to the word. Should 
I be? Perhaps only in a conversation like this, with friends and comrades 
who trace their genealogy to the political struggles of the 1960s and their 
intellectual DNA back through critical theory and Marxism, but also to 
Durkheim, Bergson, Freud, and Nietszche, as well as to the radical tradi-
tion in English letters from Milton to Blake to Shelley. “Whom do we think 
we are talking to . . . [when] we appeal to something called ‘the Left.’ . . . 
Will they not immediately put our book back on the pile of new releases 
the moment they see the worlds ‘Capital’ and ‘Spectacle’ in our subtitle?” 
(9). Spectacle might just be the “totem of an ingroup” (10). So the authors 
ask that we “wait and see.” But of course this request is, by their own cal-
culation, unlikely to be honored. These words will “immediately” doom 
the book, not earn it a patient wait- and- see attitude. So the search for “real 
opposing speech” that the authors rightly call for seems hampered from 
the start. This is too bad, because this is actually a terrific book, especially 
in its clear- sighted analyses of the materially and ideologically grounded 
fetishes— oil and land— sacred and commercial property. What if we want 
to speak to the Right and the Center as well, and in its language, in a com-
mon vernacular that can explode and reframe the issues?
2. I also want to question more generally Retort’s engagement in famil-
iar rituals of reactionary iconoclasm, expressed in its scarcely concealed 
contempt for mass culture, consumerism, and modernity. Why the disdain 
for “new media studies” and the possibilities of freedom in cyberspace? 
The fact that a few hackers made overly optimistic predictions in the pages 
of Wired magazine in the 1990s is scarcely grounds for resigning all hopes 
for the emancipatory possibilities of new media or cyberspace. The new 
social movements that Retort looks to with some guarded optimism al-
7. I am aware that it would horrify Debord to be bracketed with Baudrillard, 
but that is exactly what I see happening in the demonizing rhetoric of the all- 
consuming spectacle, which threatens to become the clone of Baudrillardian 
simulation.

T H E  S P E C T A C L E  T O D A Y  :  2 1 5
most invariably depend upon a deep engagement with Internet commu-
nication. Retort’s nostalgia for premodern forms of community, its hatred 
for the “disenchantment of the world” produced by modernity, strikes me 
as especially ill- advised. While pretending to renounce “Jeremiads against 
the commodity,” Retort engages in exactly this sort of rhetoric. “Mass- 
produced objects,” it declares, “cannot and do not work the magic they 
are presently called on to perform” (179). Is that so? Did African fetishes 
work the magic they were called on to perform? Is the problem the failure 
of material objects to fulfil our fantasies? Do we need different objects? 
Or different fantasies?
This game becomes especially transparent when Retort declares that 
“objects” cannot perform their magic “if they are standardized” (179). One 
waits for the other shoe to drop, in a rousing call for a return to manual, 
handicraft production. Presumably, when the members of Retort go the 
drugstore, the airport, the auto parts store, or the supermarket, whatever 
else they may want, it will include some guarantee that the products sold 
there will conform to certain standards of safety, reliability, and unifor-
mity.
Retort goes on to admit that “in the end we have failed to stifle our 
distaste” for the “modern condition”(180). And distaste is exactly the right 
word here. Beneath the radical rhetoric, there is a disturbing undertone of 
old- fashioned elitist snobbery, a nostalgia for some unspecified lost utopia 
of real human values and authentic cultural productions, whether located 
in traditional communities or in authentically leftist vanguard movements 
(all of them united by their hatred of modernity). What doesn’t seem to 
occur to the authors is that the demonization of modernity may be exactly 
what is crippling their analysis and leaving them stranded on the burning 
lake of hell, with Milton’s fallen angels. Suppose modernity were, like the 
spectacle, treated not as a demonic idol to be smashed, but as a sounding 
board or instrument to be played or (better yet) a terrain to be contested? 
I presume that Retort would not want to dispense with standardization, or 
flush toilets, or general anesthesia, in the world it hopes for. This means 
that some aspects of modernity will have to be retained, and a critical, dis-
criminating analysis of modernity will have to take the place of totalizing 
polemical denunciations.
3. One senses in Retort’s condemnations of modernity, consumerism, 
and the technical potentials of new media and cyberspace a tacit break 
with the whole Marxian emphasis on modes of production as a key to un-
derstanding the real battleground on which political struggle is to be 
waged. Retort seems to be accepting a picture of contemporary culture as 

2 1 6  :  C H A P T E R  1 6
a world of nothing but rampant consumerism accompanied by increased 
alienation and meaninglessness. It dismisses outright any emancipatory 
possibilities in cyberspace as “a ticket to data- punching,” and has nothing 
to say about the emergence of new, decentralized forms of journalism 
(the blogosphere), the new accessibility of global media outlets, Internet 
telephony, or the rise of virtual communities. If one believes the authors, 
the only ones who believe “that the virtual life is the road to utopia” are 
“the webmeisters of revolutionary Islam” (188). Is this a statement of envy 
for the revolutionary fervor of the jihadists? A jibe at their utopianism and 
faith in technology? Or a tacit confession that they, too, have become “true 
believers in the spectacle” they are supposed to despise?
To me, the worst moment in Afflicted Powers comes in Retort’s answer to 
Hal Foster’s invitation to say something about “art, or indeed . . . culture,” 
that is not coopted in advance by the all- consuming power of the spectacle. 
Their response is to quote the fervent words of Mohammad Sidique Khan, 
one of the London suicide bombers, as “the voice of our time.” They follow 
this with the following characterization of contemporary art:
We look around at the actually existing artworld of the Empire and see no 
reason to expect much in the same vein. We shall ask readers to put along-
side Mohammad Sidique Khan’s last testament a listing of the themes 
and styles of this week’s gallery offerings in New York and London . . . 
and judge for themselves. (207)
This may be the most blatant example of philistine sophistry in the entire 
book. Adorno must be spinning in his grave. The idea that the “themes 
and styles” of the “artworld” at any time should be “in the same vein” as, 
or weighed in the balance of political seriousness with, the statements 
of a fundamentalist suicide bomber reminds me of the most vulgar calls 
for “relevance” and “commitment” from artists and intellectuals. It is a 
gesture worthy of Stalin. It also betrays an ignorance of much of what 
is happening in contemporary art and culture, coupled with an absolute 
contempt.
Has the Retort Collective paid any attention to the work of the Critical 
Art Ensemble, or the work of the “Interventionists” curated at a recent 
show at Mass MOCA by Nato Thompson? Has it noticed the antiwar “cul-
ture jamming” strategies of Code Pink or Forkscrew Graphics or Freeway-
Blogger.com? Has it occurred to them that some forms of art in inauspi-
cious times may have to pursue quieter strategies, being content to “stand 
and wait,” as Milton put it. Blake insisted that poets should “bring out 

T H E  S P E C T A C L E  T O D A Y  :  2 1 7
number, weight, and measure,” the (standardizing) criteria of poetic form, 
“in a year of dearth.” Has Retort noticed that “new media studies” is not 
some simpleminded celebration of technophilia but an attempt to criti-
cally engage with the new forms of communication, experience, and pro-
ductivity made possible by contemporary media inventions? Has it noticed 
that the invention of digital photography and video has made possible 
new forms of resistance, precisely on the terrain of the spectacle? That 
the revelations of the Abu Ghraib scandal would have been inconceivable 
without digital cameras and e- mail? That we are now living in what will 
be regarded as a golden age of political documentary, in which films such 
as Fahrenheit 911, The Corporation, Outfoxed, The Fog of War, Control Room, 
BBC’s The Power of Nightmares, and An Inconvenient Truth treat moviegoing 
publics to bracing and brilliantly designed interventions on the strategic 
terrain of the spectacle?
My point is not that the Retort Collective should have “balanced” all 
their bad news with some inventory of positive developments. The prob-
lem is more radical than that. It consists in their adoption of a position 
that forecloses any possibility of hope, other than the grim, ironic convic-
tion that the spectacle will finally self- destruct, the state will cease to func-
tion strategically, modernity will destroy itself (along with all the rest of 
us), and the merciless laws of the history and the dialectic will be fulfilled. 
Along the way, Retort will indulge itself in the pleasures of Situationist de-
tournement, observing with satisfaction the “falling rate of illusion” just as 
earlier Marxists pinned their bleak hopes on the “falling rate of profit.” The 
problem, I fear, is that the Retort Collective seems to enjoy its position of 
despair, downcast on the burning lake of hell, while dreaming enviously of 
satanic champions who dispatch themselves on suicide missions. I cast my 
lot with those devils of Milton who take the path of production, inventing 
new technologies, building a city with music, and endlessly debating the 
fundamental questions of philosophy. This is a good time to be rereading 
Blake’s Marriage of Heaven and Hell.


CODA
For a Sweet Science of Images
To the discoverer in the field of theoretical physics, the constructions of his 
imagination appear so necessary and so natural that he is apt to treat them not as 
the creations of his thoughts but as given realities.
ALBERT EINSTEIN, On the Method of Theoretical Physics (1933)1
To form the golden armour of science
For Intellectual War the war of swords departed now
The dark Religions are departed & sweet Science reigns
WILLIAM BLAKE, Vala, or The Four Zoas (1797)2
Against the pressure, then and now, to treat the culture of science as context or 
antithesis to literary production, I recover a countervailing epistemology that casts 
poetry as a privileged technique of empirical inquiry: a knowledgeable practice whose 
figurative work brought it closer to, not farther from, the physical nature of things.
AMANDA JO GOLDSTEIN, “Sweet Science”3
What picture of science holds this book together? Perhaps by now it is 
coming into focus. It builds on Einstein’s insight that even a “hard” or 
“exact” science such as theoretical physics is grounded in images, “con-
structions of [the] imagination.” Scientific images are, of course, supposed 
to be true, accurate, and verifiable. But they are also, as Einstein insists, 
not to be taken as “given” but as taken (like photographs or tracings) or 
constructed (like models). That means they are provisional, subject to cor-
1. Einstein, On the Method of Theoretical Physics, the Herbert Spencer Lecture, 
delivered at Oxford, June 10, 1933. Cited from Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 
“Einstein’s Philosophy of Science,” http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/einstein 
- philscience/ (accessed August 13, 2014).
2. The Poetry and Prose of William Blake, ed. David V. Erdman (Garden City, NY: 
Anchor Doubleday, 1965), 392.
3. Goldstein, abstract to “Sweet Science: Romantic Materialism and the New Sci-
ences of Life,” University of California, Berkeley (ProQuest, UMI Dissertations 
Publishing, 2011. 3616128).

2 2 0  :  C O D A
rection, revision, or abandonment. If they assume the status of “settled” 
science (e.g., Darwinism) that only signals their openness to unsettlement 
and alternative images. It also hints at the possibility that there could be 
a science of images themselves, and that this would be a science whose 
object would be understood as a borderline phenomenon negotiating the 
relations of thought to reality.
The science of images offered by this book is that of Goethe’s “tender 
empiricism” and Blake’s “sweet science.” It is a critical practice that treats 
images as the building blocks of our psychosocial worlds, as well as our 
scientific models of objective reality. For Blake, contrary to his reputation 
as a Romantic mystic, sweet science is a form of Enlightenment that sets 
its face against the “dark religions” that mobilize war and destruction. 
Sweet science engages in intellectual wars of critical research into the pos-
sibility of a peaceful and humane future, as well as the truths of nature. It 
is specifically focused on the role of images in producing forms of under-
standing and pictures of reality. It is the science of biologists like Norman 
Macleod, who have shown that the proper object of biology is the image 
(understood as a self- replicating model, not an individual specimen, or, 
in the terms of iconology, the image rather than the picture).4 It is the sci-
ence of Freud rather than Heidegger, giving us an array of contesting and 
contested world views rather than “the world as picture.” (See chapter 8, 
“World Pictures.”) It is a science that not only uses images as aids to under-
standing, as in the accounts of form provided by mathematics, the pictures 
of matter and energy provided by physics, or the ideas about life provided 
by biology. It also puts images themselves under scrutiny as formal, ma-
terial, and quasi- living entities, “imitations of life,” that are subject to a 
natural as well as a cultural history. (See chapter 3, “Image Science,” and 
chapter 6, “Migrating Images.”) It is a science that conceives its object as 
a borderline entity located at the crossroads between nature and culture, 
language and perception, figures and grounds. (See chapter 4, “Image X 
Text,” the sections in chapter 2 on the metapicture and the biopicture, and 
chapter 7, “The Future of the Image.”)
Image science, then, is neither a “hard” nor a “soft” science— neither 
physics nor sociology— but a “sweet” science that pays as much attention 
to the observer as to the observed, to the subject as to the object, to framing 
4. On the image/picture distinction, see chapter 2, “Four Fundamental Concepts 
of Image Science.” For Macleod’s account of the image as biological concept, see 
his article “Images, Totems, Types, and Memes: Perspectives on an Iconologi-
cal Mimetics,” in The Pictorial Turn, ed. Neal Curtis (New York: Routledge, 2010),  
88– 111.

F O R  A  S W E E T  S C I E N C E  O F  I M A G E S  :  2 2 1
concepts and metaphors as to the empirical evidence they organize. Its 
epistemology developed in the Romantic interlude between the Enlight-
enment and modern positivism,5 the pre- Darwinist era of what Amanda Jo 
Goldstein has called “sweet science” and a poetically inflected materialism.
Perhaps that is why it shares its name with that other “sweet science,” 
named, coincidentally, in the era of Blake and Goethe.6 I am thinking, of 
course, of boxing, in which a pair of contestants dance a ballet of intricate 
tactics and resolute toughness. We don’t merely see images; we are struck 
by them, and sometimes we want to strike back, which is why iconophilia 
and iconoclasm are irreducible aspects of the affective life of images. Per-
haps the sweet pugilistic science of images might take its cue from the 
practice of shadow boxing, in which the fight is with one’s own image, as 
a preparation for all the other images, both the bodies and the arenas in 
which they are encountered.
The pugilistic metapicture of image science might seem far- fetched at 
first glance, but a bit of reflection suggests that it has legs. What is boxing, 
after all, but a sport that demands an immediate face- to- face encounter 
with another person, involving tactics of both offense and defense, alter-
nating blows and embraces, light jabs (what Roland Barthes called the 
punctum) and knockout punches (Michael Fried’s moment of total convic-
tion and presence)? The encounter with an image or a work of art is, in this 
light, a scene of modulated or controlled violence. The highest praise— or 
blame— we can give to an image is to describe it as “striking,” producing 
an effect that leaves the beholder marked indelibly, or merely bruised for a 
moment. Images can offend, enthrall, captivate, and traumatize beholders, 
which is why they are surrounded by so many taboos and superstitions. 
Erwin Panofsky famously described the encounter with a picture as akin 
to greeting an acquaintance on the street by tipping the hat, a custom 
he traces to the medieval practice of “raising the visor” on an armored 
helmet to indicate peaceful intentions.7 Possibly Jacques Lacan had this 
5. For a more nuanced account of positivist epistemology, see chapter 12, “Foun-
dational Sites and Occupied Spaces.”
6. British writer Peirce Egan coined the phrase in a series of articles on pugilism, 
Boxiana, published between 1813 and 1828. See iSport, http://boxing.isport.com 
/boxing- guides/why- boxing- is- called- the- sweet- science (accessed August 13, 2014).
7. Panofsky, “Iconography and Iconology: An Introduction to the Study of Re-
naissance Art,” in Meaning in the Visual Arts (New York: Anchor Doubleday, 1955), 
26– 54. For further discussion, see “Iconology, Ideology, and Cultural Encounter: 
Panofsky, Althusser, and the Scene of Recognition,” in Reframing the Renaissance, 
ed. Claire Farago (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1991), 292– 300.

2 2 2  :  C O D A
sort of pacifist gesture in mind when he suggested that a work of art is 
an invitation to “lay down the gaze,” to set aside the visual armor plate of 
stereotypes and search templates that prevent us from encountering the 
immediacy and density of visual experience.
Boxing is a sport involving strictly limited combat (no head butting or 
blows “below the belt”). Peirce Egan described it as the “sweet science of 
bruising,” an artful limitation of violence that administers nonfatal forms 
of trauma that heal and fade relatively quickly. Like Nietzsche’s advice to 
strike the idols with a hammer or tuning fork so as to “sound the idols” 
rather than to smash them, boxing is an art and science that aims, not to 
kill the other but to make him cry out and to yield. Marie- Jose Mondzain 
asks the question “Can images kill?” and answers that fatal effects are 
probably rare (as in boxing) but not impossible.8 Idolatry is that form of en-
counter with an image that may demand the murder of the other, whether 
as a sacrifice to the idol, or as punishment for the greatest crime against 
the invisible, unimaginable god. Certainly a false image can lead to imag-
inative imprisonment, as suggested in Wittgenstein’s admission that “a 
picture held us captive, and we could not get outside it.”
Image science locates its genealogy in Giambattista Vico’s Scienza 
Nuova, his “new science,” not of nature, but of “second nature,” the 
things that human beings produce— objects, discourses, procedures, and 
institutions— especially as they are captured and constituted by verbal 
and visual images. It is deeply affiliated with the German concepts of Kul-
turwissenschaft and (of course) Bildwissenschaft, learned traditions that re-
gard images as objects of both historical and philosophical inquiry. Image 
science has to ask what images are (the question of ontology), what they 
do (the question of rhetoric and ethics), how they produce meaning (the 
question of hermeneutics), and what they want (the question of erotics).9
I imagine that anyone expecting a highly technical science of images 
will have read this book with some puzzlement. Where are the graphs 
and equations, the databases and experimental findings? Where are the 
statistics and neurological scans, the X- rays and the MRIs? Obviously they 
are nowhere to be found. The image science elaborated in this book is a 
qualitative, historical, and psychopolitical science. It is interested in im-
ages both as objects and instruments of investigation into human realities. 
8. Mondzain, “Can Images Kill?” Critical Inquiry 36, no. 1 (Autumn 2009).
9. See my What Do Pictures Want? On the Lives and Loves of Images (Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 2005) for fuller elaboration of these questions, especially 
the last one.

F O R  A  S W E E T  S C I E N C E  O F  I M A G E S  :  2 2 3
It addresses images as the focus of a critical realism that remains loyal 
to a tradition of representation making truth- claims based on evidence 
and a critical stance toward the theoretical frameworks within which that 
evidence appears.
It also aims to be, then, a relatively practical and applied science, one 
that deals with the image as an object of inquiry that pervades everyday 
life as much as the arts, ordinary practices of seeing and knowing as much 
refined habits of aesthetic contemplation. The image science of this book 
is, in other words, a tool for understanding the world and ourselves. It is 
also an image science that cuts across the media, from photography to 
architecture, sculpture to urban space, verbal to visual metaphor. That 
is why it has to engage with media aesthetics. Every image has to appear 
somewhere, in or on or as something, the medium or support for its con-
crete appearance in a picture or other artifact. Characteristically, the image 
appears as a figure against a ground, a system nested in an environment 
(to echo Niklas Luhmann’s terms). Most simply, the whole organization of 
this image science has been structured around the dialectic between fig-
ures and grounds, their mutual interdependence and reversals of location, 
which constitutes the fundamental ontology of images as such.
The image science provided by this book might best be visualized with 
the help of Allan Sekula’s marvelous photograph of a displaced wrench, a 
graphic allegory of figure and ground, object and space (see figure 5.1). In 
chapter 5 I discussed it as an exemplar of “critical realism” in its emphasis 
on the world of tools, practical labor, and the direct engagement of the 
body in moments of effort and attention. As a symbolic form, the wrench 
exemplifies the entire world of tools and technology within which images 
function. In itself, it is a mere “hand tool,” emblem of manual production. 
But in context, in the metallic, mechanized, and globalized world of the in-
ternational shipping trade, it only makes sense in relation to the machines 
and structures on which it operates. (This contrasts it with, for instance, a 
stone axe or arrowhead, the kinds of tools that exist prior to the invention 
of machines; it is, in that sense, a “machine tool” hybrid.)
The wrench is also slightly displaced in the immediate environment in 
which Sekula found it. The caption tells us this is a “welding booth,” an en-
closed space in which metal joints are fused. A wrench is a tool for turning, 
for tightening and loosening connections. Here I would like to return to it 
as a photographic meditation on the way images come into the world. The 
photograph captures a double apparition, a real thing and its impression, 
the latter revealed by a slight displacement of the object to expose its trace 
or afterimage. It is a “contact print” that exemplifies the doubly indexical 

2 2 4  :  C O D A
and iconic character of the photographic image itself, signifying by its 
formal resemblance and its status as a material trace like a footprint. It 
exposes in an instant the very same process that produces a photogram 
of a leaf laid out on paper and exposed to sunlight, or (by analogy) the 
extraordinarily long process that allows an organism to leave behind its 
fossilized image in an appropriate medium such as slowly hardening mud. 
Despite its location in the completely artificial world of a modern ship-
yard, then, it reminds us that the image is a phenomenon that crosses the 
border between nature and culture, nonhuman physical- chemical pro-
cesses, and human fabrications. How appropriate that it be situated in a 
shipyard, the “foundational site” for a planetary approach to image science 
that does not dream of reaching a final shore but is compelled to rebuild 
its vessel on the open sea— in this case, the spaceship earth on which we 
are all passengers. Sekula’s picture of a welder’s bench may be located in a 
shipyard, but it is a synechdoche for the entire system of global capital and 
the detritus it leaves behind, the fossil trace of disuse and obsolescence. 
The unused wrench is a figure for the bankrupt, closed shipyard in Los 
Angeles harbor where it was found. Sekula’s gesture of moving the wrench 
is thus a way of putting it back to work by means of revealing it, materially 
and photographically, as both an image and a found object.
Sekula’s photograph is what Gustave Courbet would have called a “real 
allegory,” a symbolic tableau drawn from concrete experience and daily 
life, not from an arbitrary world of signs and symbols rendered either 
opaque or all too legible. It is as much a symptom as a sign of intention, 
an apparition that opens up a world of unintended meanings. What, after 
all, is a wrench? It is, first, a classic instance of Marshall McLuhan’s defi-
nition of a medium as an “extension of man,” in this case an extension of 
the arm and hand, combining the grip of an enclosing fist with the lever-
age of the extended arm. But it is also a figure of figuration itself, as the 
“turn” or “trope” that transforms an inert object or word into a metaphor. 
Poetry is a turning and displacing of words that exposes the forms of life 
that underly all the dead metaphors that make up discourse. As Emerson 
puts it, “language is fossil poetry,” and thus poetry is what brings language 
back to its living origin.
Let’s think of the sweet technoscience of images, then, as a kind of 
wrench for adjusting the connections between the hard and soft sciences, 
nature and culture. Let us also think of it as a monkey wrench designed to 
jam up the gears in the mechanically repeated clichés about a “two culture 
split” between science and art.
I realize that I have concluded this book with two unexpected and rather 

F O R  A  S W E E T  S C I E N C E  O F  I M A G E S  :  2 2 5
strange metapictures of image science, boxing and welding, exemplified 
by two McLuhanesque extensions of the hand and arm, the glove and the 
wrench. The first is a medium for softening the impact of blows exchanged 
between persons (boxing gloves are mainly for the protection of the hands, 
not the face, of the boxer). The second is a medium for enhancing strength 
through leverage in the process of tightening or loosening the bonds be-
tween material objects, or here, between pictures and things. The glove 
and the wrench, then, exemplify the double role of imagery as a mode 
of contact between persons and things: (1) its role as an intersubjective 
or communicative relation, in which the image stands between a creator 
and a beholder, a sender and a receiver, a relation charged with cognitive 
and emotional resonance, and (2) its function as an interobjective relation 
between two things, the picture and the thing it represents, a tightening 
or loosening of the representational bond. Of course, in practice the two 
functions resolve into a single complex relation of subjects and objects, 
beholders, artists, pictures, and worlds. Perhaps these two functions of 
striking and turning are precisely what gets combined in Nietzsche’s fig-
ure of the tuning fork, which strikes the idols without destroying them, 
making both the instrument and the object resonate to the sweet music 
of image science.


INDEX
Page numbers in italics refer to illustrations.
Aaron (biblical figure), 72
Abbas, Ackbar, 66– 67
Abu Ghraib, 196; ghosts of, 200; The 
Ghosts of Abu Ghraib (film) and, 
204n15; Hooded Man as icon and, 
87, 203; photography and, 54, 55– 56, 
61, 204– 5, 217; Standard Operating 
Procedure (film) and, 204– 5, 204n15
Abu Nazr (film character), 177
academia, 168– 69
Ackroyd, Peter, 155n5
Activision, 208n2
Adam (biblical figure), 86– 87
Adorno, Theodor, 111, 117, 210, 216
aesthetics: abstract formalism and, 
63; versus art history, 112; Benja-
min’s categories of, 86n12; Burke 
and, 80; versus ethical and political 
response to art, 85; imagetext and, 
47; meaning of, 111; ostensive im-
ages and, 85; photography and, 63; 
politics and, 88; self- consciousness 
and, 63; superficiality of, 113; third 
element in, 43– 44; triads of, 46, 46, 
119– 122, 122; utopia beyond desire 
and, 84; vitalism in, 86, 88. See also 
media aesthetics and media studies
Afflicted Powers (Retort Collective), 
209– 12, 214– 16
Afghanistan, 207
Agamben, Giorgio, 164, 211
agency, 37, 98, 116
Aliens (film), 120
Allotment (Gormley), 148– 49
Alpers, Svetlana, 3
Al Qaeda, 104– 5, 212
Althusser, Louis, 79
American Constitution, 161, 165, 205
American Revolution, 161
animism, 86, 86n12
Another Place (Gormley), 182n4
anti- semitism, 193– 94
Antonioni, Michelangelo, 57– 58
Arab Spring, 157, 207
architecture: artificial perspective 
and, 144; Brutalism and, 148; Car-
tesian space and, 144; in Chicago, 
146, 147; clearing and assembling 
prior to, 164; constitutions and, 
165; contemporary eclecticism and, 
146, 147– 48; critical discussion of, 
145– 46; digital imaging and, 137– 39, 
146– 47; drawing and, 137, 138– 39, 
142– 43, 144, 145, 149; as extension 
of the body, 148; foundational sites 
and, 154– 55, 164; graphic arts and, 
138, 145– 46; international spatial 
design and, 145; medium specificity 
and, 144– 45; metapictures and, 151; 
as mixed medium, 141– 42; new sen-
sualism in, 138; original vocation 
of, 151; painting and, 144– 45; sculp-
ture and, 138, 142, 146, 147– 49; state 
of distraction and, 128, 128n4, 137; 
utopian moments in, 146; visual 
media and, 128
Arendt, Hannah, 154, 159– 160, 163, 164
Aristide of Thebes, 191n2

2 2 8  :  I N D E X
Aristotle and Aristotelian thought: on 
arts as imitation of nature, 34– 35; 
high versus low subject matter and, 
62; image/picture relation and, 17; 
key texts on media and, 118; media 
aesthetics and, 122; sensus com-
munis and, 130, 132; three parts of 
tragedy and, 43– 44, 44n7; triads of 
aesthetics and semiotics and, 46; 
tripart means of drama and, 120, 
122, 125
Arnett, Peter, 54
Art + Environment Conference, 181, 
181n2, 183
art and the arts: border conflicts and 
crossings and, 173– 74, 175; critical 
realism in, 223; digital/analog rela-
tion in, 58– 59; distinctive political 
cultures of, 173– 74; double images 
in, 223– 24; environment and, 181– 
82, 183; in extreme social envi-
ronments, 184– 87, 188– 89, 188n17; 
figure and ground in, 157– 59, 160; 
function of, 79; as imitations of na-
ture, 34– 35; labor of art and, 85, 86, 
86n12; laying down the gaze and, 
222; as luxury, 184; as a necessity, 
187; political commitments and, 
216– 17; real allegories in, 224; split 
between science and, 224; split sub-
jects in, 159; visual versus verbal, 
173– 74
art history: author’s experience in, 
3, 5, 6; converging fields of study 
in, 6– 7, 10– 11; dead mother with 
infants motif in, 180, 190, 191– 92, 
191n20; expanding boundaries of, 
3, 6– 7; global, 7n5; iconology in, 6; 
Laocoön Group and, 4, 6; lifelike 
images in, 85– 86; linguistification 
of, 118; media studies in, 6, 7; mi-
gration of images and, 67– 68; new, 
13; painting and, 126; versus philo-
sophical aesthetics, 112; postmod-
ernism and, 117; revolution in study 
of medieval art and, 3– 4; salon des 
refuses (Paris) and, 67; visual cul-
ture and, 6– 7, 9, 135; visual media 
and, 128; vitalism in, 87, 88
Assad, Bashar al- , 157
Athens, 153– 54
Atlas, 95
Augustinian rhetoric, 211
Australian Aboriginal people, 140, 153
Avatar (film), 201– 2
Ayers, Bill, 90
Bachelard, Gaston, 30
Badiou, Alain, 197n3
Bal, Mieke, 3, 118, 134– 35
Ballerina on the Bull (Occupy Wall 
Street), 162– 63
Barthes, Roland: boxing and, 221; 
on image, music, and text, 43– 44, 
44n7, 119– 120, 122, 125; labyrinth of 
images and, 87; on language and 
photography, 128; on reality effect, 
64n22; triads of aesthetics and 
semiotics and, 46
Baudrillard, Jean, 36, 87, 135, 214, 
214n7
Baugh, Albert, 3– 4
Bauhaus symposium (2008), 137
Baxandall, Michael, 3
Belting, Hans, 3
Benjamin, Walter: on architecture, 
128, 137; on categories of aesthetics, 
86n12; on dialectical images, 36; 
on exhibition value, 210; key texts 
on media and, 118; law- making 
violence and, 164; on mechanical 
reproduction, 112, 112n3, 203
Berger, John, 82, 83
Bergson, Henri, 214
Berkeley, Bishop, 133
Berlin Wall, 166, 167, 186
Bible, 83
Bilbao Museum, 142
bin Laden, Osama, 199, 202, 203
biocybernetics, 8, 116, 141, 151, 179, 203
biology of images, 86n12
biopictures, 20, 151, 203

I N D E X  :  2 2 9
Blake, William: author’s interest in, 6, 
118; depictions of the creator and, 
92, 95, 96, 142, 149, 151; on function 
of art, 79; gender and, 47; globaliza-
tion and, 93, 94; on the globe, 97, 
98n5; on the infinite, 100– 101; the 
Left and, 214; “Little Black Boy” by, 
170; Marriage of Heaven and Hell by, 
217; Minute Particular and, 100, 101, 
103; on outsides, xi; on poets, 216– 
17; as prophet against empire, 94; 
on structure of the universe, 100; 
on sweet science, 219, 220, 221; on 
Universal Man, 170; on voice of the 
devil, 210; on wars of intellect, 168; 
world order and, 98– 99
Bliss, Harry, 66
Blow- Up (film), 57– 58
Bobbit, Philip, 199
Boehm, Gottfried, 3, 14, 79
Bond, James (film character), 116
Book of Hours, 2
border conflicts and crossings: all 
wars as border wars and, 171; Amer-
ican imagination of, 176– 77; buffer 
states between Russia and Europe 
and, 167; Cold War and, 172– 73, 
176– 78; division of Berlin and, 166, 
167; English language and, 169– 170; 
gender and, 175, 176; image and 
text and, 174– 75; interdisciplinarity 
and, 5– 6, 168; intertextuality and, 
186; Islam and, 177; in language, 
the media, and representation, 173– 
76; lingua franca and, 169, 169n3; 
madness and, 177– 79; material and 
metaphoric borders and, 167– 68, 
179; murals and, 185– 86; redemptive 
violence and, 178; sleeping with the 
enemy and, 176– 77; social environ-
ments and, 185; terminology related 
to, 168; triad of borders, translation, 
and convergence and, 168– 69, 170, 
175– 76; visual and verbal media 
and, 173– 74, 175. See also Israel- 
Palestine; Korea, North and South; 
Northern Ireland; war and the 
military
Bourne, Jason (film character), 116
boxing, 221, 222
Brady, Matthew, 54
Braque, Georges, 144
Brick Man (Gormley), 148
Brody, Sergeant Nicholas (film charac-
ter), 177– 78
Broken Arrow (film), 202
Brown, Bill, 140– 41
Bruguera, Tania, 88– 89
Bryson, Norman, 3, 4, 118
Burgin, Victor, 128
Burke, Edmund, 80
Bush, George W., and Bush adminis-
tration: Abu Ghraib and, 55; Iraq 
War and, 207, 212– 13; “Mission 
Accomplished” photo and, 90, 91; 
Obama versus, 90, 198– 99; proposed 
US/Mexico border wall and, 185; un-
canniness and, 199; “war on terror” 
and, 90, 179, 199– 200, 199n6
Butler, Judith, 86n12
Calatrava, Santiago, 147
Call of Duty: Black Ops (game), 208n2
Cameron, David, 207
Cameron, James, 201
Camille, Michael, 3– 5, 6, 8
Capa, Robert, 54
Capote, Truman, 112
Caravaggio, 191
Card, Andy, 207n1
Carlin, George, 185
Cartesian thought. See Descartes, 
René, and Cartesian thought
cartography. See maps and cartog-
raphy
Catholic Church, 84
Cavett, Dick, 112
censorship, of photographs in war-
time, 54
Champ de Mars (Paris), 160
Chandler, Becky, 4
Chaucer, 3

2 3 0  :  I N D E X
Chicago: architecture in, 146, 147; 
Cloud Gate (sculpture) in, 148; Hyde 
Park neighborhood of, 185
China, future place of in the world, 
106– 7
Chomsky, Noam, 117
Churchill, Winston, 17
CIA (Central Intelligence Agency, US), 
186– 87n13
Clark, T. J., 3
climate change, 103– 4, 106
Clone Wars (film), 77
cloning: acephalic clone and, 87; of 
animals and human beings, 82– 83, 
84, 87; biopictures and, 20, 203; 
clones as obverse of fossils and, 36; 
doppelgangers and, 200; Jurassic 
Park (film) and, 37, 81; living images 
and, 87; as natural and artificial 
process, 20; photography and, 60, 
60n14; taboos about image making 
and, 37; of terror, 200, 202, 203
Close (Gormley), 148
Close, Chuck, 58
Cloud Gate (Kapoor), 148
Code Pink, 216
Cold War, 167, 171– 73, 176– 77, 178, 210
Cole, Thomas, 183
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 201n9, 202
color, boundaries and, xii
Columbia University, 79– 80, 84, 185
comics, 43
Communist Party, 79
Control Room (film), 217
Cooder, Ry, 65– 66
Corporation, The (film), 217
Courbet, Gustave, 224
Crary, Jonathan, 118
creation myths, 83
Creighton, Thomas, 138
Critical Art Ensemble, 216
Critical Mass (Gormley), 148
Cronenberg, David, 112, 131
Crow, Tom, 4, 4n2, 134
Cutler, Tony, 70
Cyprus, 171
Damascus, 162
Danes, Claire, 177
Danton, George- Jacques, 201
Darfur, 187
da Vinci, Leonardo, 42, 174
Davis, Angela, 90– 91
Debord, Guy, 9, 135, 208– 13, 214n7
deconstruction, 21, 82
Delacroix, Eugène, 162
Deleuze, Gilles, 9, 15– 16, 16n6, 175
Delonas, Sean, 91
de Maria, Walter, 147
democracy: foundational sites of, 153; 
Golden Calf and, 83
Derrida, Jacques: deconstruction and, 
21; on hauntology, 30, 34n8; image 
of the animal and, 83; Laocoön 
Group and, 4; on mondialization, 
93, 99; nothing outside the media 
and, 115; nothing outside the text 
and, 112; on phonocentrism, 15; war 
on terror and, 177– 79; zoographia 
and, 83
Descartes, René, and Cartesian 
thought, xi– xii, 8– 9, 124, 133, 144
Destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem, 
The (Poussin), 193
diagrammatology, 27– 30
digital technology: analog presenta-
tion and, 139, 140; versus analog 
technology, 114, 115– 16; architecture 
and, 137– 39, 146– 47; Ben- Day dots 
and pixels and, 57, 58, 114, 140; 
computer- aided drawing (CAD) 
and, 138– 39, 142– 44; before comput-
ers and binary code, 140; digital age 
and, 140– 41; “digital image” as oxy-
moron and, 139– 40; DNA sequenc-
ing and, 140; duck- rabbit effect and, 
140; magic and, 141; mosaic tile 
and, 114, 140; photography and, 49, 
51– 53, 55– 57, 59– 60, 63– 64, 113n5; 
posthumanism and, 35; Turing Ma-
chine and, 140; viruses and, 141
distinction, xi– xii
doppelganger, 195, 200

I N D E X  :  2 3 1
drawing, 136; architecture and, 137, 
138– 39, 142– 45, 149; computer- aided 
(CAD), 138– 39, 143– 44; connotations 
of, 142; Cupid- aided, 136, 144; in his-
tory and literature, 142; nonvisual 
character of, 127; sculpture and, 
142– 43, 144
“Duck- Rabbit, The” (Anonymous), 12
Durkheim, Émile, 214
Earth Room (de Maria), 147, 148
Edge (Gormley), 148
Egan, Peirce, 222
Egypt: attempted constitutional 
moment in, 163; Occupy Movement 
and, 161– 62; Ozymandias statue in, 
183; Tahrir Square protests in, 152, 
157, 162– 63
Einstein, Albert, 219
Eisenmann, Peter, 142
Eitan, Rafael, 187
Elkins, Jim, 134– 35
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 224
empiricism, psychology of, 45
England, Lynndie, 205
Enlightenment, 220, 221
environment: Art + Environment 
Conference and, 181, 181n2, 183; 
“cultural wastelands” and, 184; 
disrupted communities and, 184n7; 
extreme social and other environ-
ments and, 183– 85, 184n7; meaning 
of, 181; suburbs and exurbs and, 
184– 85
ethnic cleansing, 69– 70, 171, 187– 88, 
192– 94
Event Horizon (Gormley), 182n4
Eyerman, J. R., 106
eyesight, 132– 34, 158
Facebook, 209
Fahrenheit 911 (film), 217
Fairey, Shepard, 90
Fanon, Franz, 9
Festival of the Supreme Being 
(France), 162
fetishism: of commodities, 31, 86, 210; 
digital age and, 141; effectiveness 
of, 215; the eye and the gaze and, 
135; fetishes as objectivist projec-
tions and, 75; fetishes versus idols 
and, 73– 74; foundational sites and, 
164– 65; Ground Zero (New York 
City) and, 156; historical develop-
ment of, 73– 74, 73n13; of historical 
particularity, 127; imperialism and, 
76; of the Left, 214; meaning of, 73; 
migration of images and, 71– 72, 
75– 76; oil and land and, 214; origins 
and, 164; painting and, 127; of po-
litical concepts, 213; as secondary 
belief, 75
Field (Gormley), 148
film: border conflicts in media studies 
and, 173; digital/analog relation 
in, 58– 59; dislocation of cinematic 
images and, 66– 67; Israel- Palestine 
and, 188; political magical thinking 
in, 201– 2; political resistance and, 
217; realism and, 61– 62; semiotic ra-
tios and, 130; silent films and, 125; 
slow- motion video portraits and, 
67; suture in, 132; synchronized 
sound and sight in, 132; television 
nested in, 131; 3- D movies and, 201, 
206. See also specific films
Float (Gormley), 149, 150
Focillon, Henri, 142
Fog of War, The (film), 217
Folman, Ari, 189
Fontana, Lucio, 43
Ford, Henry, 198
Forkscrew Graphics, 216
formalism, abstract, 63
fossils, 35– 36, 37
Foster, Hal, 212, 216
Foucault, Michel, and Foucauldian 
thought: archaeology of knowledge 
and, 175; on figure and text, 42; 
“foggy region” of, 176; on hetero-
topias, 105– 6, 161; on Magritte’s 
pipe illustration, 42– 43, 42nn4– 5, 

2 3 2  :  I N D E X
174– 75; scopic regimes and, 135; the 
seeable and sayable and, 5, 88, 122, 
175– 76; surveillance and, 208; triads 
of aesthetics and semiotics and, 46; 
visual culture studies and, 9; the 
visual versus the verbal and, 175– 76
foundational sites: architecture and, 
164; birthplaces and, 154; consti-
tutions as, 161, 165; deification of 
founders and, 165; empty space in, 
162; female figures of nonviolent 
revolution and, 162– 63; figure and 
ground and, 157– 59, 169; founda-
tional sights and, 157– 59; Israel- 
Palestine and, 153, 154– 56; meaning 
of, 153, 157; 9/11 attacks and, 156; 
obelisks and, 152, 163– 64; occupa-
tio and, 161– 62, 164; occupation of 
space and, 159; Occupy Movement 
and, 157, 159, 161– 63; origins versus 
beginnings and, 164; as physical 
versus virtual, 165; public and 
private spaces and, 161; revolutions 
and, 156– 57, 160, 162– 64; spaces of 
appearance and, 159– 60, 161, 164; 
totemic, fetishistic, and idolatrous 
character of, 164– 65; trauma and, 
154– 56; vase and faces picture and, 
158– 59, 159, 160, 164; violence and 
foundation and, 164
Fox, Bill, 181, 183
Fox News, 91
Franciscan rhetoric, 211
Frankenheimer, John, 176– 77
Frankenstein’s monster, 20, 87
Frankfurt School, 118, 209
Franklin, Benjamin, 201
Frazer, James, 75
Freedberg, David, 3
French Revolution, 160, 162, 201
Freud, Sigmund: the Left and, 214; 
magical thinking and religion 
and, 102; sweet science and, 220; 
uncanniness and, 195, 196; on 
Weltanschauung, 102; world pictures 
and, 102– 3
Fried, Michael, 3, 117, 126, 145, 221
Friedman, Thomas, 101
Frye, Northrop, 62, 200
future of the image: age of terror and, 
89– 90; animal images and, 82– 84; 
author’s dialogue with Rancière on, 
79– 81, 84; cloning and, 82– 83, 84; 
guilt by association strategies and, 
90– 91; images as the future and, 
88; Jurassic Park (film) and, 80– 82; 
living images and, 89; metapicture 
and, 84; Obama iconography and, 
90– 91
Galison, Peter, 27– 31, 178
Galtonian photograph, 33, 35
game theory, 178
gaze, power of the, 9
Gehry, Frank, 142, 144, 154– 55
genocide, 171, 202
Ghosts of Abu Ghraib, The (film), 
204n15
Ginzburg, Carlo, 197n2
Girodet de Roussy- Trioson, Anne- 
Louis, 136
global financial crisis of 2008, 90, 
197– 98
globalization: as Americanization, 
106; border wars and, 178; cata-
strophic future and, 93– 94; center 
that is everywhere and, 104; as 
cliché, 94; empire and, 75– 76; global 
village and, 76, 95, 115, 130; images 
of the globe and, 95; infinity of, 
101; localism and, 93; longue durée 
of, 94; mondialization and, 93, 
99; neoliberalism and, 94, 101; as 
overwhelming concept, 93; poetics 
and iconology of, 100; regions and 
regional imaginaries and, 104– 6; 
triad of borders, translation, and 
convergence and, 170; ways of 
Foucault, Michel, and Foucauldian 
thought (cont.)

I N D E X  :  2 3 3
thinking about the global and, 95– 
97; world order and, 98– 99. See also 
globe; world pictures
global warming. See climate change
globe: climate and, 103– 4; as cosmos, 
97– 99; as earth, 100; the earth as 
flat and, 101; empire and, 103; as 
geometric construction, 95– 96; 
Google Earth and, 103; Hung Hao’s 
New Political World and, 106– 7; 
meaning of, 94– 100; as mother 
ship, 165; as planet, 97; as produced 
object, 96; as reproduced organic 
form, 96– 97; as sphere, 95– 97; total-
ity as, 100– 101; as world, 99; world 
in God’s hands and, 98, 98n5. See 
also globalization
Gober, Robert, 148
Godard, Jean- Luc, 85
Goddess of Democracy (Tiananmen 
Square), 162– 63
Goddess of Reason (Paris), 162
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 220, 
221
Golden Calf: annihilation of, 37; fail-
ure of iconoclasm and, 31; global 
financial crisis of 2008 and, 198; 
images of, 16, 18– 19, 31; imagetext 
and, 88; populist democracy and, 
83; reaction to worship of, 192; as 
replacement for Moses, 72, 83
Goldstein, Amanda Jo, 219, 221
golem, 87
Gombrich, Ernst, 7, 132
Goodman, Nelson, 17, 46, 46, 58, 99, 
122, 122
Google Earth, 103
Gordon, Douglas, 67
Gore, Al, 104
Gormley, Antony, 148– 49, 149, 150, 
182n4
Graeber, David, 117
Gramophone, Film, Typewriter (Kittler), 
44, 112– 13, 120, 122
Graner, Charlie, 205
graphic arts, 138, 145– 47
Great Britain and British empire, 169– 
70, 211, 216
Great Depression of the 1930s, 198
Great Recession of 2008. See global 
financial crisis of 2008
Greenberg, Clement, 63, 117, 126, 
144– 45
Greenwald, Glenn, 179nn12– 13
Ground Zero (New York City), 156
Grundungsorte. See foundational sites
Gulf War, first, 53– 54
Gunning, Tom, 201
Haacke, Hans, 87
Haeg, Fritz, 183
Halbertal, Moshe, 69– 70, 192
Hams, Mahmud, 152, 189, 189
Hansen, Mark, 49, 114, 117
Harcourt, Bernard, 163
Hardt, Michael, 75– 76, 94, 98, 103– 5, 
104n15, 211
Hariman, Robert, 197n4
Harman, Sabrina, 205
Harvey, David, 185
Harvey, Laurence, 116, 177
Hawksmoor (Ackroyd), 155n5
Hawksmoor, Nicholas, 155
Hawksmoor Churches (London), 155, 
155n5
Hegel, G. W. F., and Hegelian thought, 
74– 75, 88, 131, 168
Heidegger, Martin, xii, xiin2, 94, 98– 
99, 101– 4, 220
Helsinger, Elizabeth, 4
Hersh, Seymour, 56
Herzl, Theodore, 50
Hilbert, David, 28
Hirst, Damien, 198
Hitchcock, Alfred, 67
Hitler, Adolf, 157, 199
Hobbes, Thomas, 19, 117
Holocaust, 85
Holocaust Memorial (Berlin), 142
Home (Gormley), 148

2 3 4  :  I N D E X
Homeland (television series), 116, 
176– 78
Homer, 132
Hong Kong, 164n16
Horkheimer, Max, 117, 210
Humboldt, Alexander von, 97– 98
Hume, David, 46, 47, 122, 122
Hung Hao, 106– 7
IAWIS. See International Associa-
tion for Word and Image Studies 
(IAWIS)
iconoclasm: beliefs about idolaters 
and, 75; biblical examples of, 31– 32, 
69– 70; destructibility of images 
and, 87; ethnic cleansing of images 
and, 69– 70; failure of, 31– 32; Golden 
Calf and, 192; iconophilia and, 
221; ideology critique and, 20– 21; 
imperialism and, 73; physics of 
images and, 31; reactionary, 214– 15; 
sounding rather than destroying 
idols and, 213– 14, 213n6, 222, 225
iconology: ancient Israel and, 192; 
critical, 8, 13; definitions of, 7– 8; 
distinction and, xi; fear of images 
and, 5; history of, 7; icon, index, 
and symbol and, 121; icon as first-
ness and, 118; iconic turn and, 14n2, 
203; images as icons and, 29– 30; 
mathematics and, 27– 28; members 
of category of icon and, 45; migra-
tion of images and, 67; philosophy 
as, 15– 16, 16n6; resurgence of, 13; 
science of images and, 24; in the 
sciences, 8; sign function of signs 
and, 45; versus visual culture, 8– 9; 
vitalism in, 87, 88; “wildness” of 
iconic sign and, 139n4
icons and iconography: Barack and 
Michelle Obama and, 90– 91; black 
people as apes and, 91; Hooded 
Man as icon of war on terror and, 
203; political- religious, 203; pure 
icons and, 130; spectacle and, 213– 14
idolatry: ancient Israel and, 192, 194; 
captivity to idols and, 222; digital 
age and, 141; efforts to stamp out, 
31; eternal idols and, 213; fetishes 
versus idols and, 73– 74; founda-
tional sites and, 164– 65; Golden 
Calf and, 192; idols as objectivist 
projections and, 75; imperialism 
and, 72– 73, 76; killing and, 222; 
migration of images and, 71– 73, 
75– 76; Nietzsche on, 87, 213– 14, 
213n6; pictorial turns and, 14– 15; 
as secondary belief, 75; sovereign 
as living god and, 164– 65; of the 
spectacle, 86, 213– 14; striking idols 
to hear their resonance and, 87, 
213– 14, 213n6, 222, 225; ur- narrative 
of, 83
images: abstract forms and, 17– 18; 
agency of, 37; analog presentation 
of, 139, 140; anxieties surrounding, 
20; as apparitions, 34n8, 67; audi-
ence for, 139; aura of, 37; biology 
of, 33– 37; biopictures in, 20– 21; 
children as image of parents and, 
32; of Christ, 95; circulation of, 65, 
67; cloning and, 20, 36– 37; comics 
and, 43; creation of, 32– 33; demon 
of, 214; destruction of, 31– 32, 69– 70, 
87; dialectical, 36; digital, 37, 59, 
65, 139– 40, 140n6, 145– 46; elastic 
concept of science and, 24; as 
events, 30; faceless figures and, 87; 
family resemblance among, 34; fear 
of, 5; figure and ground and, 223; 
as firstness, 118; fossils and, 35– 36; 
generalizing property of, 33– 34; of 
God, 20; as iconic sign, 17; image/
picture relation and, 13, 16– 18; im-
perial, 72; as inanimate objects, 68; 
indestructibility of, 32; knowledge 
of, 68– 69; labyrinth of, 87; lethality 
of, 222; as life- form, 34, 37, 86n12; 
living, 68, 84– 85, 86– 87, 88– 89; as 
living organisms, 68; in mathemat-

I N D E X  :  2 3 5
ics, 27– 28; metaphor and, 15n5, 85; 
metaphysics of, 15; metaphysics 
of the image and, 15; migration 
of, 37, 65– 72, 75– 77; morphing of, 
33; as motifs, 30; mutations and 
evolutionary transformations of, 
34; naked, 85; natural history of, 34; 
nested, 18– 19, 223; new dominance 
of, 15; nonartistic, 80; as object of 
science, 25– 26; ostensive, 85– 86; 
pensive, 68n3; in philosophy, 15– 16; 
physics of, 30– 33; pictorial turns 
and, 15, 203; versus pictures, 30, 67; 
plague of, 86; Platonist view of, 17; 
possible futures in, 91; as primary 
data of the human sciences, 118; 
of Roman emperor, 72; in science, 
23; the seeable and sayable and, 
88; self- reflexivity of, 5; September 
11, 2001, attacks and, 203; simula-
cra and, 36– 37; as striking, 221; as 
sufficient substitutes, 80n1; taboos 
about image making and, 37; 
temporality of, 84; truth and, 49; as 
types rather than representations 
of individuals, 33; what pictures 
want and, 5, 8, 84; word and, 13. See 
also art and the arts; film; iconol-
ogy; imagetext; photography; world 
pictures
image science: biology of images 
and, 33– 37; content of, 26– 27; 
cross- disciplinary emergence of, 
13; definition of object of, 29– 30; 
diagrammatology in, 27– 30; four 
fundamental concepts of, 13– 14; 
genealogy of, 222; image/picture 
relation in, 16– 18; versus imag-
ery used in science, 23; images 
of science and the scientist and, 
23– 25; law of conservation in, 
32– 33, 34, 87; metapictures in, 13, 
18– 19, 27; necessity of, 29; physics 
of images and, 30– 33, 34; pictorial 
turns and, 14– 16, 14n2; as practical 
and applied science, 223; pugilistic 
metapicture of, 221; as qualitative 
not quantitative, 222; questions 
asked by, 222; range of, 223; science 
of images and, 23– 24, 219– 220; as 
sweet science, 220– 21
imagetext: aesthetics and, 47; border 
conflicts and crossings and, 174– 75; 
complexity of, 40– 42; Golden Calf 
and, 88; image/text square oppo-
sition and, 41; meaning of, 39– 41, 
47; music or sound and, 44; natural 
versus conventional sign and, 43; 
normal and normative relations 
between texts and images and, 42; 
Peirce’s icon/index/symbol triad 
and, 45– 46; radio versus television 
and, 44; the Real and, 43; rupture, 
relation, and synthesis in, 47; semi-
otics and, 41– 42, 44– 45, 47; sentence 
images and, 88; space between im-
ages and texts and, 43; typographic 
signs related to, 39– 40, 42, 43, 46; 
visual and verbal representation 
and, 40– 42
imperialism: bad versus proper 
objects and, 70– 71; fetishism and, 
76; genocide and, 171; globalization 
and, 75– 76, 94; iconoclasm and, 73; 
idolatry and, 72– 73, 76; images of 
the emperor and, 72; language and, 
169– 71; migration of images and, 
70; monotheism and, 73; neocolo-
nialism and, 210, 213; totems and, 
74– 75, 76; triad of borders, transla-
tion, and convergence and, 169– 71; 
warrior culture, 73; white rescuers 
and, 201– 2
Inconvenient Truth, An (film), 104, 217
interdisciplinarity, 117– 18, 119,  
168– 69
Interior (Gormley), 148, 149, 149
International Association for Word 
and Image Studies (IAWIS), 13, 
20n14

2 3 6  :  I N D E X
Iraq War: blood for oil and, 207, 210; 
as ill- advised, 212– 13; “iRaq/iPod” 
poster and, 196; journalists killed 
during, 54n8; marketing of, 207, 
207n1; media control during, 54n8; 
photography and video in, 54, 54n8; 
as spectacle, 207
ISIL (Islamic State in the Levant),  
105
ISIS. See ISIL (Islamic State in the 
Levant)
Israel- Palestine: ancient Israel and, 
14, 191– 92; Ark of the Covenant and, 
194; arts and, 180, 185– 86, 188– 89, 
190, 191; boundary wall in, 167; as 
Cold War by- product, 172– 73, 178; 
ethnic cleaning in, 187– 88; even-
tual demise of the Jewish state 
and, 213; flying checkpoints in, 89; 
foundational sites and, 153, 154– 56, 
156n7; Gaza and, 186– 87n13, 186– 
89, 189n18, 190, 191, 193– 94; Green 
Line and, 171; Hamas and, 187, 188; 
Holocaust and, 189; names and 
contested terms in, 171– 72; Occupy 
Movement and, 161; Palestinian 
Authority and, 188; The Plague at 
Ashdod, Palestine (Poussin), 180; 
“security fence” in, 172, 185– 86; 
US policy toward, 210; Zionism 
and, 193
Jackson, J. B., 181n2
Jackson, Michael, 33
Jagoda, Patrick, 208n2
Jameson, Fredric, 15, 119
Janus figures, 159
Japan, 170
Jay, Martin, 8– 9, 135
Jewish Museum (Berlin), 142
Johnny Mnemonic (film), 113
Johnson, Mark, 15n5, 19
Joker, the, 199
Joyce, James, and Joycean puns, 39– 
40, 99
Jurassic Park (film), 22, 37, 80– 82
Kant, Immanuel, and Kantian 
thought, 47, 168, 175
Kapoor, Anish, 148
Keats, John, 44
Kennedy, Rory, 200, 204n15
Khalidi, Rashid, 186– 87n13
Khan, Mohammad Sidique, 216
Kittler, Friedrich: on digitization of 
information, 141; Gramophone, Film, 
Typewriter by, 44, 112– 13, 120, 122; 
in history of media studies, 118; 
media aesthetics and, 10; on media 
determination of situations, 114, 
116; on music and sound recording, 
121; phonography versus cinema-
tography for, 158; technical media 
and, 122; triads of aesthetics and 
semiotics and, 46, 47
Klein, Melanie, 70
Korea, North and South, 167, 170– 72, 
177– 78
Kosovo, 187
Kracauer, Sigfried, 157
Krauss, Rosalind, 10, 117, 129
Lacan, Jacques, and Lacanian 
thought: Cartesian model of tac-
tility and, 133; gender and, 47; on 
laying down the gaze, 222; psychic 
registers and, 122; real, imaginary, 
and symbolic and, 120, 122; Sauss-
ure’s “linguistic sign” and, 176; the 
symbolic and imaginary and, 42; 
Symbolic as Law and, 121; trauma 
and, 113; triads of aesthetics and 
semiotics and, 46– 47; on urinary 
segregation, 176; visual culture 
studies and, 9
Lakoff, George, 15n5, 19
language: border conflicts and cross-
ings and, 173– 76; duality of thought 
and, 45; icons as metaphor in, 45; 
poetry and origins of, 224
Laocoön Group, 4– 5, 6
Lascaux cave paintings (Dordogne, 
France), 78, 80– 82, 84

I N D E X  :  2 3 7
Latour, Bruno, 213– 14
Learning to Think (Gormley), 148
Lefebvre, Henri, 95– 96, 151
Left, the, 90, 210, 211, 212, 214
Lenin, V. I., and Leninism, 90, 212
Lessing, G. E., xi, 42– 43, 80, 173– 75
Lévi- Strauss, Claude, 74
Lewis, Damian, 177
Lewis, Monk, 201
Liberty Leading the People (Dela-
croix), 162
Liebeskind, Daniel, 142
Life magazine, 51
literature and literary criticism: 
American regionalism and, 105; 
Derrida and, 112; imagetext and, 47; 
semiotics and, 112; uncanniness 
and, 195– 96, 199– 200; visual arts 
and, 87– 88
Lo, Dr. Yen (film character), 177
Lorrain, Claude, 126
Lucaites, John, 197n4
Luhmann, Niklas, xi, 10, 116, 223
Lukács, Georg, 62– 63
Lunenfeld, Peter, 113
lynching, photographs of, 55
Lynn, Greg, 144
Macleod, Norman, 220
Madison, Wisconsin, Occupy Move-
ment and, 162
Maginot Line, 171
Magritte, René, 38, 42, 42nn4– 5,  
174– 75
Maher, Bill, 185
Maimonides, 31
Manchurian Candidate, The (film), 116, 
176– 77, 178
Manet, Édouard, 86
Manning, Bradley. See Manning, 
Chelsea
Manning, Chelsea, 208
Manovich, Lev, 60n14, 113
maps and cartography, 103, 106– 7
Marat, Jean- Paul, 201
Margalit, Avishai, 69– 70, 192
Marriage of Heaven and Hell 
(Blake), 217
Marshall, Brent, 184n7
Marx, Karl, and Marxism: on brains 
and muscle, 3; commodity fetish 
and, 210; on exchange value, 31; fall-
ing rate of profit and, 217; fetishism 
and, 74; the Left and, 214; modes of 
production and, 215; on “Old Mole” 
of proletarian revolution, 104; Re-
tort Collective and, 3
Masada, 155– 56, 156n7
Mason- Dixon line, 171
Massachusetts Museum of Contem-
porary Art, 216
Massumi Brian, 114
materialism, 31
mathematics, 27– 28, 29
Matheson, Carrie (film character), 
177– 78
Matrix, The (film), 58– 59, 76, 113– 14, 
139– 140
Matta- Clark, Gordon, 147– 48
McCain- Feingold Act, 212
McCarthy, Paul, 87
McLuhan, Marshall: on architecture, 
148; eclipse of, 112; eyewash and, 
113; genealogy of media aesthetics 
and, 10; global village and, 76, 95, 
115; in history of media studies, 
118; on hot and cool media, 120; 
on media and earlier media, 131; 
on media as extension of the body, 
224– 25; media as global nervous 
system and, 116; as media celeb-
rity, 111; on medium and message, 
111– 12; on new and old media, 52, 
115; probing and, 123; on ratio of 
senses and signs in media, 7, 79; 
on sensory ratios, 129– 30, 131; on 
television as tactile medium, 129
media: braiding of sensory channels 
and, 132, 133, 135; dominance and 
subordination among, 131; as exten-
sion of body, 224– 25; mass media 
and, 9– 10; mixed, 125, 128– 31, 129n7, 

2 3 8  :  I N D E X
141– 42; nesting of, 131– 32, 133, 135; 
numerator/denominator relation in, 
131, 131n10; post- medium condition 
and, 10, 141; purity of, 117, 144; sen-
sory ratios and, 129– 30, 131, 132, 133
media aesthetics and media studies: 
author’s evolution as a scholar 
and, 117– 19; balkanization of media 
studies and, 112, 117; Benjamin and, 
112, 112n3; border conflicts and 
crossings and, 173– 76; digital versus 
analog and, 114, 115– 16; experimen-
tal play in, 10; eyewash and, 113; 
genealogy of, 10; Gramophone, Film, 
Typewriter (Kittler) and, 112– 13; his-
toricization versus anachronization 
in, 122– 23; history of, 118; image/
sound/text triad and, 44, 119– 20; 
immediacy and, 10, 114; interdisci-
plinarity and, 117– 18, 119; material 
social practices and, 51; after McLu-
han, 112; media archaeology and, 
113; media as collective body and, 
116– 17; media as communication 
device and, 115; media as environ-
ment and, 114– 15; media as global 
nervous system and, 116; media as 
passive background and, 116; media 
determination of situations and, 
114, 116; media taxonomy and, 130; 
medium and message and, 111; 
medium specificity and, 129– 30; 
versus medium theory, 119; new 
media and, 52, 113, 214, 217; new 
synthesis in, 112– 13; persistence of 
divisions in, 120; pictorial turn and, 
118; purity in, 117, 144; questions 
addressed by, 10; religion and, 116; 
semiotics and, 130; sensory ratios 
and, 7, 79, 129, 130; singularity and 
multiplicity and, 116– 17; sound of 
phrase and, 111; totalizing tenden-
cies of, 115; transhistorical struc-
ture of, 122; University of Chicago 
common core curriculum based in, 
119; University of Chicago course 
in, 44n7; Videodrome (film) and, 112. 
See also aesthetics; visual media
medium theory, 119
Melville, Herman, 73n13
memory, 16– 17
Merleau- Ponty, Maurice, 30
Mesmerism, 201
metaphor, 15n5, 19, 83, 199, 224
metapictures: architecture and, 151; 
boxing and welding and, 224– 25; 
duck- rabbit image and, 19; foun-
dational sites and, 157; future of 
the image and, 84; hypericons and, 
19; in image science, 13, 18– 19, 221; 
meaning of, 27; medium theory 
and, 119; nested media and, 132; 
Plato’s Allegory of the Cave as, 19
Michelet, Jules, 160, 162
Milton, John, 210, 211, 214– 17
mimesis, 62, 113
Mink, Louis, 200
Mirzoeff, Nicholas, 134– 35
Mitchell, William J., 49, 51n3, 52– 54, 
56– 57, 60
modernism and modernity, 3, 145, 
213– 16
Mograbi, Avi, 156n7
Mondzain, Marie- Jose, 222
Morris, Errol, 204, 204n15
Morris, Robert, 127, 147, 182, 183
Moses, 14, 66, 72, 83
motifs, 17
Mubarak, Hosni, 157
Mumbai, India, 184
murals, 185– 86
Murdoch, Rupert, 91
Museum of Tolerance (Jerusalem), 
154– 55
music, 120– 21, 138
National Press Photographers Associ-
ation, 53
National Security Agency (US), 178, 
179nn12– 13
Nation magazine, 91
media (cont.)

I N D E X  :  2 3 9
nature, arts as imitation of, 34– 35
Neer, Richard, 193
Negri, Antonio, 75– 76, 94, 98, 103– 5, 
104n15, 211
Nelson, Rob, 4
neoconservatism, 212
neoliberalism, 94, 101
Neurath, Otto, 153, 157, 164
Nevada Museum of Art, 181, 181n2
news media, 53, 54n8, 57– 58,  
202, 216
New Yorker, 90– 91
New York Post, 91
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 87, 155, 213– 14, 
213n6, 222, 225
9/11 Memorial (New York City), 156
1984 (film), 208– 9
nominalism, 64
Northern Ireland, 184, 186, 188n17
Obama, Barack: iconography and, 
90– 91; inauguration of, 191; name 
of, 199; uncanniness of election of, 
198– 99; war on terror and, 179, 205; 
weariness of war and, 207
Obama, Michelle, 90– 91
objectivity, 70– 71
Occupy Movement: female figures of 
nonviolent revolution and, 161– 63; 
foundational sites and, 157, 165; 
Occupy Central in Hong Kong and, 
164n16; social media and, 209
Olin, Margaret, 4
ontology, 51, 53, 56– 57, 61– 62, 64
Orwell, George, 208– 9
Oswald, Lee Harvey, 51
Outfoxed (film), 217
Ovid, 126
Oxbow, The (Cole), 183
Ozymandias, 183
Pack, Brent, 204
painting, 180; abstraction in, 146; of 
animals, 83; architecture and, 144– 
45; Australian Aboriginal, 140; crit-
ical discourse about, 126; as dead, 
143; as feminine, 175; modernism 
and, 145; photography and, 127; po-
etry and, 42, 173– 74, 175; pregnant 
moment in, 68; purely visual media 
and, 126– 27; sculpture and, 143; the 
seeable and sayable and, 88
paleontologists, as image proces-
sors, 36
Panofsky, Erwin, 7– 8, 13, 17, 30, 118, 
221
Pappe, Ilan, 187
Pauline rhetoric, 211
Peirce, C. S.: algebraic icons and, 34; 
on first sign, 88; icon, index, and 
symbol and, 121, 122, 130, 131; on 
image as firstness, 118; on image as 
iconic sign, 17; on images as icons, 
29; imagetext and, 46; on photo-
graph as sign and index, 121n16; 
Saussure’s “linguistic sign” and, 
121– 22; semiotics of, 45; triads of 
aesthetics and semiotics and, 46, 47
performance art, 88– 89
philosophy, 15– 16, 16n6, 119
Philostratus, the Elder and the 
Younger, 7, 7n4
photography: Abu Ghraib and, 54, 
55– 56, 61, 204– 5, 217; adherence 
to controlling intention and, 
55– 56; adherence to the referent 
and, 52– 53, 55, 61– 63, 113, 113n5; 
aestheticization and, 63; analogy 
between images and life- forms 
and, 56; Ben- Day dots and pixels 
and, 57, 58, 114; censorship of, 54; 
circulation and dissemination of 
photographs and, 55, 56; cloning 
and, 60, 60n14; codes underneath 
claims about referentiality and, 56; 
critical realism in, 223; deep copies 
and super copies and, 52; demateri-
alization of images and, 60; digital 
versus film, 49, 51– 53, 55– 57, 59– 60, 
63– 64, 113n5, 204; double images 
in, 223– 24; fossilized light and, 60; 
Gaza and, 188, 189, 189n18, 190, 191; 

2 4 0  :  I N D E X
generations from original and, 60– 
61; grain in film photography and, 
57; immortality of digital images 
and, 61; as instrument of torture, 
55, 56; life- cycle of photographs, 60; 
lynching and, 55; manipulation of 
photographs and, 49– 50, 51, 53, 55, 
60, 189; metadata and, 204– 5; news 
photographs as iconic events and, 
197n4; ontology of, 51, 53, 56– 57, 
61– 62, 64; optimization of images 
and, 50, 59– 60; painting and, 127; 
photograph as index and icon, 
121n16; Photoshop and, 49, 50, 53, 
59; physical characteristics versus 
uses of, 52; picturing the invisible 
and, 128; plague of images and, 
61; political resistance and, 217; 
printing and, 52, 59; private versus 
publicly distributed, 60– 61; realism 
and, 49, 50– 52, 61– 62, 64; sculpture 
and, 148; spacecraft imaging and, 
52; storage and retrieval of, 59– 60; 
surrealism in, 61n16; traditional 
photography as natural sign and, 
49; truth and, 64; visual media and, 
128; wartime, 53– 54, 54n8
Photoshop, 49, 50, 53, 59
pictorial turns, 13, 14– 16, 14n2, 20– 21
pictures versus images, 30, 67
picture theory, 119
Pietz, William, 73, 73n13
Plague at Ashdod, Palestine, The (Pous-
sin), 180, 190, 191, 193– 94
Plato and Platonism: Allegory of the 
Cave and, 19; digital/analog dif-
ference relation and, 59; the globe 
and, 95; images and, 17; key texts 
on media and, 118; natural and 
conventional signs and, 45; reverse 
Platonism and, 16n6; visual culture 
and, 8– 9
Pliny the Elder, 142, 191n2
Poe, Edgar Allan, 195– 96
poetry: ekphrastic, 132; as masculine, 
175; origins of language and, 224; 
painting and, 173– 74, 175; sensus 
communis and, 132; standardization 
in, 216– 17
Poincare, Henri, 28
Pollock, Jackson, 126
Pope, Alexander, 98, 106
postcolonial theory, 75– 76
posthumanism, 35
postmodernism, 117
Poussin, Nicolas, 18, 180, 190, 191, 
193– 94
Power of Nightmares, The (film), 217
PowerPoint, 50
Pyramid Lake (Nevada), 181
racial profiling, 9
Raiders of the Lost Ark (film), 194
Rancière, Jacques: aesthetics and 
politics and, 88; Althusser and, 79; 
author’s dialogue with, 79– 81, 84; 
Communist Party and, 79; on dis-
tribution of the sensible, 7, 79– 80, 
84, 87, 128; faceless figures and, 87; 
on future of the image, 79– 81; on 
image as sufficient substitute, 80n1; 
life of images and, 84– 85; literature 
and the visual arts and, 87– 88; on 
naked, ostensive, and metaphoric 
images, 85– 86; on pensive image, 
68n3; on relationship between art 
and image, 85– 86; on sentence 
images, 88
realism and the Real, 43, 49– 53, 61– 64, 
63n21, 64n22, 120– 21, 223– 24
Red Square (Moscow), 157
Reinhardt, Ad, 143
religion: ancient Israel and, 191– 92; 
anxieties surrounding images in, 
20; dark religions and, 219, 220; eth-
nic cleansing and, 192– 94; founda-
tional sites and, 153, 154; images of 
Christ and, 95; Islam in Homeland 
(television series) and, 177; Judaeo- 
Christian Europe and, 191– 92; 
media and, 116; political- religious 
photography (cont.)

I N D E X  :  2 4 1
iconography and, 203; war on terror 
and, 210– 11
Reni, Guido, 126
representation, theory of, 47, 113
Retort Collective, 209– 12, 213, 214– 17
Rhine River, 171
Ricoeur, Paul, 200
Riegl, Alois, 13
Ripa, Cesare, 7
Robertson, Etienne- Gaspard, 201
Robespierre, Maximillien, 201
Romanticism, 220, 221
Rome, ancient, 72
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 90
Rorty, Richard, 15, 118, 198
Rousseau, Jean- Jacques, 83
Rubin, Edgar, 159
Sacco, Joe, 188
Sacks, Oliver, 133
Saddam Hussein, 157, 199, 203
Said, Edward, 21, 93, 164
salon des refuses (Paris), 67
Sartre, Jean- Paul, 9, 133
Saussure, Ferdinand de, 44– 47, 44n9, 
45, 110, 121– 22, 122, 175– 76
Schumpeter, Joseph, 73
science: biocybernetic reproduction 
and, 8; humanities and, 25– 26; 
iconology in, 8; image as object of, 
25– 26; imagery in, 23; of images, 
219– 20; lack of tabula rasa in, 153; 
new, 222; settlement and unsettle-
ment of, 219– 20; soft versus hard, 
24– 25, 27; split between art and, 
224; stereotype of scientists and, 25; 
sweet, 219, 220, 222
sculpture, 128, 138, 142– 44, 146– 49, 
182n4
Seidel, Linda, 4
Sekula, Allan, 48, 62– 63, 63n21, 76, 
223– 24
semiotics: braiding and, 132; image-
text and, 44– 45, 47; media and, 130; 
new art history and, 13; pure sym-
bols and, 130; Saussure’s “linguistic 
sign” diagram and, 44– 45, 44n9, 46; 
semiotic ratios and, 130– 31; third 
elements and, 45; third elements 
in, 43– 44; triads of, 45– 46, 46, 119– 
22, 122, 125
September 11, 2001, attacks. See terror, 
age of
Serra, Richard, 148, 182
Shapiro, Peggy, 90
Shaw, Sergeant Raymond (film charac-
ter), 116, 177
Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 183, 214
Simpson, David, 73n13
simulacra, 36– 37
Situationist International, 211, 212, 217
Skyfall (film), 116
Slum Dog Millionaire (film), 184
Smith, Terry, 147
Smith, Winston (fictional charac-
ter), 209
Smithson, Robert, 157
Smokey Stover (comic), 43
Snow, C. P., 25
Snowden, Edward, 179n12, 208
Snyder, Joel, 4, 128
social media, 9– 10, 54n8, 158– 59,  
209, 216
Sonfist, Alan, 182
Sontag, Susan, 61, 61n16
South Africa, 185
Sovereign State (Gormley), 148, 149, 150
Soviet Union, 90, 94
spectacle: all- consuming power of, 
216; counterspectacle and, 209; 
desacralization of, 213; idolatry of, 
86, 213– 14; the Left and, 214; 1960s 
and, 210– 11; phantasmagoria and, 
200– 201; resistance on terrain of, 
217; self- destruction of, 217; social 
media and, 209; society of, 135, 208, 
209; versus surveillance, 207– 9; 
totalizing closure of concept of, 212, 
213; United States’ loss of control 
of, 207; visual culture studies and, 
9– 10; war on terror as, 201, 207, 
210– 13

2 4 2  :  I N D E X
speech- act theory, 162
Spencer- Brown, George, xi
Spiegelman, Art, 43
Spielberg, Steven, 22
Spivak, Gayatri, 4
Stalin, Joseph, 199
Standard Operating Procedure (Morris), 
204, 204n15
Starr, Paul, 117
Star Trek, 131
Star Wars (film series), 77
State Britain (Wallinger), 88, 89
Steinberg, Saul, 18, 99, 142
Stevens, Wallace, 182
Stewart, Jimmy, 201– 2
Stiegler, Bernard, 10
Still Leaping (Gormley), 148
surrealists, 32– 33
surveillance, 9– 10, 207– 9
Syria, 207
systems theory, xi– xii, 167
Tahrir Square (Cairo). See Egypt
Tate Britain, 88, 89
Tate Modern, 88– 89
Tatlin’s Whispers (Bruguera), 88– 89
Taussig, Michael, 31– 32
technology: architecture and, 137– 38; 
blogs and, 216; circulation and 
dissemination of photographs and, 
55; computer- aided drawing (CAD) 
and, 138– 39; as cybernetic and biocy-
bernetic, 115– 16, 203; digital culture 
and, 57; digital versus analog repre-
sentations and, 56– 58; emancipatory 
possibilities of, 214– 15, 216; in film, 
116; gender and, 47; jihadists and, 
216; music and, 138; phantasmago-
ria and, 200– 201, 201n9, 203– 5; Real-
ness of ones and zeros and, 113– 14; 
technophilia and, 201; viruses and, 
116; wartime photography and, 54n8
teleportation, 131
television, 115, 129, 131, 177
Ten Commandments, cartoon 
about, 66
Tennessee Valley Authority, 182
terror, age of: American war fever and, 
210; apocalyptic rhetoric and, 210– 
11; Christendom and Islam in, 211; 
cloning of terror and, 200, 202, 203; 
cover- ups and subversion of justice 
system and, 205; extraordinary 
executive authority and, 179; in film 
and television, 176– 78; foundational 
sites of, 156; future of the image 
and, 89– 90; Hooded Man as icon 
of war on terror and, 203; madness 
and, 177– 79; neocolonialism and, 
213; neoconservatism and, 212; neo-
liberalism and, 212; public relations 
and, 199– 200, 199n6; retirement of 
“war on terror” phrase and, 179; 
roots of, 209– 10; September 11 at-
tacks and, 202– 3, 207, 212; surveil-
lance and, 207– 8; uncanniness and, 
197, 199; war on terror and center-
less enemy and, 104– 5; war on ter-
ror as autoimmune disorder and, 
179; war on terror as border war 
and, 171; war on terror as metaphor 
and, 199; war on terror as spectacle 
and, 201, 207, 210– 13
theater, 117, 125, 126
theory, Golden Age of, 21
Thin Blue Line, The (Morris), 204
This Is Not a Pipe (Magritte), 38
Thompson, Nato, 216
Tiananmen Square (Beijing), 157, 
162– 63
Tillyard, E. M. W., 102n13
Tilted Arc (Serra), 148, 182
Time Horizon (Gormley), 182n4
Time Landscape (Sonfist), 182
Time magazine, 90
Todorov, Tzvetan, 195, 200
torture, 55, 56
Total Strangers (Gormley), 148
totems, 71– 72, 74– 77, 86n12, 141, 153, 
164– 65
truth: images and, 49; photography 
and, 64

I N D E X  :  2 4 3
Turing Machine, 140
Turkey, 171
Twain, Mark, 126
Twitter, 209
uncanniness, 195– 205, 197nn2– 3
United States: extreme social and 
other environments in, 184– 85; 
Great Britain and, 170; Israel- 
Palestine and, 188; political future 
of, 106– 7, 107n17; proposed US/
Mexico border wall and, 185
University of Chicago, 3– 5, 44n7, 119– 
20, 185
University of Leuven, 63n21
Velázquez, Diego, 18
Veyne, Paul, 200
Vico, Giambattista, 222
Videodrome (film), 112
video games, 202
Vienna school, 9
Vietnam and Vietnam War, 54n8,  
171, 178
Viola, Bill, 67
Virilian surveillance, 135
vision. See eyesight
visual arts, 3, 87– 88, 175
visual culture, 8– 9, 13– 14, 134– 35, 
168– 69
visual media: architecture and, 128; 
border conflicts in media studies 
and, 173; eyesight and, 132– 33; me-
dia taxonomy and, 130, 135; medium 
specificity and, 129– 30, 129n7; as 
misleading expression, 125, 134; 
mixed media and, 125, 128– 29; 
painting and, 126– 27; pure opticality 
and, 125– 29, 132– 34; sculpture and, 
128; silent films and, 125; visual as 
reified concept and, 135
vitalism, 86, 87, 88
Wallinger, Mark, 88, 89
Wall Street Journal, 212
Wal- Mart, 185
Waltz with Bashir (film), 189
war and the military: adventurism 
and, 103; all wars as border wars 
and, 171; American imagination of, 
176– 77; as autoimmune disorder, 
179; foundational sites and, 156– 57, 
160, 161; human shields and, 189; 
image practices in, 53– 54; long- ver-
sus short- range missiles and, 104; 
madness and, 177– 79; neoliberalism 
and, 210, 212; regions and nations 
and, 104, 105– 6, 105n16; surgical 
strikes and collateral damage and, 
103; technology and, 116; video 
games and, 202; war games and, 
208, 208n2, 209; war on terror and 
centerless enemy and, 104– 5; wea-
riness of, 207, 208. See also border 
conflicts and crossings; Cold War; 
terror, age of; and specific conflicts
Warburg, Aby, 7n5, 13
Warburg school, 9, 135
Ward, Martha, 4
Ware, Chris, 43
Warsaw Ghetto, 186
Washington Monument (Washington, 
DC), 163– 64
Weaver, Sigourney, 120
Weltanschauung, 102
White, Hayden, 200
Whiteread, Rachel, 148
Wiesenthal Foundation, 154– 55
WikiLeaks, 209
Wilhelm (kaiser of Germany), 50
Williams, Raymond, 51, 129
Winnicott, D. W., 72
Wiseman Museum (Minneapolis), 144
Wittgenstein, Ludwig: aspects of 
thinking about the global and, 95; 
on captivity to a picture, 16, 16n7; 
on captivity to idols, 222; on dawn-
ing of an aspect, 30; Duck- Rabbit 
image and, 19; on the world, 99
Wolfe, Tom, 126
Woman with the Blue Brassiere 
(Tahrir Square), 162– 63

2 4 4  :  I N D E X
Word and Image (journal), 20n14
World Health Organization, 68
World of Warcraft (game), 209
world pictures: apocalyptic, 93– 94; 
climate change and, 103– 4; Freud 
and, 102; Greeks’ lack of, 98; 
Heidegger and, 94, 98– 99, 101– 4, 
220; Hung Hao’s New Political World 
and, 106– 7; images of the globe 
and, 95; limits of, 103; meaning of, 
94; metaphors for the world and, 
151; of militaristic adventurism, 
103; of neoliberalism, 103; regions 
and regional imaginaries and, 104– 
6, 105n16; sweet science and, 220; 
technology and science and, 101– 2; 
worldview and, 102, 102n13. See also 
globalization; globe
World Trade Center (New York City), 
156
Wren, Christopher, 155
X: artworks incorporating, 182; Art X 
Environment and, 181– 82, 183; Gen-
eration X and, 181n2; image X text 
and, 39– 44; as Joycean pun, 39– 40; 
meaning of, 43, 182– 83
Yeats, William Butler, 84
Zizek, Slavoj, 211
Zucotti Park (New York City), 161, 162

