Free ebooks ==>  
www.ebook777.com
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Imagining the Internet

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Imagining the
Internet
Communication, Innovation, and
Governance
Robin Mansell
1

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP,
United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of
Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
# Robin Mansell 2012
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
First published 2012
Impression: 1
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Library of Congress Control Number 2012933398
ISBN 978–0–19–969704–5 (Hbk)
ISBN 978–0–19–969705–2 (Pbk)
Printed in Great Britain
on acid-free paper by
MPG Books Group, Bodmin and King’s Lynn
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and
for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials
contained in any third party website referenced in this work.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
In memory of
Christopher Freeman and Roger Silverstone
For
Lukas

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
n PREFACE
This book is for students of the past, present, and future communication
system. It is for people in policy, business, and civil society who want to
inﬂuence change in this system and also for people who are largely unaware
that what they do every day is changing this system. I examine some of the
causes and consequences of innovations in the modern digital communica-
tion system. These have been at the centre of my interest in social transfor-
mation for a long time. Investigations of what has come to be known as the
information society normally are conducted within disciplinary boundaries
in the humanities, social sciences, or natural and physical sciences. In this
book, I cross these boundaries, something I have been encouraged to do
throughout my career.
My engagement with changes in information and communication technol-
ogies (ICTs) led me on a journey into anthropology, clinical and social
psychology, politics, economics, media and communication studies, science
and technology policy studies, telecommunication engineering, and sociology
in approximately that order and with varying levels of understanding. This
was not a journey according to a plan; it was the result of my pursuit of
answers to questions about digital technologies and about communication
processes. Along the way, remarkable people provided answers to some of my
intermediate questions. I have seen how differently people imagine the worlds
of technological innovation and social change, depending on their ways of
framing questions and the puzzles they want to address.
The idea that mediated communication through time and space is impli-
cated in cultural, social, political, and economic formations was deeply
ingrained in my mind through my early exposure to the works of Harold
A. Innis and Marshall McLuhan. I was sceptical about their emphasis on
technology, so initially I studied clinical, and later, social psychology, seeking
answers to questions about the communication process and the genesis of
conﬂict. Some important answers were provided by Professor Hilde Himmel-
weit, one of the tutors on my master’s degree programme at the London
School of Economics and Political Science (LSE) in the mid-1970s. She
stressed how social practices shape communication systems, identiﬁed conti-
nuities and disruptive developments in the history of the media, and encour-
aged her students to explore the value and limitations of efforts to regulate the
media and the communication system.

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
When I returned to Canada, I joined a bank at the time when computers
were beginning to replace mechanical machines and transforming banking
practice and the skills base required of employees. Bank regulations and ‘best
practice’ manuals seemed to be hindrances to everyday work practice. We had
to ﬁnd ways of sometimes working with, and often subverting, the new
information technology applications that we were told to use by senior
management and technology system developers, when we wanted to get
things done. This experience made me wonder about the ideas of those who
hold the power to decide how the communication system develops.
Following this, I began further academic work at Simon Fraser University,
and studied with Professors William H. Melody and Dallas W. Smythe, both
political economists. One of Smythe’s preoccupations was with whether
innovations in the communication system might further the interests of the
less powerful, becoming an enabler of revolutionary change. One of Melody’s
was with prospects for the reform of policy and regulatory institutions to help
guide innovations in technology in the light of what he and others under-
stood to be the public interest. Their visions of the information society were
vastly different as were their ideas about the way power operates within the
capitalist system. Yet they managed to conduct research and teaching together
and to take common positions in controversial policy debates. I often asked
myself how it might be possible to hold such different visions, yet ﬁnd
common cause in the practice of research and policy advocacy.
I worked also with Richard Gabel, an engineer who had helped to build the
rural American telephone system before World War II and who knew the
contemporary technologies and operator business practices inside out. When
Melody and I did a study of the costs of providing telecommunication service
in Nova Scotia, Canada, in the early 1980s, Richard Gabel provided consul-
tancy. He encouraged me to think about the coaxial cables buried in muddy
trenches in urban streets, in a completely new way, as technologies imbued
with social purpose. He connected often conﬂicting engineering justiﬁcations
for the design of these and many other components of the communication
system with even more often contradictory claims by economists and lawyers
about the costs of building and using them. Gabel had a special ability to
translate engineering and economic perspectives into insights about power
relationships in Western capitalism and democratic goals. He never doubted
the links between these domains and he always wanted to question whether
changes in the communication system were aligned with values he felt were
important in a democratic society.
Those who guided me, from various disciplinary perspectives, in their different
ways always had an interest in the politics of technology, all of them resisting
claims that digital technologies are simply neutral tools. After joining the Orga-
nisation forEconomic Co-operationandDevelopment (OECD), Ishareda search
for effective ICT policy measures just at a time in the mid-1980s when market
viii
PREFACE
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
liberalization and privatization were sweeping through the telecommunication
sector. With Hans-Peter Gassmann and Dimitri Ypsilanti, I became involved in
exploring the basis for differences in national perspectives on matters of telecom-
munication equipment and services competition and trade, and privacy and
security issues, in response to what had already started to be referred to as ICT
convergence.
Professor Christopher Freeman, co-founder of the Science Policy Research
Unit (later SPRU—Science and Technology Policy Research) at the University
of Sussex, was often cited in OECD reports on the relations between policy
and technological innovation and I started to read in the ﬁeld of science and
technology policy studies. A move to SPRU in 1988 gave me the chance to
pursue my search for insight into the complicated processes of innovation in
the communication system, focusing mainly on political and economic as-
pects of these changes, but working also with Professor Roger Silverstone—
then at Brunel and later at Sussex University, as part of a ten-year UK-funded
network of scholars investigating the social and economic aspects of ICTs. His
questions about the cultural, the social, and the political, as well as those of
many others in our interdisciplinary research programme, were constant
reminders to me that the struggle to undertake such an enquiry is hard, but
it is always rewarding. In 2001, I joined the Interdisciplinary Programme in
Media and Communications at the LSE, led by Roger Silverstone. In 2003,
this became the Department of Media and Communications where I now
work in an interdisciplinary space with colleagues pursuing questions about
the media and about communication technologies, informed by disciplinary
backgrounds in economics, law, linguistics, philosophy, politics, social psy-
chology, and sociology.
I want this book to be accessible to those who are seeking to understand
processes of social and technological innovation through their respective
traditions of practice, policy, and academic study. This involves a certain
level of abstraction in the text and, in some cases, a synoptic treatment of
debates that are discussed very thoroughly in the academic and policy litera-
tures. I have provided comprehensive notes at the end of the book to guide
the reader. In addition to the usual page references for quotations, these notes
point to academic works providing in-depth treatments of the concepts
I draw upon and to policy, regulatory, and legislative documents that I use
in support of my overall argument.
My search for answers to questions about how innovations in the techno-
logical and social features of the modern communication system are mediat-
ing our lives is not over. This book sets out some of what I have learned so far.
It draws on the different ways of seeing the innovation process that I have
encountered—each with their sometimes quite radically different views about
power and social change and about whether anyone can or should intervene
in this process to hold others accountable. I hope this book will provoke
PREFACE
ix

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
readers into thinking about intervention issues because policies and practices
are shaping the mediated communication environment in ways that are not
always benign.
Robin Mansell
Lewes, East Sussex, 2012
x
PREFACE
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
n ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
My thanks go to all the master’s students in the Department of Media and
Communications at the London School of Economics and Political Science
(LSE) who, over the last ten years, took my course on new media, information,
and knowledge systems; and to students at SPRU—Science and Technology
Policy Research, University of Sussex, who took an earlier course on informa-
tion and communication technology policy. These students have been a
constant source of inspiration. I owe a very big debt to my doctoral students
at the LSE and SPRU with whom I explored new pathways and who have
shaped my thinking in countless ways. Maria Benet, Thomas Cameron-
Fawkes, Rhonda Hammer, and Debra Slaco encouraged this project from
the beginning; you were always in my mind. Thanks go especially to my
colleagues in the LSE Department of Media and Communications—Paolo Dini
for his persistent questions; Bart Cammaerts, Shani Orgad, and Margaret Scam-
mell for their constant encouragement; and Sonia Livingstone for her commit-
ment to the project of interdisciplinarity in our ﬁeld. All of them took the time
to comment very helpfully on the penultimate draft. Esra Ercan provided
excellent assistance in the early stages of background research on systems theories.
Cynthia Little applied her superb editing skills to the manuscript. My editors
at Oxford University Press, David Musson who encouraged this work from its
inception, and Emma Booth, were very helpful at every stage in the process.
I am very grateful to Peter Morris, artist and friend, for the adaptations to the
drawings in Figures 3.1 and 3.2, and for the original drawing in Figure 3.3. I am
grateful to Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt Publishers for permission to reproduce
Richard Brautigan’s poem in the opening epigraph (“All Watched Over by
Machines of Loving Grace” from The Pill versus The Springhill Mine Disaster
by Richard Brautigan. Copyright # 1968 by Richard Brautigan. Reprinted by
permission of Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt Publishing Company. All rights
reserved).
I have learned a huge amount from many scholars including Brian Collins,
Paul A. David, Nicholas Garnham, William H. Melody, Geoffrey Oldham,
Liora Salter, Rohan Samarajiva, and Dallas W. Smythe, as well as other
colleagues who I hope will forgive me for not naming individually—many
are members of the International Association for Media and Communication
Research (IAMCR) or are associated with the Information and Knowledge
Management-Emergent (IKM-E) Programme. This book is dedicated to
Chris Freeman and Roger Silverstone who saw very different things in my

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
work, but who always and strenuously encouraged me to write, something
I have been reluctant to do in monograph form until now. Policy makers,
consultants, technology developers, and people who ﬁnd creative uses of ‘new
media’ helped me enormously over the years. I am grateful to everyone with
whom I have discussed aspects of this work. I particularly thank Richard
Morgan-Jones for his patience and his persistent idea that I might complete
this book. Lastly, Edward Steinmueller, my partner, offered invaluable advice
and comment on several drafts and suggested the epigraph which precedes
Chapter 1. I am indebted to him for his commitment to this project, for his
love and support throughout, and for everything he did to help me cross the
ﬁnish line. He and others who contributed their insights are blameless for any
errors or omissions which remain my responsibility.
xii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
n TABLE OF CONTENTS
LIST OF FIGURES
xiv
LIST OF TABLES
xv
ABBREVIATIONS
xvi
Chapter 1: Introduction
1
Chapter 2: Fast Forwarding through the Information Society
14
Chapter 3: Social Imaginaries of the Information Society
29
Chapter 4: Communication, Complexity, and Paradox
66
Chapter 5: Communication Systems in Everyday Life
93
Chapter 6: Emergence and Communication Systems
118
Chapter 7: Political Firestorms in Communication Policy
148
Chapter 8: Conclusion
175
NOTES
195
REFERENCES
233
INDEX
283

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
n LIST OF FIGURES
3.1 Otlet’s ‘Web’
39
3.2 Otlet’s Mundaneum Vision
40
3.3 Bringing on the Information Revolution
43
3.4 Old and New Components of Converged ICTs
48
4.1 Concepts for a Critical Systems Framework
86
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
n LIST OF TABLES
3.1 Administrative and Critical Research Traditions
37
4.1 Social Imaginaries of the Information Society
87
7.1 Institutions with Interests in Internet Governance
158

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
n ABBREVIATIONS
3G
Third Generation Mobile Telecommunication Service
4G
Fourth Generation Mobile Telecommunication Service
AACP
Alliance Against Counterfeiting and Piracy
ACTA
Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement
ANT
Actor Network Theory
BBC
British Broadcasting Corporation
BCBS
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
BIS
Business, Innovation, and Skills, UK Department of
BT
British Telecommunications plc
CDN
Content Distribution Network
CEO
Chief Executive Ofﬁcer
CERN
European Organization for Nuclear Research
COE
Council of Europe
DBE
Digital Business Ecosystem
DCMS
Department for Culture, Media and Sport, UK
DDOS
Distributed Denial of Service
DNS
Domain Name System
EBU
European Broadcasting Union
EOA
Ecosystem Oriented Architecture
FATF
Financial Action Task Force
FCC
Federal Communications Commission, US
FLOSS
Free/Libre Open Source Software
GAC
Governmental Advisory Committee
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GEO
Group on Earth Observations
GPS
Global Positioning System
GPT
General Purpose Technology
HADOPI
Haute Autorite´ pour la diffusion des œuvres et la protection des droits
sur internet
HTML
HyperText Markup Language
ICANN
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
ICAO
International Civil Aviation Organization
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
ICT
Information and Communication Technology
IDN
Internationalized Domain Names
IFPI
International Federation of the Phonographic Industry
IGF
Internet Governance Forum
IIPA
International Intellectual Property Alliance
IMF
International Monetary Fund
INSNA
International Network for Social Network Analysis
IP
Internet Protocol
IPTV
Internet Protocol Television
ISP
Internet Service Provider
ITU
International Telecommunication Union
LDC
Less Developed Country
MIT
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
MPAA
Motion Picture Association of America
NGN
Next Generation Network
NWICO
New World Information and Communication Order
OECD
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OKS
Open Knowledge Space
OPAALS
Open Philosophies for Associative and Autopoietic Digital
Ecosystems
OSS
Open Source Software
P2P
Peer-to-Peer
QdN
La Quadrature du Net
RIAA
Recording Industry Association of America
SBVBR
Semantics of Business Vocabulary and Business Rules
SNA
Social Network Analysis
SOA
Service Oriented Architecture
TCP
Transmission Control Protocol
TRIPS
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
UK
United Kingdom
UN
United Nations
UNCITRAL
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
UNESCO
United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization
US
United States
USSR
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
VoD
Video on Demand
VoIP
Voice over Internet Protocol
ABBREVIATIONS
xvii

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
W3C
World Wide Web Consortium
WiFi
Wireless Fidelity (network standard)
WiMAX
Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access
WIPO
World Intellectual Property Organization
WSIS
World Summit on the Information Society
WWW
World Wide Web
WTO
World Trade Organization
XML
EXtensible Markup Language
xviii
ABBREVIATIONS
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
This page intentionally left blank 

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
I like to think (and
the sooner the better!)
of a cybernetic meadow
where mammals and computers
live together in mutually
programming harmony
like pure water
touching clear sky.
I like to think
(right now please!)
of a cybernetic forest
ﬁlled with pines and electronics
where deer stroll peacefully
past computers
as if they were ﬂowers
with spinning blossoms.
I like to think
(it has to be!)
of a cybernetic ecology
where we are free of our labors
and joined back to nature,
returned to our mammal
brothers and sisters,
and all watched over
by machines of loving grace.
All Watched Over by Machines of Loving Grace,
Richard Brautigan (1968: 117).
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
1
Introduction
Richard Brautigan imagines a cybernetic ecology. For some, it is an ecology
built on machines that are neither benign nor used gracefully. For others,
these machines are instrumental in delivering an information society with the
potential to advance us towards the good society. Innovations in digital
technologies, including the virtual spaces on the Internet, are accorded
near-mystical qualities in societies constructed around this ecology. The
technologies may be empowering or disempowering for those who encounter
them, but the spread of digital information and communication technologies
(ICTs) portends a future in which ‘machines of loving grace’ bring social
transformation that is beyond the control of human beings. This vision is
enduring, seductive, and alluring.
While the ‘real’ for some people in the twenty-ﬁrst century is being reduced
to a shadow in the face of the bright, the new, and the ‘virtual’, the materiality
of life intersects with the virtual in very important ways, including the mean-
ings we give to life. Extending the global reach of networks and selling digital
information is creating great wealth for some, but improving material liveli-
hoods and well-being for all remains a challenge, even as investment in digital
technologies extends their reach into our lives. There are numerous stories of
instances where these technologies are beneﬁting people and communities,
but people cannot live only on a diet of digital bits. There are numerous
cautionary tales of inequality and social injustice in the contemporary infor-
mation society.
The contemporary vision of what the information society is or could
be, is of a society in which innovative ICTs, designed by scientists and
engineers, encouraged by corporate (and state) investors, and beneﬁting
from the labour of collaborating networked communities, provide easy
access to the wealth of human knowledge and to communication capabil-
ities. These capabilities are rendered vastly superior to those previously
available through the use of powerful and increasingly cheaper applica-
tions of ICTs that enhance the mediated world. The widespread diffusion
of ICTs means that everyone will have access to the Internet through
a handheld device such as a mobile phone, or through a desktop worksta-
tion, or a television in the ofﬁce, bedroom, or living room. Everyone will

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
be able to produce or consume the information he or she values. Propo-
nents of this vision presume that the outcome of the evolutionary process
is a technological system that is ‘ﬁt for purpose’—it is equitable and
just because it yields the greatest good for all in the information society,
which is the good society.
The proponents of this vision diverge in their views about the role of
markets in creating incentives for technological innovation and for wealth
creation, despite their agreement that technology offers the solution to
societal problems. For some, market-imposed information scarcity creates
the optimal incentive for the production of digital information that re-
sponds to all preferences because information is initially costly to produce.
The goal of maximizing creativity and information diversity is believed to
beneﬁt from the removal of impediments to the operation of markets and
from the enforcement of laws protecting intellectual property. This is the
dominant vision. For others, because technological innovation is giving
rise to abundant digital information of all kinds and information is
virtually costless to reproduce, the optimal motivation for its production
and consumption is created when the exchange of information is not
subject to the constraints of the market; information should be shared
freely to maximize its diversity. The proponents of this argument do not
provide answers to how economic growth can proceed in a world in which
information is freely available. In the face of this paradox of information
scarcity, every step towards a more sophisticated communication system
makes it more difﬁcult to secure the scarcity of information so that it is
saleable in the marketplace, and it becomes ever more challenging to
stimulate economic growth in economies increasingly dependent on im-
material goods.1
In the contemporary vision of the information society, the abundance of
digital information is seen as creating a new foundation for the expansion
of societies based on improved access to and use of ‘knowledge’, and digital
networks are seen as creating opportunities for participatory forms of
democracy on an unprecedented scale. This abundance of information
(enabled by efﬁcient use of the radio frequency spectrum, the spread of
high-bandwidth networks, cheaper information distribution, near-ubiqui-
tous access to networks, and advances in human representation by digital
avatars) is taken as evidence that the evolution of the system is in the
public interest. Public policy interventions to guide the development of the
system start to be seen by those who are most optimistic about its poten-
tial, as an affront to the values of the good society. For them, it is
unnecessary to make choices about possible alternatives or to promote
diversity through such interventions.
The information society is understood to be arising from an evolutionary
process with intrinsic beneﬁts based on the emergent complexity of the
2
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
technologies of the communication system. This process and its complex
adaptive system characteristics are best not interfered with by the state. This
despite the fact that the evolution of this system is leading to declining human
control and that enhanced control is being sought through the design of
hardware and the programming of software in a highly decentralized system.
The generative dynamics of a complex adaptive system are such that we
should rely on the designers and programmers to ensure that the communi-
cation system is consistent with aspirations for the good society. This is the
paradox of complexity in the Internet Age. It is not a new phenomenon, but it
is increasingly important because of the progressive convergence of ICTs. The
design of the modern communication system, comprised of ever more com-
plicated components, makes it subject to instability and, therefore, the risks of
interventions aimed at guiding the system are seen widely as being greater
than in earlier times.
In this book I argue that these accounts misread the implications of the
paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity in the Internet Age. This
misreading is apparent when the persistent conﬂicts between a dominant
market-led vision of the information society and an increasingly prominent
alternative vision of an expanding information commons are examined. My
analysis considers whether the evolution of the communication system is
mediating our lives in a way that is empowering for people and the choices
they can make about their lives or whether it is reinforcing power relation-
ships that contribute to persistent poverty and sometimes fear. If the answer
to both of these questions is yes, what interventions might foster a society in
which people can achieve greater empowerment, freedom, and responsibility
in the Internet Age? How is the thinking of different stakeholders related to
these questions?
The Internet Age and the Good Society
The questions posed above are important because the communication system
of the twenty-ﬁrst century is mediating most people’s lives in increasing
numbers of ways. I characterize the contemporary period as the Internet
Age to evoke the dreams, hopes, and fears about advances in digital ICTs.
This period is characterized also by labels such as the network society, the
digital age, and the new media age, all helpful constructions that draw
attention to the principal features of the modern era. However, the Internet
Age brings to mind contested ideas about opportunities and threats to society
in a manner that is reminiscent of the way that the Atomic Age suggests both
the beneﬁts and risks of scientiﬁc progress in nuclear physics.
INTRODUCTION
3

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The Internet is iconic of our time for young and old. The architecture of the
Internet may be a speciﬁc technical design, but the Internet label is associated,
cynically or not, with ‘machines of loving grace’—with a communication
system that is increasingly ubiquitous and ‘intelligent’. In the academic
literature and in everyday speech, the Internet may refer to the material or
the immaterial, to hardware or software, to the way information is produced
and consumed, or to the means by which people communicate for multiple
purposes. The term is used so pervasively that it has become imbued with
multiple meanings which may be technological, but which also refer to the
cultural, social, political, and economic features of most contemporary socie-
ties. Like the Atomic Age, there is no single vision, but multiple ones,
grounded in the experience of particular uses of the technology and how
understandings of these experiences are changing over time.
In this book, I examine how multiple dimensions of the communication
system in the Internet Age—personal, institutional, and technological—are
implicated in the way people are able to make choices about their lives,
individually and collectively. I show why dreams of the realization of a
cybernetic ecology—today subsumed within the information society—are
in urgent need of assessment. I discuss the feasibility of measures that
would guide the evolution of the communication system along a pathway
that is more consistent with aspirations for the good society. This requires a
critical examination of the implications of the paradoxes of information
scarcity and complexity for stakeholders in the information society.
The notion of the good society has a long history in Western philosophy
relating to social justice and how it can be achieved. The idea that members
of society have a responsibility to attend to the welfare of all has been
espoused since Democritus advocated the social compact.2 For some, the
good society is an ‘achievable society’ in which, according John Kenneth
Galbraith, all citizens ‘must have personal liberty, basic well-being, racial
and ethnic equality, [and] the opportunity for a rewarding life’, for exam-
ple.3 For others, such as Amartya Sen, the good society is one in which
policy choices are not ‘indifferent to the lives that people can actually live’
or to what people are able to accomplish.4 There are many problematic
aspects of the notion of the good society, as philosopher Martha Nussbaum
and many others acknowledge, and I do not attempt to resolve them here.
Nussbaum, however, suggests that the idea can be used as a picture to help
us ‘think creatively about what justice can be in a world’, acknowledging
that some other picture might be more helpful to articulate people’s aspira-
tions for society.5
The prevailing visions of the information society, one giving priority to
market-led commercial development in the interest of economic growth
and the other giving priority to the collaborative production and consump-
tion of information outside the conventions of market exchange, are
4
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
represented in the scholarly literature and in policy debate as being in
conﬂict with each other. Progress towards the realization of one vision is
seen as damaging to the realization of the other. I examine their respective
claims in the light of the insights provided by a focus on the paradoxes
involved in technological change and transformations in society in the
Internet Age. I show that the tensions between adherents to these conﬂicting
visions are symptoms of a false opposition between a vision that privileges
the freedom of information and participation and a vision that privileges
economic growth. Its resolution lies in presuming that one of these visions
must be an incorrect reading, that is, that progress towards the good society
requires that one vision be privileged over the other. I want to suggest
another reading of this conﬂict. My reading opens a range of potential
means for guiding the evolution of the communication system in a way
that enhances the likelihood of outcomes that minimize the dangers asso-
ciated with ‘machines of loving grace’. In order to develop this reading, it is
necessary to understand a variety of ways of seeing the processes of social
and technological change.
Ways of Seeing and Theorizing Change
British art critic, novelist, and painter, John Berger, emphasizes that ‘the
relation between what we see and what we know is never settled’.6 Similarly,
the prevailing visions of the information society are never settled. In some
visions there is an overemphasis on technological change, knowledge gaps,
and the diffusion of technology. Others emphasize symbolic meaning and
power relationships that enable active human beings to shape our technolog-
ical systems. These ways of seeing are associated with different theoretical
models of change that have been developed within academic disciplines built
up around different purposes and epistemologies. My aim is to critically
examine the conﬂicting visions of the information society and some of the
reasons that these conﬂicts persist. This requires that we make explicit the
conventions of these traditions to understand how they become co-mingled
in the practices of the Internet Age.
To make sense of these contemporary visions, I employ a strategy of
comparison and critical assessment of the social imaginaries of the informa-
tion society. The notion of the social imaginary has its origins in a number of
intellectual traditions. I build my analysis principally around the idea as
proposed by political philosopher and commentator on modernity, Charles
Taylor. He describes the social imaginary as ‘the deeper normative notions
and images’ invoked by the ways in which we understand ‘how things go on’
INTRODUCTION
5

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
among people7 (see Chapter 3). Taylor emphasizes that ‘the social imaginary
is not a set of ideas; rather it is what enables, through making sense of, the
practices of a society’.8 For my purpose, it is about the taken-for-granted
notions, images, and visions of those engaged with developments in the
information society and how they think about and experience the mediated
environment, acting upon it in ways that lead to the paradoxes of information
scarcity and complexity in the Internet Age.
A paradox involves apparently contradictory criticisms or statements that
may be rendered consistent with each other if they are given a ‘certain
reading’9 when the nature of power relationships within a complex system
is taken into account. In order to perform a re-reading of transformations in
the information society, I examine the metacommunications of different
stakeholders, that is, their ways of talking or communicating about asymmet-
rical, contested relationships in the information society (see Chapter 4). This
analytical procedure provides a basis for a ‘certain reading’ of the conﬂicts
that give rise to the two paradoxes. While not new to the Internet Age, we will
see that these paradoxes have major implications for whether it is understood
to be feasible to guide the progress of the information society towards the
good society. My reading suggests broad directions for changes that unsettle
received views about what we think we know about changes in the commu-
nication system and their consequences.
The prevailing visions of the information society rest in part on distinct
ways of understanding or theorizing change in society and on a claim, in the
case of the dominant vision, that disengagement from a normative position
with respect to values is an appropriate stance for enquiry into the dynamics
of change. Taylor observes, however, that if we want to ‘grasp what motivates
some person or group, how they see the world, and what kinds of things are
important to them, disengagement will almost certainly be a self-stultifying
strategy’.10 Roger Silverstone insists that the communication system, through
its mediation of our lives, ‘constitutes our worldliness, our capacity to be in
the world’.11 The relationship between the communication system and our
capacity to be in the world clearly matters for the lives of people everywhere.
For this reason, a disinterested stance towards the implications of the con-
tending visions of the information society would be inappropriate for my
enquiry.
Studies of the evolution of the information society draw on a variety of
incommensurable ways of seeing. This is reﬂected in disagreements about
whether humanistic or mechanistic ‘models of man’ or social and technologi-
cal change should guide work in this area.12 Mechanistic models are thriving
despite being regarded by those with an afﬁnity for humanistic models as
being ‘innocent of matters relating to institutions and power relations’.13
Mechanistic models are exogenous, that is, these models treat technological
change as a shock to a system of pre-existing relationships that requires
6
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
adjustment to bring the system back to stability. Humanistic models are
‘endogenous’; change is attributable to internal ‘causes’, which are more likely
to acknowledge the importance of power relationships and meaning con-
struction. In both models, the alignment or misalignment of technological
innovations with a given set of goals such as those of the good society is
regarded as being uncertain. However, different assumptions are made about
the role of human agency and the capacity of people to shape their environ-
ment through their ideas, institutions, and development and use of their
artefacts.
This book is intended for readers with different disciplinary backgrounds
and from different research traditions. This raises a question about the
vocabulary I use to discuss the processes of historical development of the
communication system in Internet Age of the information society.
I employ three different terms to refer to these historical developments.
The most direct is ‘change’ which is simply the idea that from one time to
another there are differences. Change may be an experiential or an obser-
vational concept—we experience or observe difference and this is called
change. In general, simply noting that change has occurred is not satisfac-
tory. It leaves open the question of why change has occurred and it falls
well short of addressing the question presented by ‘development’—devel-
opment towards what, for what, in what direction? To answer these ques-
tions requires a theory of what brings about change processes. The most
obvious theory of change is that of intentionality—change occurs because
someone or some group of people strives to achieve goals, objectives, or a
result. However, when it comes to a complex system, such as that discussed
in this book, theories predicated upon the idea of intentionality are often
inadequate—no single group’s intentionality may dominate in bringing
about change, or change may happen unintentionally, as the collateral
effects of intentional efforts or because of the interaction between the
efforts of various actors.
In these cases, two additional terms are appropriate. The ﬁrst is the concept
of evolution. Evolution involves a process of variety generation and a process
of selection and inheritance or learning from the past.14 The coherence of
processes of change that are evolutionary need not be obvious. Selection may
operate capriciously and variety generation may be limited or biased. None-
theless, when evolutionary processes are present, it may be possible to explain
change in terms of the increased viability of certain institutions, artefacts, or
ideas, and the decreased viability of others. The concept of ‘ﬁtness’ in social
life compared to Darwinian or biological evolution is unlikely to have a clear
deﬁnition, and it is necessary to turn to theories of change predicated upon
ideas about human agency.15 The directionality of evolutionary processes may
be discernible. The process or processes of variety generation and selection,
INTRODUCTION
7

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
processes which may be cultural, social, political, and economic, may favour
some directions over others.
The second term is ‘emergence’ which is drawn from a branch of systems
theory called complexity theory. Emergence encompasses evolution, but is
less restrictive in that it may also apply to systems in which the elements
are stable (i.e. variety is unchanging) and in which selection may be
incidental or unimportant. In complex systems with emergent properties,
the interaction of a system’s elements may be taken to be autopoietic (self-
organizing or self-regulating). The presence of autopoiesis provides an
explanation of change in two senses. First, autopoietic adjustment implies
change from period to period; it is only over a longer period of time that
stability may be observed—sometimes referred to as dynamic stability.
Second, autopoietic systems may be disturbed by shocks or events that
are external. These shocks may disturb the inherent tendency of the system
to self-organization or self-regulation, causing changes (previously unob-
servable) to occur before dynamic stability is restored, or they may be
sufﬁciently disruptive to destroy the autopoietic properties of the system—
creating chaos and a lack of stability or order. In this book, the terms
evolution and emergence are used to indicate tendencies in historical
developments that have ‘direction’.16 In some cases, the underlying process-
es or mechanisms are analysed in detail in order to tease out the way the
paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity can be understood,
employing exogenous or endogenous ways of seeking.
The meanings of these terms may be a little obscure for some social
scientists, or suggest meanings that are not intended. My aim is not to
conﬂate the epistemological differences between disparate theories of change,
especially because theories of evolution and complexity sit uncomfortably
alongside discussions about power and ideology in the information society.
My intention is not to suggest that evolutionary processes in the social or
cultural context are ‘natural’ or that they are distinct from any of the processes
that give rise to technological change. Nevertheless, these terms are increas-
ingly common in research on changes in society in the Internet Age. Many
actors, inside and outside the academy, are employing them in the process of
making claims that are becoming part of the taken-for-granted legends about
the information society.
For those in the social sciences and humanities more familiar with the
vocabulary of change, modifying the directions of change will be thought
to imply some kind of ‘choice’ by human agents, with or without a
conscious awareness of the consequences of their choices. In this book,
I consider the choices available to active agents at the micro-level, for
individuals in the information society, and the way these choices appear
at the level of institutions. Each of these levels has implications for how
power is conceptualized. At the individual level, ‘the enterprising self’ can
8
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
be understood to ‘shape itself in order to become what it wishes to be’,17
and institutional actions can be understood as being what ‘is produced and
reproduced in what people do’.18 My interest in this book is in the social
imaginaries—the way people in the information society make sense of their
visions and practices and how this is inﬂuencing the communication
system that is so central to people’s lives.
These different models and terminologies depicting ‘change’ in the infor-
mation society provide us with disparate ways of seeing the dynamics of
change in the communication system. James Carey, a principal contributor to
communication theory, suggested that,
to study communication involves examining the construction, apprehension, and
use of models of communication themselves – their construction in common
sense, art, and science, their historically speciﬁc creation and use. . . . Behind and
within these encounters lie models of human contact and interaction. . . . Our
models of communication, consequently, create what we disingenuously pretend
they merely describe.19
One model of communication about change, which serves as an example
of how such models begin to inﬂuence practice in the information society, is
the use of exogenous models in economics. Present-day economics ﬁnds the
multiplicity or ‘co-determination’ of factors inﬂuencing social change, for
example, to be a very difﬁcult construct with which to grapple compared to
the apparent simplicity of models documenting the cumulative rate and
direction of ICT diffusion. It is even more difﬁcult for economists to analyse
the way power relationships are involved in processes of technological in-
novation. For them, change is governed by shocks that are taken to be external
to the economic system and then reconciled through a process of equilibra-
tion. Problems are stated in univocally rational (or quasi-rational) ways and,
thus, are unambiguously solvable through recourse to theoretical models or
quantitative simulations of change, constrained by limiting assumptions
about the nature of human rationality and choice. The convention in this
model is that existing unequal distributions of resources are given; their re-
distribution is outside the scope of analysis. Wealth is generated by efﬁciency
improvements and is redistributed in the form of increased wages to ever
more productive workers, endowed with an ever-expanding stock of tools
(capital), with sufﬁcient proﬁt only to stimulate risk-taking rather than a safer
and lower return investment.
This model of innovation seems to bear little relation to the ‘real’ world
where frontier-expanding technological change, for instance in ICT, creates
wealth by endowing some actors with the power to dominate compe-
titors and re-distributes wealth through the ‘creative destruction’ of rivals.
Models drawn from theories of the dynamics of complex adaptive systems
can be integrated with the economists’ models by changing assumptions
INTRODUCTION
9

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
about the way shocks to the system play out in terms of stability or instability
and whether the system tends over time towards an equilibrium state. Inte-
grating them with models which embrace a much richer conception of human
agency and the way people construct and apprehend the world around them
results in the uneasy juxtaposition of incommensurate assumptions about
knowing and being in the world.
When the economics model (and systems theories built on metaphors
taken from the natural and physical sciences) is taken up outside the
academy, it co-mingles with others. Policy makers usually are willing to
acknowledge that technological innovation is shaped by political consid-
erations and by social and cultural perceptions and values. In the early
phases of the diffusion of digital technologies, for example, the then
Secretary General of the OECD, Jean-Claude Paye, said that ‘technological
change is often equated either with certain hardware, or with speciﬁc
production processes; this is a mistake. Technological change is, in its
development and application, fundamentally a social process, not an event,
and should be viewed not in static but in dynamic terms’.20 The idea that
innovation is a ‘social process’ may be obligatory for sociologists, but it sits
uncomfortably with the views of economists and many technologists. For
many of them, the spread of technology is inexorable and is the result of
shocks. It should be accelerated in order to build the information society
or, indeed, to achieve any type of progress.
The genesis of paradox is not uncommon in complex systems. Contra-
dictory statements derived from different ways of seeing transformations in
the social or technological realms should come as no surprise and they
often are valid in the contexts in which they are made. Understanding the
genesis of paradox—in this case, the paradoxes of information scarcity and
complexity—helps us to see the progressive evolution of the communica-
tion system in a different light. This provides a basis for assessing whether
or not innovations in the communication system are aligned with the goals
of the good society and for beginning to conceive of a more diverse set of
interventions than otherwise come to light in debates about information
society policy.
Chapter Outline
Convergent ICTs are deeply implicated in many people’s lives. There is
no doubt that, as Roger Silverstone says, ‘mediated connection and inter-
connection deﬁne the dominant infrastructure for the conduct of social,
10
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
political and economic life across the globe’.21 Certain ways of seeing make
the paradoxes of the Internet Age difﬁcult to examine, but it is essential to
do so to answer the questions I address in this book. Without a better
understanding of the dynamics of the evolutionary process, we can look
forward to a continuing rehearsal of unproductive struggles among the
proponents of the contending visions of the information society. In Chap-
ter 2, we ‘fast forward’ through different ways of seeing the information
society, proﬁling social imaginaries that have become pervasively shared, if
contested, in the Internet Age. These features of contemporary social
imaginaries are widely seen as opposing visions of the preferred direction
of change in the information society.
The book is then structured into two main parts. In the ﬁrst part
(Chapters 3 and 4), I discuss various models that inform the prevailing
visions of the information society. These chapters draw upon theories of
change, but it is not my intention to suggest that social imaginaries are
developed by scholars as scripts that ﬁlter into the consciousness of policy
makers and those who design and use ICTs and digital information.
Following Charles Taylor, the social imaginary should be understood as
being shared by large groups of people or even the whole of society, and is
not a theory. Some theories developed in scholarly traditions may be
exclusive to narrow interpretative communities, without widespread rec-
ognition in the wider community, while others play a very prominent role
in the social imaginaries of the information society. The imaginaries also
emerge out of the interactions of everyday participants in the information
society, policy makers, and activists as well as scholars from multiple
disciplines. Taken together, these two chapters provide the basis for an
analytical framework for assessing the implications of different ways of
seeing progress towards the information society and its consequences.
The validity of representations of change in the information society
arising from theory and empirical research may not resonate beyond the
academy. With a caveat about whether the perceptions and experiences of
everyday users, software developers, and other stakeholders in the develop-
ment of the communication system can be represented by examining the
narratives or metacommunications available to the social scientist, the
second part of the book (Chapters 5, 6, and 7) examines the social
imaginaries of the information society from several different perspectives.
This analysis is based partly on ﬁndings in the academic literature, on an
analysis of the trade and policy literatures, and on my experience of
working with technology developers and policy makers over several
decades.
In Chapter 3, in the ﬁrst main part of the book, I focus on the insights
provided by theories employed in the social sciences to examine the causes
INTRODUCTION
11

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and consequences of technological innovation in the information society. The
chapter begins with a short history of the emergence of the ‘information
society’ in the period following World War II and the exogenous models that
characterize change as the product of advances in the technologies for infor-
mation processing. These models are contrasted with insights from endoge-
nous theories of techno-economic change, of the political economy of
communication, and of mediation. I consider how what I refer to as the
administrative or instrumental and critical traditions of research contribute
to the social imaginaries and the different possibilities they imply for policy
intervention.
In Chapter 4, I assess what we can learn about the social imaginaries of the
information society from system theories that invoke the concepts of evolu-
tion and complexity. These models of change will be familiar to those working
in the physical and engineering sciences, and many of those who are involved
in the design and implementation of the communication system, and in its
governance. They are increasingly prominent in the social sciences. A critical
assessment of this tradition and the problems it presents for understanding
human agency is followed by a discussion of the way this model has been
developed to understand paradox and its implications for ‘adaptive learning’.
At the end of Chapter 4, I outline a critical systems framework to help make
sense of the way people, in their different capacities, construct their visions of
the information society.
I use this framework in the second part of the book to guide an analysis of
the social imaginaries of the information society which seem to characterize
the way the communication system is experienced in the everyday lives of its
users who encounter it largely from ‘in front of the screen’ of the computer or
other digital device. This is contrasted with imaginaries that are more charac-
teristic of software engineers and scientists whose work takes them ‘behind
the screen’ (Chapter 5). In Chapter 6, social imaginaries of the information
society are examined through a consideration of the experiences of a com-
munity of developers of a new digital platform for communication and of the
representatives of companies and other stakeholders with the strongest inter-
ests in maintaining the constructed scarcity of digital information. Chapter 7
turns to an examination of debates about the governance of the communica-
tion system in the information society, focusing mainly on the Internet as an
exemplary site where the paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity
are being played out.
My argument is summarized in Chapter 8. I suggest that the persistent
denial of the paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity sequesters
debate about possible interventions that might help to reconcile the goals
of economic growth with the goals of social justice and the equitable
distribution of resources in the information society. Certain interventions
12
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
are needed to avert the emergence of a runaway technological system.
I suggest several interventions that follow from the invocation of a new
social imaginary of the information society which resists the excesses of the
market without abandoning it, and which encourages experimentation and
creativity in mediated environments, with less risk to human beings.
INTRODUCTION
13

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2
Fast Forwarding through the
Information Society
Introduction
In the prevailing vision of the information society, a technological revolution
gives rise to digital networks and applications that diffuse widely and rapidly
throughout society with many disruptive consequences. These disruptions
result in the need for adjustments to legal arrangements and policies, to the
structure and operation of the economy, and to the norms for social and
economic conduct. It is claimed that companies’ commercial prospects are
damaged each time an innovative technology takes hold. Incumbent compa-
nies then seek protection for their economic interests. When solid-state
electronics became the ‘new art’ in the 1950s, for example, it was claimed
that this technology was destabilizing the electro-mechanical age and serious-
ly impairing the monopoly telecommunication network providers’ abilities to
carry out their ‘public duty’.1 Similarly, today’s creative industry companies
are seeking protection from the disruptive digital technologies that have made
the means of copying digital content easily and cheaply available to everyone
with the skills to use them.
It is not surprising that there is conﬂict about what should be done to
maximize the beneﬁts and avoid the risks of new technologies and about the
interests that should be favoured. For those whose concern is ﬁrst and
foremost with the potential of the huge advances in digital technologies for
enabling the production, processing, circulation, and storage of information,
these adjustments are needed to support market competition in ‘Internet
Time’2 and to enable citizens to manage their lives in an intensely mediated
world. Digital networks and applications are bringing all manner of texts
and images into our homes. In the Internet Age, the networked abilities of
radio frequency identiﬁcation sensors are leading to the electronic tagging not
only of criminals but also of children and pets, and, ultimately, perhaps
everyone.3 These and many other developments are testing our abilities to
render dreams of the cyberspace ecology and, more crucially, the technologies
and services that actually leave the laboratory, consistent with values of the
good society.
This chapter introduces the way the evolution of the communication
system in the information society is conceived from the perspectives of
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
science ﬁction writers, futurologists, and some of those in the policy and
scholarly communities. I focus ﬁrst on prevailing visions of the evolution
of ‘digital life’. One facet of the predominant vision is a commitment to
the idea that the fruits of technological innovation bring disruptions for
companies whose proﬁts depend on their ability to maintain some ele-
ment of control over digital information, that is, its scarcity, so that it can
be produced and consumed in the commercial market. The paradox of
information scarcity is that digital information is costly to produce in-
itially and is virtually costless to reproduce.
In this vision, the characteristics of increasing returns from positive feed-
back within complex adaptive systems mean that the technological system is
subject to the risk that it will spiral out of human control. Human interven-
tions to guide the system have uncertain consequences. The paradox of
complexity is such that the intrinsic beneﬁts of emergent complexity lead to
less human control, but enhanced control simultaneously is sought through
programming choices. I consider the views of those who foresee the risk of a
‘runaway system’. Most debates in policy forums do not focus on the risks
associated with declining mastery of the technological system. Instead, they
concentrate on the many facets of the digital divide, that is, on how to ﬁll
technology or knowledge gaps, which I discuss brieﬂy. The ﬁnal section
explains why there is an urgent need to unmask the false polarization between
the prevailing social imaginaries of the information society. This is essential if
progress is to be made towards reconciling the goal of economic growth with
the goals of social justice and equitable distribution of information resources.
The Evolution of Digital Life
The actions of stakeholders guide both the direction and movement along the
technological innovation pathways that inﬂuence the evolution of ‘digital life’.
Along the path towards ‘machines of loving grace’—whether welcomed or
not—engineers and mathematicians argue that, sooner or later, technological
advancement will produce the ‘Singularity’. For example, Vernor Vinge, a
computer scientist who is also a science ﬁction writer, argues that a time will
come when ‘we have the technological means to create superhuman intelli-
gence’.4 At this point, the end of the human era will have arrived. This kind of
post-human vision is a consistent theme in the work of mathematicians,
computer scientists, and writers of science ﬁction. It is a vision of the
convergence of the computer and biological sciences and the creation of
entities, with runaway consequences beyond the control of humans.5
FAST FORWARDING THROUGH THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
15

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Futurologists take up works of science ﬁction, embellishing them to offer
confusing utopian and dystopian scenarios, invoking visions of the evolution
of digital technologies. For example, Ian Pearson, a futurologist, talks about
smart bacteria infecting people’s minds and controlling them, enslaving them,
and turning them into zombies,6 presenting a vision that echoes Greg Bear’s
much earlier science ﬁction story, Blood Music. Donna Haraway’s widely cited
‘Cyborg Manifesto’ offers a vision—grounded in the scholarly literature—of a
time when the opportunities afforded by new technologies will be seized to
cultivate new identities and relationships. This she argues will alter the terms
of the political struggle for gender liberation and build on the hybridity of
humans and machines.7
Each technological advance seems to provoke renewed debate over the
possibility of a loss of human control over the technological system. Loss of
control is a persistent theme in the history of technological innovation,
memorably in the Luddite’s resistance to the introduction of mechanized
looms in the textiles industry in Britain in the early nineteenth century. That
ﬂurry of technological disruption raised concerns about deskilling, job losses,
and changes to the rhythm of working life, but the Luddite movement was
suppressed by the government of the day.8 There is enthusiasm for the
Internet on the part of the great majority of people. Although some of its
applications may be questioned, the entre it provides to rich opportunities of
many kinds is being met by little resistance.
Discussion about innovations in ICTs is inﬂuenced increasingly by the
argument that the best option to advance the beneﬁts and mitigate the risks
of a complex technological system is to allow it to evolve, unhindered by
human beings. Investment in digital networks and applications in business,
government, and all other areas of society is seen as the best way to ensure
the optimal adjustments to technological innovations. The priority seems
to be to reach the top of the league tables for the diffusion of technology or
for literacy in its use, with far less attention to the risks that might be
encountered by society as a whole and by groups within society. Govern-
ments celebrate success, for example, when the media claim that ‘Britain logs
on to a world-beating £100bn internet economy’, ahead of the United
States.9 When the diffusion of ICTs is linked to threats of cyber war, or
actions to restrict the freedom of speech, this is often glossed over as part of
the process of adjustment to the evolution of the communication system,
which, ultimately, is—or soon will become—consistent with values of the
good society.
Timelessness and a context-free way of thinking characterize this vision of
the evolution of digital information and ICTs and the adjustments that the
diffusion process is assumed to provoke. Any resistance is attributed to a lack of
the requisite skills base or to more sinister anti-technology sentiments. Tech-
nologies are conceived as autonomous—as independent of the innovation
16
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
processes in society that give rise to them. Each new generation of technology is
presumed, on balance, to be consistent with humanwell-being, democracy, and
freedom.10 This is the vision prevailing in the imaginations of many of those
who promote the beneﬁts of the information society. It embraces particular
norms and values about how the world is, or should be, organized. These
norms and values are seen as consistent with the supposed beneﬁts of techno-
logical progress, the primacy of market exchange as the optimal way to solve
the problems of resource allocation, and the perception that it is only a matter
of time before everyone beneﬁts from the evolution of the communication
system.
The vision portrayed by a study of ‘digital life’ illustrates this way of
thinking. It is suggested that the ubiquity of the ‘Internet of Things’ (net-
worked sensing of everything and everyone) will automate mundane tasks
and gradually recede from human consciousness or awareness.11 This is a
vision offered under the auspices of the International Telecommunication
Union, a UN specialist agency with a mandate for governing the communi-
cation system in the Internet Age. A European Commission-funded study on
ubiquitous computing (an earlier closely related term for the Internet of
Things) takes a similar view, but suggests that rather than receding altogether,
digital life should be controllable using on/off switches that allow decisions
about the level of access people prefer an automated system to have to their
private lives.12
Developing the means of achieving individual control is seen also as an
opportunity for wealth generation from innovations in software technologies
to support the pre-ﬁltering of information, software agent-based recom-
mender systems, and other metadata automated systems which operate
behind the computer screen. Flexible intelligent systems for information
handling, such as smart tagging, the Semantic Web, and online search tech-
nologies, are portrayed in the trade literature and in some academic accounts
not only as the answers to people’s desires to control their communication
environments but also as new commercial opportunities. Visions of the
ubiquity of these technological solutions are emblematic of their proponents’
hopes for an information society built upon a technologically-supported,
rational, and calculable life. The claim is that the technological management
of abundant digital information presents opportunities that must be taken up
because this enables an ever-increasing range of choices for individuals. All
these developments are associated with the production and processing of vast
quantities of digital information. When technological innovations of these
kinds have eliminated information scarcity, it seems to follow that there will
be no need for policy intervention to ensure that its production and con-
sumption are in the interests of the public or, indeed, of the good society. Yet,
at the same time, those beneﬁtting from the beneﬁts of the abundant infor-
mation are sorely challenged to develop means of creating proﬁtable business
FAST FORWARDING THROUGH THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
17

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
models, consistent with their interests in market-led growth. This is unsur-
prising in the face of the paradox of information scarcity.
The prevailing vision of the information society is part of a broader vision
of how society and the economy should function. For several decades, neo-
liberalism and the Washington Consensus on the beneﬁts of market-led
economic expansion and free trade have dominated debates over policy and
regulation, with major implications for public policies affecting the develop-
ment of the communication system.13 In line with this policy environment,
which typically calls for the withdrawal of the state from governance and the
ascendency of market forces, de-regulation of the communication system,
and a ‘hands-off’ stance towards the Internet are widely regarded as being
optimal for encouraging the development of societies that depend on
digital intangible goods. The less state governance, the better this will be for
society—so the narrative goes. Advocates of this position oppose regulation
of the Internet, for example, arguing about the dire consequences of intrusive
regulations for the evolution of open networks and open access to digital
information. Even when there is acknowledgement that there are problems
with a policy of non-intervention, for example, the loss of privacy or threats
to security, it is argued by some scholars that policy intervention, ‘if under-
taken, might ruin the very environment it is trying to save’. Instead, it is
suggested that the future network environment should be shaped by the
generative potential of ‘technically skilled people of goodwill’,14 who it is
assumed will develop alternatives to a centralized, market-led information
society. Recourse to the generative characteristics of a complex technological
system is symptomatic of what I call the paradox of complexity.
Since the ﬁnancial crash in the late 2000s, the neoliberal policy position has
been defended less robustly, but the idea that intervention in the governance
of the communication system, speciﬁcally the Internet, but more broadly the
information society, in the name of the public interest, is anathema to many.
The dangers of intervention, stemming from uncertainty about the market
distorting impacts of interventions or fears of infringement of civil liberties,
have a ﬁrm grip on the imaginations of many policy makers, companies, and
civil society advocates for various reasons. When digital information is no
more than a keystroke or tap-on-the-screen away, it would seem to follow that
the evolution of the communication system carries very few risks for human
beings. When its dangers are acknowledged, for instance, in the event of
unwanted intrusions into citizens’ lives by software agents, or new forms of
cyber warfare, it is assumed that these risks can be managed without restrain-
ing or altering the evolution of the new technologies. ICT applications are
seen as the answers to political, social, economic, and even environmental
risks, with little regard to the way, for example, their energy consumption is
creating threats to the global ecosystem.15
18
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Thus, a principal component of the prevailing vision of the information
society is related to the presumed dangers of policy intervention in the
evolving communication system. In this view, the complexity of the system
inevitably will defeat any efforts to guide it. This is a seductive argument,
perhaps even more so than the neoliberal argument about the beneﬁts of
unfettered markets. It is persuasive because many of its proponents are
careful to state that their work is not related to the motivations or prefer-
ences of human beings. For example, Brian Arthur, a developer of modern
theories of increasing returns resulting from positive feedback within
complex systems, says ‘modern technology organizes itself increasingly
into networks of artefacts that sense, conﬁgure, and execute appropriately, it
displays some degree of cognition. . . . In fact, not only will these systems
in the future be self-conﬁguring, self-optimizing, and cognitive, they will be
self-assembling, self-healing, and self-protecting’.16
A modern articulation of the super-intelligent system envisaged by those
who, like Vinge, dream of the Singularity, is that the communication system is
a component of an evolutionary system, the dynamics of which give rise to
emergent, indeterminate outcomes. The system is conceived as being self-
organizing, that is, it is envisaged as being separate from other components of
the system. In this view, consequently, policy interventions are as likely to
produce negative as to yield beneﬁcial, outcomes. The best advice is to leave
the system to emerge through its own dynamic oscillations. This is the
paradox of complexity—the system’s very complexity heightens the risks
associated with it, but this complexity renders the system interventions that
do occur, at least as, if not more, risky.
The outcomes of these oscillations are seen as leading to the end of human
beings as we know them in the wake of the emergence of ‘machines of loving
grace’ imagined by Brautigan with more than a hint of cynicism. However, in
the prevailing vision of the information society, these same developments are
welcomed in policy debates by those who see them as harbingers of a bright
future with universal, ICT-supported, personal, and collective empowerment.
Optimism about the beneﬁts of ICTs is not misplaced, especially for econ-
omically poorer citizens. There are numerous instances of ‘clever services’,
enabled by inexpensive mobile phones, which are providing useful informa-
tion, for example, about potentially harmful counterfeit drugs, which is of
obvious beneﬁt.17 Unfortunately, though, the availability of digital informa-
tion, distributed via the Internet using mobile phones or computers or by
other means such as compact discs or television, does not necessarily coincide
with the greater availability of information that is relevant to people’s lives.
The prevailing vision of the information society is that almost all innova-
tive applications of digital technology will be empowering for their users,
especially if markets are unhindered by external interventions. However, even
when people have access to the new technologies, there is no guarantee that
FAST FORWARDING THROUGH THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
19

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
available digital information will be locally relevant or veriﬁable and trust-
worthy. Numerous experiments using real-time data on local developments
are providing information that can assist in supporting many types of ser-
vices, but here, too, there are ethical issues about who can or should collect
and make use of such information. In the dominant vision, events such as the
Arab Spring or the British riots in 2011 are often cited as resulting from the
availability of social media as if this potential for circulating timely informa-
tion for political or other purposes is ‘proof ’ of the absence of risk associated
with the deployment of ‘intelligent’ ICTs throughout society.
This view of the contribution of digital technologies to political engage-
ment is one that rarely acknowledges that these social media also may be used
by authorities to suppress protest movements. Nor does it acknowledge that
these technologies are less effective than is commonly believed in creating
material wealth (for other than their sponsors) or in encouraging the redistri-
bution of productive activities or wealth within a community.18 It is seldom
noted in discussions about the beneﬁcial impacts of innovations in ICTs, that
greater equality and improved social justice do not follow inevitably from the
diffusion of ICTs; they cannot, on their own, empower the ‘multitude’.19
Runaway Systems
In the prevailing vision of the information society, increasingly what seems to
matter is the virtual world, not the material or ‘real world’.20 Whether virtual
representations in cyberspace are seen as being beneﬁcial or pathological, the
vision of a technologically-mediated world seems to have great appeal. It is
appealing to science ﬁction writers and also to those who regard innovations
in the communication system as leading to discontinuities in cultural, social,
political, and economic organization, not all of which are welcome. Set
against the visions of technological progress, there are the reﬂections of
analysts for whom the prevailing information society vision either greatly
exaggerates the death of an old order or substantially underestimates the risks
associated with the communication system that is being developed.21
Some of those who have been deeply involved in developing the technol-
ogies of the Internet Age and have been strong advocates of their beneﬁts,
seem to be much more pessimistic when they realize that technology does not,
on its own, resolve human problems. They argue that if the brakes are not
applied, there is a high risk that the communication system will run out of
control. For example, in the early 1990s, William Davidow, Intel Corpora-
tion’s former Vice-President of Marketing and Sales for Semiconductors, and
an electrical engineer by training, co-authored an inﬂuential book called The
20
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Virtual Corporation. This book extolled the enormous beneﬁts associated with
the global information and communication system. It anticipated the whole-
sale transformation of the structure and organization of companies and mar-
kets with innovations in semiconductors and computers, leading to ‘formerly
well-deﬁned structures . . . beginning to lose their edges, seemingly permanent
things starting to continuously change, and products and services . . . adapting
to match our desires’.22 Many of these changes in organizational dynamics, in
the management of internal and external sources of information, and in the
personalization of goods and services, are well in train today.
In his 2011 book, Overconnected, Davidow reﬂects on how his thinking has
changed in the light of experience with digital technologies. He argues in this
book that the increasing returns associated with positive feedbacks in a
complex networked system could yield contagion effects and a system greatly
at risk of ‘racing out of control’. He wonders whether ‘my technologist friends
and I weren’t every bit as naı¨ve as the missionaries. We brought the world the
tools and believed society could only beneﬁt. . . . Now we ﬁnd ourselves at the
peak of the evolutionary pyramid, facing what H.G. Wells called the “inexo-
rable imperative” to adapt or perish’.23 Networked information and contagion
effects are implicated, for example, in cases of dodgy ﬁnancial assets which
spread like viruses, consigning former ‘miracle’ economies, such as, Greece,
Ireland, or Iceland, to the world ﬁnancial system’s intensive-care wards, and
leading to the threat that the global economic system must adapt or perish
with thousands of lives affected.
Concerns about the threats accompanying the interpenetration of ICTs
and the human or social system are not new. The theme of runaway ICT
systems has been discussed widely in the social science literature.24 Never-
theless, the extent of human dependence in the twenty-ﬁrst century on the
communication system is new. In later chapters, I discuss the problems for
society associated with faster speeds of communication, the way immersive
virtual worlds alter the way we experience our lives, and whether and how
people are able to master or control the technological system. The possibility
that the enlightenment supposedly offered by technological innovation
might be problematic if it continues along the current pathway, however,
is more likely to be entertained when things go wrong than when there is no
precipitating crisis. The potentially negative consequences of a world char-
acterized by the increasing intensity of communication between human
beings and their virtual proxies may be signalled regularly, but these signals
have little effect in ‘normal’ times.25 There are, of course, warnings that the
speeding up of life in the wake of ICT deployment is outstripping human
cognitive capacities and suppressing abilities for reﬂection. Some observers
do claim that, in the absence of intervention to counter the ‘inexorable
imperative’ of the technological system, there is a risk of chaos.26 In the
dominant vision of the information society, however, future technological
FAST FORWARDING THROUGH THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
21

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
innovations are expected to provide solutions to mitigate the risks of an ‘out
of control’ system.
The ICT revolution is not the ﬁrst example of a potentially beneﬁcial, but
disruptive, technology being implicated in endangering human beings. Crises
of the Atomic Age, such as Chernobyl and Fukushima, highlight risky con-
ditions and sometimes promote an evaluation of alternative policies and
standards. While the case is often made for a return to a pre-nuclear power
era, in the situation involving ICTs, there is no such reasonable argument for
interventions that would suppress the innovation process. For the young, the
‘pre-Internet’ period is a creation of the imagination; for the old it is a
challenge to the memory. Nevertheless, it is unreasonable to ignore the
communication system’s evolution or to leave its development to chance
when some of its features are inconsistent with the values of the good society.
As we will see, the direction of evolution is not pre-determined, despite claims
about the inevitability of the Singularity.
Closing the Gaps
The risks of the present trajectory of change in the communication system are
often sidestepped in policy debates. In most policy forums the focus is on the
unevenness of ICT diffusion and on gaps in accessibility to digital informa-
tion.27 The initial uneven spread of digital technologies throughout the
economies of the wealthy countries and, later, the lower income countries,
produces concerns about the implications of the inability to access ICTs and
digital information, and about ‘the right of the public to take part in this new
domain of social power’.28 These concerns are often depicted mainly as
problems that can be addressed by closing the gaps in accessibility to technol-
ogy, which can be managed through targeted investments in hardware or
software.
For example, Nicholas Negroponte (former Director of the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT) Media Lab) adopted a strategy of promoting
Internet access for children in low-income countries, claiming that the
‘instantaneous and inexpensive transfer of electronic data that move at the
speed of light’, would lead automatically to beneﬁcial change. The result of
supplying schools with one laptop per child in low-income countries, so he
claims, is that ‘everywhere we go, truancy drops to zero’.29 But such assertions
are not borne out by the experiences of recipient countries unless their govern-
ments or other stakeholders are able to put in place accompanying measures
(e.g. training, long-term ﬁnancing, housing, and transport) unrelated to ICTs.
Thus, in the dominant vision, the highest priority for information society
22
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
policy is to close the gaps in access, for instance, to the Internet or a mobile
phone. This ambition becomes a proxy for responding to the need for relevant
local or distant knowledge and for investment in the other material resources
that might enable people to improve their lives. It does little to close the gap
between the rich and the poor, except inadvertently.
This way of seeing is typical of the way economic analysis treats the markets
for digital information and does not distinguish between information and
knowledge. Without such a distinction, any investment in ICT that enhances
the capacities to produce, transmit, process, and store information is seen as
being equivalent to enhancing the capacity of people to access, produce, and
act upon diverse forms of ‘knowledge’ with beneﬁcial effects. This is the
perspective that has inﬂuenced the way agencies such as the World Bank
and various UN organizations have responded to the challenges and oppor-
tunities accompanying advances in digital technologies. The World Bank’s
Knowledge for Development 1998 report, which strongly promotes investment
in ICTs, for instance, opens with the statement that ‘knowledge is like light.
Weightless and intangible, it can easily travel the world, enlightening the lives
of people everywhere’.30 Philip Agre, an academic commentator on the
information society, argues that the conﬂation of information and knowledge
is ‘a utopian idea that stands in the main line of a long millennialist tradition.
Its prophets see it levelling hierarchies, dispersing power, and bringing peace
to the world’.31 A kind of ‘secularized religion’ of technology seems to
overtake the imaginations of so many of those who engage in policy advocacy
in the information society. Digital technologies and open data initiatives
become central to efforts to boost economic growth and to reduce poverty,
but without giving sufﬁcient attention to whether such initiatives are helping
to level hierarchies or are instrumental in creating new ones that may be no
less harmful than the ones they succeed.
If the information society is to be better aligned with values that are
consistent with the good society, the vision needs to be articulated in a way
that suggests a different social imaginary of the goals of the technological
developments. The UN Human Development Report provides one alternative
in saying that ‘the purpose of development is to create an enabling environ-
ment for people to enjoy long, healthy and creative lives’, by enlarging the
choices available to the poor.32 Too often, and unfortunately, this statement of
purpose amounts to lip service in relation to opportunities for all and, in the
context of the digital ‘revolution’, to the assumption that this purpose can be
achieved mainly through the diffusion of improvements in ICTs, that is, by
ﬁlling the gaps. The goals of equality and social justice that are espoused in
UN human development reports do not provide remedies for the problems
associated with the evolution of the communication system.
One of the greatest puzzles in modern societies is how to reconcile the
goal of economic growth with the goals of social justice and the equitable
FAST FORWARDING THROUGH THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
23

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
distribution of resources, and this puzzle is at the core of many debates about
these gaps. For instance, the digital divide agenda, aimed at closing technolo-
gy gaps and speeding up the transmission of ‘knowledge’, is symptomatic of
the millennialist notion of the ‘end of history’ or ‘end times’ in Christian
eschatology.33 Digital divide debates in policy forums often focus on how to
distribute existing resources, that is, on the information ‘haves’ and ‘have
nots’, and what to do about them.34 This is an important issue. However, the
differences in the competing visions of the good society, in this case, an
information society underpinned by a complex communication system, are
about how to reconcile the goals of economic growth and social justice. In the
neoliberal account which is central in the dominant vision of the information
society, it is the self-regulating market for ICTs and information that should
‘decide’ who gets what. What is needed, instead, as Phil Agre suggests, is ‘a
post-utopian imagination’ that emphasizes the ‘coevolution of institutions
and technologies’,35 and the fact that human agency is always a feature of the
economy, even in times when this is ignored. By focusing on the way the
paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity are presenting themselves
in the Internet Age, it is possible to begin to think about possibilities for
intervention that would be consistent with aspirations for the good society.
Critical Reﬂections on Dreams of Machines
In the contemporary vision of the information society, the evolution of the
communication system is conceived as the outcome of disruptive technologi-
cal innovation that promises beneﬁts for all, but, at the same time, requires
adjustments that sometimes are inconsistent with aspirations for the good
society. This phenomenon is not speciﬁc to ICTs; it is central in the marriage
between modernity and modern liberalism. Modernity promises progress,
while liberalism promises a meritocratic distribution of the gains from prog-
ress, but recognizes that equality of opportunity does not lead to equality of
outcome. This is complicit in perpetuating inequality and social injustice and
leads to constructs such as the ‘deserving poor’ and the ‘undeserving poor’. In
the information society, we could conceive of the deserving and the unde-
serving ‘information poor’, an approach characteristic of many digital divide
debates. An alternative is to undertake a critical evaluation of how the logics
of the paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity are mobilized in the
different visions of the information society with the aim of providing a new
reading of the possibilities for intervention.
This implies the need to ‘unmask’ the prevailing visions in the Internet Age
to reveal the interests in them and how they inﬂuence decisions about policy
24
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and governance.36 Daniel Bell was a close observer of the emergence of the
information society in the post-World War II period. He was one of the ﬁrst
sociologists to argue that the evolution of the information society would
be aligned with prevailing power relationships, such that certain groups or
individuals would come to ‘dictate’ what information is produced, and for
whom, and he challenged researchers to unmask the prevailing ideologies
or ways of seeing.37 In similar vein, Manuel Castells insists that ‘the commu-
nication process decisively mediates the way in which power relationships are
constructed and challenged in every domain of social practice, including
political practice’.38 The need for a critical assessment of the prevailing visions
of the information society is as pressing in the Internet Age as it was during
the transition from mechanical to electronic means of processing informa-
tion. I take up the issue of relationships among visions, ideologies, and the
social imaginary, as understood by Charles Taylor, in Chapter 3. In the
meantime, it is important to signal that the evolution of the communication
system in the information society is being guided by the ideas and actions of
multiple actors within a complex system of power relationships.
The evolution of the communication system is being guided by the eco-
nomic power of the largest companies, by the political power of nation
states and their institutions, by a host of other actors organized formally
into non-governmental organizations, and by individuals in their capacities
as consumers and citizens in the information society. Developing a better
understanding of how the power relationships guiding the technological
innovation process come to be aligned with a vision of an information society
that emphasizes private ownership of information and commercial markets is
a goal of my analysis of the paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity.
Critical examination of the prevailing vision serves as a means to understand
possibilities for reconciling the goal of economic growth with the goals of
social justice and the equitable distribution of resources. The evolution of the
communication system is being guided also by a vision that is increasingly
prevalent among members of online communities (of scientists, engineers,
computer scientists, activists, and everyday users of the Internet) who favour
social relationships that privilege the values of online cooperation, non-
market information sharing, and common ownership of information.
These two visions usually are represented as requiring a choice between
apparently plausible, but contradictory, paths. The path towards cooperation
in an information commons is presented typically as consistent with equality
and social justice, but it does not resolve the problem of how to monetize
information production in the virtual realm in order to pay for the non-
virtual essentials of life. The path towards market-led development of the
information society seeks better means of monetizing information production,
but it does not address the problems of inequality and social injustice that
FAST FORWARDING THROUGH THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
25

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
emerge as new technologies and modes of information production become
integrated ever more tightly into market-based institutions.
Industrialization and standardized mass production under Fordism ins-
tigated the emergence of a technologically progressive approach to market-led
growth.39 In the Internet Age, large positive network externalities and increas-
ing returns, associated with the spread of global connections and faster
production of goods and services and shorter time to market, are seen as
ushering in the post-Fordist era—what I call the Internet Age. This is creating
the conditions for the personalization of goods and services, and for the
diversity of information that is seen as being responsive to the preferences of
all people,40 alternately inching and bounding towards the time of ‘machines
of loving grace’. This vision is widely presumed to be feasible under conditions
of constant economic growth and a ﬁrm belief that such growth will, eventu-
ally and with minimal intervention, foster social inclusion and improve-
ments in people’s lives. The dominant vision of the information society is
about growth and prosperity, deferring and downplaying the goals of inclu-
sion, equality, social justice, and sustainability of the global system.41 Thus,
technologists, industrialists, policy makers, and civil society members make
different assumptions about the means to achieve what they understand to be
the good society. This happens, for example, in discussions on personal
privacy, the security of states, the protection of intellectual property, the
prospects for economic growth, and the opportunities for democratic partici-
pation in society.
In the light of confusion and uncertainty about the journey towards the
information society, it is essential to examine the implications of technologi-
cal innovation and its outcomes for the lives that people are able to live and
for their consistency with values of the good society. In his history of
communication technologies, Harold A. Innis suggests that the progress of
‘science, technology, and the mechanization of knowledge’ tends to empha-
size complexity and confusion. If we take the present phase of developments
in the digital technologies of the Internet Age as the most recent instance in
the history of the ‘mechanization of knowledge’, then Innis’s concern that
such technologies come to be associated with ‘monopolies of knowledge’ that
affect conditions for freedom of thought, signals a need for a critical investi-
gation. He says that it is ‘extremely important to any civilization, if it is not to
succumb to the inﬂuence of this monopoly of knowledge, to make some
critical survey and report’.42
The dominant vision of the information society is a form of ‘monopoly of
knowledge’ insofar as it privileges one vision of society over other visions and
practices that also seem to be consistent with values of the good society. The
dominant vision that has been discussed so far is hugely inﬂuential in the
afﬂuent regions of the world and, also, increasingly, in the poorest regions
of the world. There are some variations, but the main assumptions—the
26
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
imperative to secure the relative scarcity of information and to practice non-
intervention in the market—are deeply entrenched in the prevailing vision of
the information society.
This shapes what it is feasible to discuss within policy debates about the
governance of the communication system, as will be demonstrated in later
chapters. The contending social imaginaries of the information society usu-
ally are seen as oppositional. One or other of them is seen as being a
misperception of the dynamics of the evolutionary process.43 My analytical
strategy is to examine why these oppositions persist. I suggest that these
misperceptions are illustrations of paradox in the Internet Age. Among the
many such paradoxes that could be explored, two stand out as being especially
harmful when they go unacknowledged as such—the paradox of information
scarcity and the paradox of complexity.
Conclusion
The challenge for my investigation is to see how the taken-for-granted,
‘deeper normative notions and images’ of these paradoxical ways of seeing
come to be inﬂuential in guiding the evolution of the communication system.
The central questions I set out in Chapter 1 are concerned fundamentally
with whether the direction of change is serving human purposes, consistent
with the good society. In her book, Alone Together, Sherry Turkle asks
similar questions, suggesting that ‘technologies, in every generation, present
opportunities to reﬂect on our values and direction. . . . What I call realtechnik
suggests that we step back and reassess when we hear triumphalist or apoca-
lyptic narratives about how to live with technology’.44 There is a risk that the
communication system is racing out of control and that we are on the cusp of
a ‘robotic moment’ in which human-to-human relationships are devalued. In
the face of this risk, it is appropriate to determine whether policy measures
might support ameliorative action. This is not to suggest that we should look
back with nostalgia to an earlier era. Instead, it is an acknowledgement that
the lives of human beings are increasingly mediated by machines with multi-
ple beneﬁts, and that it is important for the research community to study and
report on the ways in which they may be harmfully mediated, so as to suggest
ameliorative actions.
If the scarcity of digital information or material resources is a problem, in
line with the prevailing vision, it can be shelved as temporary, as a problem
that will disappear as the self-organizing communication system attends to its
survival. Conﬂicts among proponents of opposing positions with respect to
the responses to the paradox of information scarcity frequently are met with
FAST FORWARDING THROUGH THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
27

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the claim that the communication system is too complex to govern. Nothing
should be done to guide the evolution of the system because the ‘correct’
amount of variety and diversity of information in the information society is
most likely to emerge if the innovation process is left to the self-regulating
market. The system of communication is seen as being immune to human
intervention, or human intervention is seen as being liable to pervert the
system, resulting in unintended consequences. The best course of action,
therefore, is inaction, or perhaps some form of industry self-regulation.
Concerns about the risks associated with the evolution of the communication
system are deferred to the future. These readings of the evolution of the
system lead to non-intervention policies that are frequently responsive to
the interests of powerful corporate and state actors. However, they are also
consistent with the interests of those who champion a generative process of
change from below, claiming that this will maximize the opportunities for
creative expression and experimentation in the information society.
An alternative reading requires the invocation of a new social imaginary of
the information society in the sense suggested by Charles Taylor. A new social
imaginary is needed that is neither utopian nor dystopian, but, instead,
enables consideration of whether there is a better direction for a society in
which human lives are mediated by machines. A better pathway would be
consistent with social desiderata that do not place equality and social justice
in opposition to economic growth, and that do not relegate human emotions
and experience to a place that is unconnected with our experiences of
machines. In the next two chapters (3 and 4), I examine how social imagin-
aries of the information society are fostered by traditions of work, ﬁrst, in the
social sciences and, then, in the physical and natural sciences. Problematic
oppositions between prevailing ways of seeing the information society are
shown to be associated with difﬁculties in understanding the paradox of
information scarcity and the paradox of complexity; that is, with a failure
accurately to diagnose the conﬂicts in power relationships that are invoked
within a complex, twenty-ﬁrst century, multi-level information society.
28
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3
Social Imaginaries of the
Information Society
Introduction
The evolution of the communication system is giving rise to paradoxes that
are rarely discussed explicitly in the scholarly literature on the information
society. This creates problems for those who seek to understand the determi-
nants and likely outcomes of the ongoing technological innovation process.
The prevailing vision of the information society encourages technological
innovation with the promise of beneﬁts for all while, simultaneously, it is
facilitating persistence of a social order that is complicit in perpetuating social
and economic inequality. Is it possible to choose an alternative pathway in
this evolutionary process? Is action required to alter the present path in order
to increase the prospects for achieving the aspirations of the good society?
Answering these questions presumes an understanding of the interdepen-
dence of the processes of innovation and other components of a complex
adaptive system, and how this is involved in changes in the communication
system.
In this chapter, I introduce selected social science perspectives on the
information society, differentiating between those that are consistent with
what I will depict as the dominant social imaginary of the information society,
and those more compatible with alternative, though still widely held, imagin-
aries. As indicated in Chapter 1, the uncertain relationship between what we
see and what we think we know means that many theoretical perspectives can
be used to understand the innovation process and its role in the construction
of the information society.1 In this chapter, I treat insights from theoretical
traditions in the social sciences as being provisional or, in Berger’s terms,
‘unsettled’. No single perspective offers a complete explanation of the evolu-
tion of the communication system in the information society. These perspec-
tives co-mingle in the social imaginaries of the information society with
different consequences for what we then come to understand as appropriate
policy interventions. Roger Silverstone comments that ‘the communications we
undertake . . .have consequences for how we see and live in the world’.2 The aim
of this chapter is to draw attention to some of these communications in the
social science literature that are integrated within the social imaginaries of the
information society.

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Following a consideration of the notion of social imaginary, I continue by
differentiating between what can be designated as administrative or instru-
mentalist accounts of features of the information society, contrasting them
with accounts that can be designated as critical. I then set out features of the
dominant social imaginary of the information society. This discussion draws
principally on insights from theories that account for technological innova-
tion as an exogenous shock to society, and on the instrumental traditions of
research. This is followed by a discussion of some of the alternative social
imaginaries of the information society, in this case drawing on theories in
which the innovation process is regarded as being a contributor to the
endogenous developments within a complex system, and insights from in-
strumental and critical theories.
Insights from work in the social sciences (and the humanities) serve as a
means of communicating about the evolution of the communication system,
providing quite different accounts of how or why change happens. Critical
endogenous accounts are more sensitive to asymmetries in power relation-
ships in the information society, amplifying mechanistic models that are
characteristic of instrumentalist exogenous accounts. However, even the
former do not offer a full picture of the implications of the paradoxes of
information scarcity and complexity, which, I have suggested, are a central
feature of the information society in the Internet Age. This is taken up in
Chapter 4 where I examine what we can learn from systems theories about the
dynamics of change in the technological and social realms.
Social Imaginary as Analytical Tool
The social imaginary is an important concept for making sense of the world.
Craig Calhoun argues that ‘to speak of the social imaginary is to assert that
there are no ﬁxed categories of external observation adequate to all history;
that ways of thinking and structures of feeling make possible certain social
forms, and that such forms are thus products of action and historically
variable’. He comments that, ‘alternative imaginaries are operative in the
constitution of global culture and social relations’.3 For the sociologist,
C. Wright Mills, the ‘sociological imagination enables its possessor to under-
stand the larger historical scene in terms of its meaning for the inner life and
the external career of a variety of individuals’ and the way individuals ‘become
falsely conscious of their social positions’. It involves a reﬂexive stance in
reaction to ‘Science’ which he characterizes as ‘a set of Science Machines,
operated by technicians and controlled by economic and military men who
neither embody nor understand science as ethos and orientation’,4 a comment
30
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
that brings to mind some of the dreams of machines in the Internet Age. The
information society often is presented as emerging out of an evolutionary
process which is universally applicable. However, common sense suggests that
the way people understand the tools of communication, both hardware and
software, the way they experience mediated representations, and how they
interpret and act (or fail to act) on these representation, is neither ﬁxed nor
universally instantiated in a homogeneous way by technology.5
Indeed, as many scholars are acknowledging, different social imaginaries are
operative in constituting the information society and in guiding the evolution
of the communication system. John Thompson, for example, argues that ‘the
imaginary accounts for the orientation of social institutions, for the constitu-
tion of motives and needs, for the existence of symbolism, tradition, and
myth’,6 though he challenges views of the imaginary as an ‘unceasing and
essentially undetermined (social-historical and psychical) creation’,7 as in the
understanding of the Greek scholar, Cornelius Castoriadis, who worked after
World War II in Paris. Thompson argues that, in rejecting a rationalist
philosophy of history, Castoriadis leaves no basis for deciding whether we
should struggle to achieve any particular imaginary among competing alter-
natives. For instance, if we were to follow Castoriadis, we would have no basis
for concluding whether to favour an information society that is the outcome of
an emergent complex system whatever the values it entails, or to favour
relations of power within a system dominated by capitalist markets. In other
words, we would have no normative basis to guide human choices with respect
to the information society.
Others who employ the idea of the social imaginary include Chantal
Mouffe, who suggests that ‘every hegemonic order is susceptible of being
challenged by counterhegemonic practices, i.e. practices which will attempt
to disarticulate the existing order so as to install other forms of hegemony’.8
She argues that there are indeed choices that human beings can make
about the pathway that is to be followed. Similarly, Ernest Laclau sees the
social imaginary as ‘a horizon: it is not one among other objects but an
absolute limit which structures a ﬁeld of intelligibility and is thus the
condition of possibility of the emergence of any object’.9 In our case, the
‘object’ in question is the systems that are giving shape to the way our lives
are mediated by ICTs. Nico Carpentier applies the social imaginary concept
in his examination of the feasibility of the emergence of a regime of global
governance for the media and communication system. He argues that
‘social imaginaries are produced, accepted, and then taken for granted’ as
people seek some consistency in their experience of the ‘reality’ of their
lives in a world of rapidly changing technologies and cultural and social
norms.10 These treatments of the social imaginary are inﬂected with a
particular interpretation of the power relationships at the heart of processes
of social, political, and economic as well as technological change and they are
SOCIAL IMAGINARIES OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
31

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
derived from both Marxist and non-Marxist understandings of the ways that
power is articulated in capitalist society.
In my analysis, I employ Charles Taylor’s deﬁnition of the social imaginary.
For Taylor, the social imaginary is:
something much broader and deeper than the intellectual schemes people may
entertain when they think about social reality in a disengaged mode. I am thinking
rather of the ways in which they imagine their social existence, how they ﬁt together
with others, how things go on between them and their fellows, the expectations which
are normally met, and the deeper normative notions and images which underlie these
expectations.11
As discussed in Chapter 1, for Taylor, the social imaginary is not a speciﬁc
set of theoretical ideas that is given from above, but an ethos that enables
people to make sense of developments in society. I use this open and ﬂexible
concept of the social imaginary because I want to explore competing visions
of the information society and what they seem to mean to their respective
stakeholders when they adhere to them. When it comes to the framework for
the analysis of the experience of these stakeholders and the question of whether
there is scope for intervention to guide the evolution of the communication
system, it is important to position oneself with respect to matters of human
agency, which I do in Chapter 4. Here, my intention is to set out why Taylor’s
concept is helpful in thinking about the contribution of different traditions of
research to an understanding of the evolution of the communication system.
Taylor’s concept of the social imaginary is based on a liberal view of moral
philosophy that conceives moral order as being similar to the idea of the good
society or the social compact that guides the way social actors aspire to
maximize human welfare. Taylor explains that the social imaginary should
be conceived as ideas that are ‘carried in images, stories and legends’.12 Social
imaginaries are widely shared understandings that have achieved general
legitimacy. In this sense, the social imaginary is not synonymous with an
ideological hegemony insofar as it does not describe a particular dynamic in
the distribution of resources in society. Taylor emphasizes that it is important
to investigate what is involved when a particular theory or theories penetrate
and transform the social imaginary. This is especially important for under-
standing how very different theoretical explanations of the emergence of the
information society are taking hold and inﬂuencing policy and our everyday
lives. Taylor suggests that:
for the most part, people take up, improvise, or are inducted into new practices. These
practices are made sense of by the new outlook, the one ﬁrst articulated in the theory;
this outlook is the context that gives sense to the practices. And hence the new
understanding comes to be accessible to the participants in a way it wasn’t before. It
begins to deﬁne the contours of their world . . . .13
32
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The new practices for the design and organization of the hardware and
software of the communication system, for its governance, and for everyday
life in the information society ﬁt either easily or awkwardly with theories
about the dynamics of technological innovation and their implications for
society, and with different actors’ varying claims to legitimacy. As Taylor says,
‘the practice largely carries the understanding. At any given time, we can
speak of the “repertory” of collective actions at the disposal of a given sector
of society’.14 Thus, it is the repertory of images, stories, and actions selected by
those whose lives are interdependent with the technological system of com-
munication that is central to my investigation. Taylor paid particular atten-
tion to the ascendant imaginary in a given historical period. While not
neglecting alternatives, he has been particularly interested in how the social
imaginary informs all practices in society, practices that include the econom-
ic, political, cultural, and social—and in his case, the religious. In my analysis,
the aim is to show how conﬂicts, which are central to an established and to an
ascendant social imaginary, can be understood as paradoxes with major
consequences for the development of the information society in the Internet
Age.
Social imaginaries for Taylor are what make possible a shared sense of
the legitimacy of the organization and conduct of society. They deﬁne the
contours of the social world and inﬂuence its governance. They ‘can eventu-
ally come to count as the taken-for-granted shape of things, too obvious to
mention’.15 Thus, the social imaginaries of the Internet Age inﬂuence the way
digital technologies are used and the way they permeate and mediate people’s
lives. They also need not imply a causal relationship from the laboratory to
practice. Experience beyond the laboratory can be understood to permeate
the experimental world in multiple ways. There is an interpretive and dialec-
tical relationship between what we understand through theory and what we
know through practice. As Anthony Giddens says, ‘the proper locus for the
study of social reproduction is in the immediate process of the constituting of
interaction, for all social life is an active accomplishment; and every moment
of social life bears the imprint of the totality’. ‘“The totality”, however, is not
an inclusive, bounded “society”, but a composite of diverse totalizing orders
and impulsions’.16
In the prevailing vision of the information society as depicted in Chapter 2,
however, an ‘economic-centred’ notion is strongly privileged. For some
analysts, this is consistent with the perceived ‘natural order of things’, and
with the emergence in the eighteenth century of a doctrine of the ‘harmony of
interests’, which Taylor traces in detail.17 This vision is taken up in the
dominant social imaginary of the optimal way to encourage the development
of the information society, that is, reliance on market forces. This is despite
the signiﬁcance of the information society for polity and culture and despite
the availability of an imaginary that is consistent with non-market relations
SOCIAL IMAGINARIES OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
33

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and a sharing culture in an information commons. When these conﬂicting
social imaginaries collide, they do so because the values they embrace are
strongly contested. These contestations are attributable to paradoxes which
inﬂuence understanding of the new technologies and whether they are wel-
comed or seen as threatening. The genesis of paradox can be brought to light,
following Taylor, by providing ‘a certain reading’18 of the contending social
imaginaries in a given historical period and their associated practices.
An interrogation of the social imaginaries of the information society in the
Internet Age provides a means to account for differences in the way actors
understand and make sense of the dynamics of technological innovation and
a basis for a critical analysis of their interests in information society develop-
ments. It is important to reiterate that the social imaginary is not coterminous
with a ‘vision’ or an ‘ideology’ and it does not imply—in the abstract—a
particular understanding of power. Taylor’s is a relatively open concept. This
is in keeping with an interdisciplinary approach, with an emphasis on the way
stakeholders communicate about their relationships in the information soci-
ety. Two not always mutually exclusive ways of seeing the information society
are present in the scholarly literature in the social sciences on developments in
ICTs (and in the media) and their implications for society. These are dis-
cussed in the remainder of this chapter to provide an initial basis for the
framework that is used later to explore the genesis of paradox and its
implications in the information society.
Instrumental and Critical Ways of Seeing
One means of distinguishing between the main ways of seeing the informa-
tion society and the evolution of the modern (post-World War II) communi-
cation system is to consider the prevailing social imaginaries from the
perspectives offered by what came to be designated as the administrative or
instrumental and critical traditions in social science research.19 These tradi-
tions are present in all academic social science disciplines and they privilege
different research questions and assumptions about the values that guide
action in the cultural, social, political, and economic world. Following Paul
Lazarsfeld, an American sociologist and founder in the 1940s of the Bureau of
Applied Social Research at Columbia University, administrative research is
that which is ‘carried through in the service of some kind of administrative
agency of public or private character’.20 Much of the Bureau’s research
was funded by corporate or military organizations. This kind of research
is instrumental in the sense that those who conduct it normally purport to
be agnostic, unbiased, or neutral about the values associated with the ends
34
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
to be achieved. It is associated with a modernist view of technology in which
progressive innovations in technology and in the accompanying social orga-
nization are assumed to result in societal improvements that can be controlled
or mastered.
Lazarsfeld contrasted administrative and critical research. He understood
critical research as ‘independent’ of the instrumental interests of its funders
and, therefore, as more likely to challenge assumptions about the social value
of scientiﬁc and technical progress. Contemporary critical researchers would
likely question the meaning of ‘independent’ as applied to research, but also
would similarly insist that administrative researchers are trapped by the
questions they ask and the methodological stances they adopt in undertaking
research to support the prevailing status quo.21 They would argue that inter-
ests and power are deeply embedded in the progress of science (and social
science), and that this has implications for what is funded, the research
questions that are asked, and whether power relationships are the important
subjects for investigation.22
In the case of the communication system in the information society,
administrative research addresses the means by which ICTs might be applied
to achieve improvements in control systems. These include controls for
targeting missile systems or automated information systems to improve
productivity. The administrative researcher tends to examine ‘what is’ or
what is possible, whereas the critical researcher tends to interrogate why
things are the way they are, how they happened, and what were or are likely
to be their political, social, economic, or other consequences. Thus, critical
research is likely to question the implications, for all members of society, of
the power relations that emerge with scientiﬁc and technological innovation.
There are of course departures from these distinctions. For example, in some
cases, critical researchers advocate disengagement from normative issues and
from suggesting changes in policy so as not to collude or become co-opted by
the prevailing power structure. And administrative researchers, in many
instances, become advisors to governments, advocating policy actions and
reforms, albeit within the constraints of the prevailing power structure and
without challenging its fundamental legitimacy to govern. In this chapter,
I will be concerned principally with the way these research traditions are
informed by, and contribute to, the social imaginaries of the information
society, especially with respect to the themes of the potential of human
mastery and control of ICTs.
Research that is instrumental in orientation tends to focus on the ‘material’
components of ICT (the hardware or digital bits) and on mastery of techno-
logical and social systems. Critical research is more likely to be concerned
with both the material characteristics and the symbolic meaning of technol-
ogies and their applications, as well as with the diversity of the information
that they enable to be produced and consumed. The questions tend to be
SOCIAL IMAGINARIES OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
35

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
about the value of new developments to different interest groups within
society. In line with the prevailing social imaginary of the information society,
instrumental work mainly emphasizes the innovations in ICTs that support
the functions of communication, computation, coordination and control,
and memory and record keeping. Critical research is more likely to be
interested in the possibility of alternative innovation pathways, that is, in
the implications of technological innovation for meaning and identity con-
struction, social or cultural difference, a participatory society, and the well-
being of human beings.
It is not easy, as indicated above, to draw clear distinctions between these
research traditions. The instrumental concern with technological mastery is
evident, for example, in American political scientist and communication
scholar Harold Lasswell’s question about the ‘revolutionary ICT gadgets’ of
his time—‘How can we effectively master them so that they can contribute to
some result that’s worth getting?’23 Lasswell contributed to the analysis of
propaganda and communication during World War II, and was regarded as a
very inﬂuential social scientist. Despite its administrative orientation, his
work was inﬂuenced by concerns typical of those working in the critical
research tradition. He was interested, for instance, in the relationships be-
tween communication, the media, and people’s vulnerabilities to the way they
are used. As he puts it: ‘it is no news that knowledge is power, especially
knowledge that is promptly available and includes information about indivi-
duals and groups that lays open their vulnerabilities to blackmail or to tactics
of positive inducement’.24
These distinctions are present in the social sciences that examine various
aspects of the information society. In the administrative tradition, the Inter-
net, for example, has been regarded as either a progressive medium contribut-
ing to economic growth, providing platforms for advertisers and businesses,
or, alternatively, as an inclusive technology that favours democracy. It is more
likely to be seen by those working in the critical tradition as being complicit in
contributing to the maintenance of unequal power relationships. This is so
even when it is also acknowledged that technological innovations are creating
opportunities for political contestation, mobilization, and resistance to the
prevailing institutions of power.
For researchers in the critical tradition, ICTs have been regarded as
providing a basis for political contestation, but not without constraints
stemming from the structural features of their production and consumption.
Herbert Schiller, an American political economist, differentiated critical from
administrative perspectives by observing that the latter are preoccupied with
technology because of their belief that ‘most, if not all social and economic
problems either arise from or can be overcome by improved technique and
instrumentation, regardless of such institutional questions as ownership,
control, and social structure’.25 Analysis of issues of institutional structure,
36
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
and of power and its articulation in the material and symbolic realms,
differentiates work in the critical tradition from the instrumental tradition.
In the critical tradition, attention is drawn to the potential of innovations in
technologies to be associated with people’s empowerment and their disem-
powerment, depending on the extent to which they are able to master or
control the innovation process.26 Some of the keywords signalling differences
between these research traditions are shown in Table 3.1.
These distinctions are important because understanding the evolution of
the communication system and the social imaginaries of information society
varies with the analytical tradition that is emphasized. Research in the two
traditions differs, in part, because they respond to different questions and
embrace incommensurable premises. Thomas Kuhn, American historian and
philosopher of science, claims that competing theories arise from different
ways of seeing the world and that ‘novelty emerges only with difﬁculty,
manifested by resistance, and against a background provided by expectation’.27
Resistance to new ways of seeing, and expectations about continuities between
past and present, account for some of the differences in approaches. However,
incommensurability can stem from differences in the values that the techno-
logical innovation process is assumed to embrace. This is crucial also for
differentiating among the ways that these research traditions contribute to
social imaginaries of the information society.
Instrumental approaches advance the project of developing ever more
sophisticated technologies. They are concerned with the feasibility of efforts
to bring a particular, albeit changing, information society vision into reality
by engaging in a purposive innovation process. Alternatives have emerged but
the critical research tradition has not achieved the status of a transformation-
al paradigm that has repressed the dominant social imaginary of the infor-
mation society. Research in the critical tradition has succeeded, however,
Table 3.1. Administrative and Critical Research Traditions
Administrative research
Critical research
Instrumental
Reﬂexive
Transmission model
Ritual (symbolic) model
Information processing
Material and symbolic
Individual
Individual and collective
Control and mastery
Mediation
Pluralist
Unequal power relations
Finance—corporate and military
Resistance and vulnerability
Productivity and economic growth
Collaborative development
Modernization
Mobilization
Stability
Change
Source: Author.
SOCIAL IMAGINARIES OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
37

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
in provoking reﬂection on the ‘march’ towards the information society, and it
has contributed to an increasingly widely held repertory of practices embrac-
ing resistance to the market-led values of the predominant social imaginary.
Key features of the dominant social imaginary of the information society in
the post-World War II period are traced in the next section, followed by a
discussion of the alternatives.
Prevailing Information Society Imaginary
The designation of wealthy industrialized societies as information societies
started to become prominent after World War II. The immediate post-war
period saw signiﬁcant advances in the application of electronic information
systems to support the organization and control of information for military
and non-military purposes. Many of the key ideas were in circulation long
before this, however.28 For example, in the mid-ﬁfteenth century, the term
‘information’ was beginning to be used to refer to an instruction or ‘fact’. It was
in the late 1920s that a physicist, Leo´ Szlia´rd, who conceived of devices such as
the cyclotron and linear accelerator, invested ‘information’ with its ‘thing-like’
character, rendering it available for quantiﬁcation.29 By that time, information
was being used to describe a mathematically deﬁned quantity. Vannevar Bush,
an American engineer, who worked on early analogue computers and on
research that would lead ultimately to digital circuitry, proposed the memex
in 1945. This was an indexing device that could store different kinds of
information and communications, ultimately, as he imagined it, creating
associations between all kinds of stored information and inﬁnitely expanding
the capacity of available memory systems.30
This was not the ﬁrst such proposal; there had been numerous efforts in the
pre-war period to bring technology to bear to construct a society aligned with
a vision of a world in which information and control systems would augment
the human mind. For example, in 1934, a Belgian entrepreneur and informa-
tion scientist, Paul Otlet, had the ambition of using the library index card as a
means of organizing all the world’s information. He described a Mundaneum
comprised of some 15 million cards, referring to the device as a ‘mechanical
collective brain’,31 preﬁguring the vision of the Internet as facilitating new
forms of collective intelligence.32 Otlet’s sketches resemble the modern com-
puter and early conceptions of the relationship between mind and represen-
tations of the external world. Figure 3.1 is suggestive of how the features of
later information processing devices are preﬁgured by the features of earlier
devices.33 Figure 3.2 highlights the association between ‘intelligence’ and
information processing and the early idea that media representations of
38
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
reality might be automatically produced, substituting for human (subjective)
interpretation.
It was the work of mathematicians, engineers, and economists rather than
social scientists from other disciplines, and library scholars, such as Otlet,
however, that would become central in the social imaginary of the informa-
tion society. The research interests of the former groups attracted substantial
public and private funding aimed at developing improved means of mastery
over the control and processing of information.
After World War II, research in the ﬁeld of cybernetics became central to
the scientiﬁc community’s search for the development of improved systems
in which information feedback would lead to changes in a system and,
potentially, improved means of system control. Cybernetics was the label
given by Norbert Wiener to the study of the structure of regulatory or control
systems within closed system environments, in his book on Cybernetics: Or
Control and Communication in the Animal and Machine, published towards
the end of the 1940s.34 This research had applications in electronic networks
and in many other ﬁelds where control is an important feature and where the
goal is to regulate a system to achieve stability. Wiener, a mathematician at
MIT, characterizes this way of seeing the uses of information systems as
involving processes, ‘of our adjusting to the contingencies of the outer
environment and of our living effectively within that environment. . . . com-
munication and control belong to the essence of man’s inner life, even as they
Figure 3.1. Otlet’s ‘Web’
SOCIAL IMAGINARIES OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
39

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
belong to his life in society’.35 Research on control systems was regarded as
being about both the physical and biological worlds of human beings.
In 1949, a year after Wiener’s book on cybernetics, A Mathematical Theory
of Communication was published. This was a collaboration between Claude
Shannon, an electrical engineer and mathematician at MIT, who had worked
with Vannevar Bush, and Warren Weaver, a scientist and Director of Natural
Sciences at the Rockefeller Institute.36 Their aim was to develop new ap-
proaches to the automation of information systems. Their model of a sender
and receiver in an information and communication system was to become
hugely inﬂuential, and provided the foundation for technological innovations
that eventually led to Internet Age technologies. This model came to be the
preferred one and it was consistent with instrumentalist ambitions for tech-
nological progress. Researchers in the social sciences were also attracted by
simple, ‘elegant’, ways of theorizing communication systems developed by the
mathematicians, physicists, and engineers. The model came to be known as
the ‘stimulus-response model’ of communication. Despite being criticized for
The Book and the representation
of the world
Different methods of communicating 
with the world
Intelligence creates the book to 
represent the outside world
Direct sight/vision in nature (real objects)
A
Indirect vision in museums (samples, models)
Words (conversation)
Reading the book gives rise to new thought processes
and thus stimulates man’s creativity
The photograph automatically substitutes
intelligent interpretation and documents reality
B
C
D
Intelligence creates the book to
represent the outside world
Direct sight/vision in nature (real objects)
A
Indirect vision in museums (samples, models)
Words (conversation)
Reading the book gives rise to new thought processes
and thus stimulates man’s creativity
The photograph automatically substitutes
intelligent interpretation and documents real
B
C
D
Figure 3.2. Otlet’s Mundaneum Vision
40
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
its inapplicability to questions about the meaning of information, this model
retained its inﬂuence, informing the dominant social imaginary of the infor-
mation society in numerous ways.37
By the 1960s, ‘information age’ terminology was being used in the corpo-
rate world as well as by academics. Some sources attribute this label to
Richard Leghorn, whose work was in the ﬁelds of airborne and space (photo-
graphic) reconnaissance and, later, in the broadcast and cable industries.38 In
the social sciences, economists were attracted to the simplicity of mathemati-
cal depictions of information systems. They quite easily made the shift from
modelling electronic information transmission systems to examining the
impact on the economy of information ﬂows. For them, at least, it was only
a small step to the assumption that what was being modelled was knowledge.
The Nobel Prize winning economist, George Stigler, who received the award
for his work on the economics of information, wrote that ‘one should hardly
have to tell academicians that information is a valuable resource: Knowledge
is power’.39
By the end of the 1960s, the conﬂation of information with knowledge had
become commonplace. Notwithstanding the advances made by Stigler, how-
ever, the study of information was to occupy, for some time, what he called a
‘slum dwelling’ in the economics discipline. The study of information pre-
sented difﬁcult problems for economists. They struggled with the challenge of
modelling the immaterial characteristics of information (compared to the
modelling of material goods such as automobiles or lumber). Theoretical
work in economics faced challenges because information has some unusual
characteristics compared to other economic resources. The most obvious of
these are, ﬁrst, its non-rivalry (my use of your information does not reduce
your holding of it and, because of this, information is often shared), and,
second, its expansibility (once someone incurs the often substantial costs of
producing the ﬁrst copy of information, its unlimited reproduction incurs
much lower costs and, in the case of digital information, these costs are often
negligible).40 In the conventional economic analysis of markets, buyers and
sellers are assumed to perceive that a resource is relatively scarce. In the case of
information, with rapid changes in the way digital information can be
produced and copied, this condition of scarcity has become increasingly
difﬁcult to achieve, a development that challenges the foundation premises
of economic theory.
As attention focused increasingly in the early post-war years on the pro-
duction, circulation, and consumption of digital information in the wealthy
economies as a means of growth and employment, information-related re-
search began to proliferate in some branches of economics and in the man-
agement ﬁeld. Fritz Machlup and Peter Drucker in the United States and
Yoneji Masuda in Japan were among the early contributors.41 The questions
SOCIAL IMAGINARIES OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
41

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
they investigated were mainly consistent with the administrative tradition.
They focused either on measuring the speed of a shift towards greater
dependence of economies on information goods supported by the new
technologies for information processing and control, or on qualitative assess-
ment of the transformations in the organization of businesses and the struc-
ture of industry sectors, in both cases, focusing on the changes accompanying
disruptive technologies.
In the social imaginary of the information society that became dominant in
the twentieth century, all societies were expected to move through a series of
economic stages, from dependence on agricultural production for wealth
creation through an industrial revolution with an emphasis on manufacturing,
towards growing dependence on immaterial wealth creation, that is, on infor-
mation processing. This way of seeing the process of technological innovation
offers an account of the impact of technological change on society, a techno-
logically deterministic vision, captured in Marshall McLuhan’s vision of the
‘global village’.42 By the 1990s, this image of the information society had taken
hold in the popular imagination. Its strong emphasis on the materiality of
technology was depicted on a cover of a 1993 edition of Time magazine which
proﬁled the role of the information highway or infrastructure in bringing ‘a
revolution in entertainment, news and communication’.43 This media treat-
ment of technological innovation emphasized the impact of technology on
society. As suggested by Figure 3.3, developments in integrated circuits became
more and more closely associated with the ‘tree of knowledge’ that would
beneﬁt everyone in society.
In the MIT Media Lab around this time the talk was about ‘inventing the
future’ with digital technologies. The political classes picked up on this
message as the information society began to achieve greater prominence
in the social imaginary.44 US Vice-President Al Gore began to promote
the information highway in the United States and internationally, and
Martin Bangemann, the then European Commissioner for Industry and
Telecommunications, did the same in Europe. At around the same time,
Japan launched a programme of research on the advanced information
infrastructure.45 Academics were writing about ‘promise and peril in the
age of networked intelligence’,46 and many inﬂuential scholars were
providing analyses of progress towards an information society.47 For those
in the administrative tradition, the vision was one of progress towards the
ultimate goal of ‘perfect’ knowledge and of technologies that would help to
achieve it. In this view, progress towards this goal was only a matter of time
and it would be consistent with aspirations for the good society. Harnessing
technological progress in the service of economic growth became the central
feature of the dominant social imaginary of the information or ‘knowledge’
society.
42
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
FROM INFORMATION TO KNOWLEDGE SOCIETY
The conﬂation of information as data or digital bits, information as ‘fact’, and
information as useable knowledge is a feature of the epistemology of the
economics discipline. For this reason, the shift from debates about the
‘information’ to the ‘knowledge’ society was a slight one for many economists,
as well as for others working on instrumental questions about the evolution of
the communication system. For economists, there is an important association
between knowledge and productivity which ﬁts well with the scientists’ and
engineers’ interest in control systems. The relative intensity of the use of
capital and labour resources is understood to inﬂuence productivity. Over
the long term, capital is replaced, labour skills change, and economic gains are
expected from improvements in the knowledge base of the labour force. This
is an exogenous model of economic growth.
In this model, it is assumed that processes external to the operation of the
economic system generate technological progress. Thus, the long run rate of
Figure 3.3. Bringing on the Information Revolution
SOCIAL IMAGINARIES OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
43

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
growth is said to be determined exogenously because technological change, a
fundamental explanatory factor for labour productivity, is modelled as being
exogenous to the economic system. In the 1950s, Robert Solow developed this
insight further, emphasizing the importance of the rate of technological
progress or innovation.48 He argues that economic growth is accounted for
by disembodied technological change, that is, new ways of deploying capital
and labour (including organizational innovation) and new knowledge about
how to use capital and labour (productivity movements stemming from
knowledge improvements). These insights were translated into an emphasis
on the importance of investing in innovation and leading-edge technologies
such as ICTs.
In the wake of the exogenous model’s emphasis on growth and digital
information (knowledge), the labels ‘knowledge society’ and ‘knowledge-
based economy’ were used to describe developments based on the use of
ICTs for the acquisition, storage, and processing of information. In the
framework of the exogenous economics model, what this means for transfor-
mations in society differs little from what is imagined about such transforma-
tions in the ‘information society’.49 The emphasis is on analysing the stock of
knowledge and the speed of diffusion of the new technologies. An important
implication of an emphasis on knowledge is the assumption that an increase
in the relative importance of knowledge inputs in the production process
implies a changing basis for the competitive success of companies and the
need for substantial adjustments to their business strategies and practices.
Knowledge comes to be seen as an essential feature of organizations that exist
to coordinate the actions of individuals and to maintain some degree of
continuity in their collective purposes. As a result, knowledge is embodied
in individuals and allows them to earn a return on knowledge investments,
giving rise to the idea of human capital and its accumulation (or lack thereof).
Human capital came to be seen as a key factor inﬂuencing wage and employ-
ment opportunities. It is a key factor in whether people are included in or
excluded from the imagined beneﬁts of the information society.
The work of those specializing in the organizational adjustments that seem
to be needed to accommodate features of the new technologies has comple-
mented the work of economists. The term, knowledge work, was used by
management consultant and scholar, Peter Drucker, in his examination of the
organizational changes needed to stimulate creativity and efﬁciency in the
workplace when the product is intangible information.50 When the term
‘knowledge economy’ entered the popular lexicon in the late 1960s, it did
so, not as a scholarly concept, but as a journalistic reference in the Saturday
Review magazine. From the 1970s, organizations with a considerable inﬂu-
ence on the social imaginaries of policy makers, such as the OECD and the
World Bank, consistently promoted the idea that ‘knowledge is power’ and
that investment in the communication system is required to drive wealth
44
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
creation in the knowledge-based economy.51 By the start of the twenty-ﬁrst
century, information society had come to describe societies whose populations
were said to aspire towards the wide-scale appropriation of digital ICTs and
information to support all aspects of their lives. And the label knowledge
economy was associated with the privileged role of commercial activity in the
marketplace which would give rise to the economic growth of a modern
information society and to a wide range of expected social, cultural, and
political beneﬁts, consistent with values of the good society.
SPECULATIVE FUTURES
What was understood by ‘knowledge’ is unclear in most of this literature and
it varies depending on the instrumental purposes of research and with the
focus of policy debates on the development of the information or knowledge
society. In the literature, the word ‘knowledge’ typically occurs as a singular
noun and, as in the case of information, is used in a way that suggests that it is
a ‘thing’ that can be measured.52 The Oxford English Dictionary notes the
plural usage of ‘knowledges’, referring to ‘a branch of learning; a science; an
art’ which it traces to the late sixteenth century. Thus, it seems that historically
a conception of multiple knowledges and meanings was prevalent, but with
the ascendency of the information processing model and its contribution to
the prevailing social imaginary of the information society, treating knowledge
as synonymous with information or ‘fact’ became commonplace. The univer-
sality of meaning associated with knowledge became ﬁrmly embedded in the
social imaginary of the information society. This would have major implica-
tions for the representations of people and their values in the information
society because it would help to conﬁrm the idea of a hierarchy of universal or
factual knowledge about how to organize and govern.
The absence of consistency in the terminology in use has contributed to the
speculation about the trajectory of information society development, with
many vague and conﬂicting claims being made about the impact of digital
data, information, or knowledge. The enthusiastic take-up of online social
media, from an instrumental perspective, for example, might suggest that
society has powerful platforms for bringing together the people, skills, and
knowledge (facts) needed to tackle many of the world’s problems.53 However,
these speculations do not take account of the problems of inequality and
exclusion in the everyday world, nor do they explain how the mere existence
of these powerful platforms might resolve them. Assumptions are made
frequently also about the spread of digital ICTs and changes in people’s
cognitive abilities, with suggestions, for instance, that ‘the linear mind is
being pushed aside’.54 However, discussion about the possibilities for inter-
ventions to avert this displacement or to beneﬁt from it, are relatively rare.
SOCIAL IMAGINARIES OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
45

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The technological enthusiast model presumes that people are buffeted by
exogenous technology shocks and inevitably must adjust to the technological
system. In this perspective, it is assumed that the innovation process is
yielding technologies that are ‘ﬁt for purpose’, that is, they are consistent
with human well-being and the good society.
Pessimism about the outcomes of the interpenetration of these technologies
with human experience is similarly affected by speculation. The cynics lament
the relatively small amount of attention being given to the way technologies are
implicated in people’s lives, and the strong emphasis on the ‘impact’ of
technology on the information society and on our post-human lives. When it
is claimed, for example, that time spent online is reshaping our brains, and
leading to stress and effects on memory,55 in the instrumental tradition the
questions tend to be principally about cause and effect. The focus is on whether
online activity is causing changes in cognitive ability or whether differences in
cognitive abilities are resulting in new patterns of online activity. It is not
usually on whether these ‘impacts’ of technology are consistent with well-
being as is more likely in critical research.
From an exogenous theoretical perspective on the role of technological
innovation, the challenge for technologists is to build a better communication
system for the good society. The good society here, however, is conceived as
one in which individual freedom of choice is the most highly privileged value,
and this downplays the importance of collective values and goals. The con-
struction of a communication system, based on digital platforms and modu-
lar hardware and software components, is understood to produce shocks that,
as discussed earlier, disrupt the structure and organization of production in
the ICT industry. This disruption, in turn, is expected to give rise to changes
in the way people interact with each other using ICT applications. Questions
about the nature of online interactions then become the principal focus of
research. For example, how many friends do people have on Facebook? Which
new Apps are favoured in the market? How long to the next technology that
will embellish the affective experience of networking, such as 3D television?
These are the orientations typical of instrumental research that focuses on the
‘impact’ of technology, on ‘shocks’ to the social or economic system, and on
the need to adjust to these shocks to sustain economic growth and prevailing
cultural, social, and political practices.
With the diffusion of multiple means to construct virtual worlds using digital
devices and networks, however, and some sixty years after the information
processing model became central to the social imaginary of the information
society, confusion about how to adjust to the communication system in
terms of social, cultural, political, and economic norms is undiminished.
This is because the digital features of the communication system that has
been built creates the conditions for the genesis of the paradoxes of information
scarcity and system complexity that are central to the evolution of the
46
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
information society. Some of the companies with a strong interest in creating
the market and the institutional conditions necessary to maintain the percep-
tion that information is relatively scarce are experiencing stress in the form of
declining revenues. However, the problems for the economy created by infor-
mation abundance are either ignored, or treated as a ‘problem’ variable,
in studies focusing mainly on the relationship between the pace and direction
of technological innovation and the prospects for economic growth and
opportunity.
The social imaginaries of engineers and mathematicians in the post-war
period that gave rise to cybernetic theory, persist as witnessed in the search for
continuous improvements in digital information systems through miniaturi-
zation, modularization, and the greater capacity and reach of networks. The
information society imaginary is associated with the challenges involved in
constructing a communication system enabling all digital bit streams to be
carried within the same transmission system. At the heart of this repertory of
images is a vision of ICT convergence. For example, in the 1950s, John Pierce,
an engineer associated with Bell Labs, saw that television transmission would
be combined with telephony, that mobile phones would ﬁt in a pocket, and
that machine-to-machine communication would become fully automated.
His vision of electronic information systems involves, ‘not only the transmis-
sion of digital information, but the use of elaborate computing machinery to
sort data, to collate it, to make computations concerning it’,56 that is, to use
technology to do things more cheaply and effectively. In this context, com-
munication problems are abstract, and the theory of communication is based
on the assumption that ‘a bit’ is a universal measure of an amount of
information. In the twenty-ﬁrst century, little has changed insofar as it is bit
streams that preoccupy company strategists and policy makers who focus on
ICT convergence and on broadband speeds for information transmission,
consistent with a mathematical theory of the best way of encoding informa-
tion to reduce uncertainty.
This theory of communication has never been concerned with the meaning
of information in the interpretative sense. Pierce argues that the suggestion
that a theory of communication should be concerned with matters such as
meaning is absurd because, for him, the crucial issue is to understand noise,
entropy, and uncertainty and their reduction. However, many engineers and
mathematicians have had the ambition to devise a machine that would use
language in a meaningful way. The popular press was inspired by the quest for
a machine that could ‘think’. Computer scientists debated then and, in the
computer science discipline continue to do so, whether the Turing test
conditions will be met.57 The ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence has ﬂourished
and has contributed to the social imaginary of the information society
which embraces a vision of the ultimate convergence of digital technologies.
SOCIAL IMAGINARIES OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
47

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
This is seen as a crucial step in the direction of enabling the extension of
virtual worlds into all aspects of people’s everyday lives.
THE CONVERGENCE VISION
Technological convergence is the label applied to the fruits of the engineering
and mathematical vision of the communication system as a system with
increasing capacities to process and store digital bits of information. Ever-
higher capacity networks capable of transmitting bit streams of digitally
encoded information mean that voice, data, and image signals are integrated
or converged. During the 1980s there was speculation in the industry trade
press and by Nicholas Negroponte at MIT and John Scully at Apple Compu-
ters among others, about whether ICT convergence might lead to the disap-
pearance of existing companies and to the emergence of new ones with
strengths in the converged segments of the industry. These imaginaries
spawned research on industry convergence, the development of converged
digital platforms, and on the pace of innovation required of ICT hardware
and software companies to retain leadership in the market.58 Figure 3.4
includes some older and newer components of the converged digital commu-
nication system that constitutes the core of the social imaginaries of the
information society.59
Technological convergence is associated with a vision of a ‘new frontier’
where ‘virtual community’ members have the opportunity to exercise their
freedoms. For enthusiasts such as Howard Rheingold, the American author of
Virtual Communities: Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier, ICT conver-
gence is associated with a transition to the digital age in which the prospect
for computers to serve as mind-ampliﬁers becomes possible, and newly
constituted communities have the potential to become ‘smart mobs’.60 In
Figure 3.4. Old and New Components of Converged ICTs
48
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
these accounts of convergence, virtual communities wrest control of the
communication system from traditional companies and the declining costs
of digital technologies lead to radical changes in ICT markets and in society.
The changes in ICT markets due to convergence are seen as signs of
adjustments to technological innovation. Many parts of the sector, such as
the telecommunication infrastructure, historically were high ﬁxed-cost
industries. This made them subject to monopolistic tendencies which had
the effect of suppressing competition in the marketplace. In the instrumental
tradition, research normally focuses on market performance indicated by
various metrics of proﬁt and shareholder value. It focuses also on disputes
over how the ‘relevant market’ should be deﬁned for the purpose of deciding
about the fairness of competitive strategies devised by companies in the
market.61 Market power is often examined by modelling the ability of com-
panies to attract data trafﬁc to their digital platforms in the competitive
market.62 Microsoft Windows is an example of a multi-sided platform
providing services to applications developers, hardware manufacturers, and
end-users. Apple’s iPod, in contrast, is integrated vertically so that Apple
produces hardware, software, and content either itself or through approved
third parties. Research on these developments is mainly concerned with
markets rather than their wider consequences, except with respect to the
variety and cost of products reaching the market.
The door is open, therefore, to claims about the ‘impact’ of convergence,
such as the idea that convergent ICTs ﬂatten market hierarchies, that informa-
tion is abundant and there is no need for market regulation, or that all users
become content producers. These kinds of impacts are assumed to be consis-
tent with the values of the good society, and the public interest is assumed to
be synonymous with market outcomes, whatever they may be. However, there
are of course critical perspectives which embrace substantially different ways of
seeing the process of convergence. These incorporate a broader range of factors
that contribute to the convergence process by relaxing many of the assump-
tions of the exogenous models. These factors become ‘endogenous’ within the
models that guide research on the information society.63
Alternative Information Society Imaginaries
It is important to stress that information and communication have always
played a key role in societal organization. The technologies of information
and communication did not materialize for the ﬁrst time in the post-war
period, but the move from mechanical to electronic technologies was widely
understood as involving major consequences for all aspects of the social,
SOCIAL IMAGINARIES OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
49

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
political, and economic order of society. Historical studies conﬁrm that
all societies can be designated information societies because of their depen-
dence, in some or other fashion, on information and on the communication
process.64 Fernand Braudel, Richard Duboff, Harold A. Innis, and Armand
Mattelart all emphasize how each generation of ICTs comes to be associated
with changes in the organization of political control, economic power, and
cultural development.65
Harold Innis argues that ‘civilisation has been profoundly inﬂuenced by
communication’. He focused on the technologies of communication that have
been associated with those inﬂuences, comparing these developments with
societies where oral traditions (without the use of the mass media) were
predominant, concluding that ‘oral discussion inherently involves personal
contact and a consideration for the feelings of others’.66 His work has been
widely criticized for its technological determinism, but there were many
others who, like Fernand Braudel, also emphasized the idea that changes in
technologies are often associated with crises—real or imagined—for the
societies that are affected by their development. He describes the innovation
process as one in which ‘the past appears as the result of an accumulation of
accidents, breakdowns and distortions’.67 This view is apparent in the domi-
nant repertory of images of the information society in which technological
innovations are regarded as accidental outcomes or shocks that disrupt
society and to which society must adjust. As noted previously, the theme of
adjustment to the exigencies of the technological system is a persistent one—
especially in the case of the spread of digital ICTs.
However, for some researchers working in the critical tradition it is impor-
tant to be sensitive to the ambiguous implications of the technological
innovation process. Manuel Castells, for example, emphasizes that the com-
bination of larger quantities of information circulating at ever-greater
speeds inﬂuences the way we see and experience our lives: ‘we are networks
connected to a world of networks’.68 Efforts to understand the ambiguities
of mind and behaviour in the information society take us into the domain
where the questions are more likely to be about how ‘reality’ is experienced,
whether this is to be welcomed, and whether a social order organized around
the new technologies is likely to be both wealth generating and inclusive,
equitable, and just.
From the perspective of instrumental research and exogenous theories,
there is a consensus, often unacknowledged, that technological change is a
shock to the societal system, as discussed above. Reasons for departures from
this way of seeing include dissatisfaction with the simplistic assumptions of the
exogenous approach which do not explain why rapid changes in the techno-
logical or social system occur. In the exogenous tradition, there is sometimes
consideration of how the rate of technical progress is being inﬂuenced by
exploiting the unprecedented technological opportunity provided by the
50
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
miniaturization and modularization of microelectronics technologies. As
Adam Osborne says, if aviation technology had advanced at the rate of
microelectronics, today’s aeroplanes would carry 500,000 passengers, and
travel at 20 million miles per hour, for a ticket price of a few pence.69 This is
an example of exogeneity and technological determinism in which the tech-
nological opportunity is stumbled upon and generates unprecedented change.
It provides no insight, however, into the way human decisions are involved, or
into the ways in which the fruits of technical progress are coordinated,
accommodated, or resisted, especially when they become pervasive across
the economy and society.70 Endogenous theories and models, in contrast,
treat the origins and consequences of these changes as part of a system
which requires explanation.
Dissatisfaction with exogenous approaches may be motivated also by a
different social imaginary of the role of technology in the good society. In this
case, it might be assumed that individualism, consumerism, political liberal-
ism, and democracy (in contrast to various fundamentalisms and dictator-
ships) are the principal values that should be promoted, and/or that a
collective interest in social justice and equality should be valued as much as,
or more highly than, market values. Relations of power, which are understood
to encompass more than the calculus of ‘market power’ as in the exogenous
approach, then become a focus for research aimed at developing endogenous
perspectives.
Endogenous theories explain phenomena such as the dynamics and con-
sequences of the innovation process, through reference to internal causes or
origins (in contrast to theories that explain by referring to external shocks).71
The term ‘endogenous theory’ evokes the idea that change proceeds from
within a system with all its complexity. The concept of an endogenous cause is
common to the analytical models employed in the physical and the social
sciences. Initially, I consider endogenous accounts of the dynamics of change
in the information society that are provided by some economics models
which focus on a wider range of factors than is typical of the exogenous
models discussed above. These accounts are more amenable to a critical
analysis of information society developments because they offer greater op-
portunity to explore the power relationships that are implicated in the
evolutionary process and, therefore, provide a basis for beginning to under-
stand how the paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity are gener-
ated, and their implications.72
ENDOGENOUS ECONOMICS OF THE KNOWLEDGE ECONOMY
The exogenous model of the economy treats the rate of technological progress
as an unexplained residual factor. In the economics discipline, endogenous
SOCIAL IMAGINARIES OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
51

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
growth theory was developed in an effort to provide greater insight into how
the residual—often assumed to be technological innovation—is associated
with changes in the economy.73 The endogenous economic approach inherits
some of the blind spots of its exogenous counterpart, for instance, detouring
around the ownership of endowments such as land, and sharing a focus on
instrumental ends such as economic growth or the improved management of
organizations.74 However, unlike the exogenous approach, in this model,
institutions are permitted to inﬂuence the long-run rate of economic growth.
It has more to say about the medium-term consequences of policies that may
raise the level of investment in technology-related research and development
or in education to strengthen human capital.75
The proliferation of cheaper and more powerful ICTs, and signs since the
1980s of their destabilizing shocks to the wealthy economies of the world,
led work in this area to focus particularly on the relationships between
technological innovation and knowledge production, as a key feature of the
innovation process. Knowledge-based activities are understood to ‘emerge
when people, supported by information and communication technologies,
interact in concerted efforts to co-produce (i.e. create and exchange) new
knowledge’.76 The emphasis is on accelerating the speed of knowledge creation
and accumulation, and on its economic relevance and value.
As indicated earlier, economists usually do not differentiate between
knowledge and information. A principal ambition of their work is to measure
stocks and ﬂows of ‘knowledge’ within the economic system. This approach is
inﬂuential in policy debates on the causes and consequences of the knowledge
economy. It is consistent also with the administrative research tradition where
the outcomes of investment in knowledge production and consumption are
assumed to lead to increased social welfare, that is, progress towards the good
society. The endogenous approach goes some way towards dealing with
economists’ restrictive assumptions about the pre-deﬁned nature of individ-
ual preferences. Since modelling efforts have been unable to yield insights into
changes in the economy associated with growing dependence on digital
information, other approaches have been sought in which the conventional
assumptions about isolated individuals have been relaxed. This has enabled
economists to consider the implications of social interactions for the coordi-
nation of the economic system, and how preferences may change to reﬂect
experience.77 However, the absence of constructs allowing for a differentiation
between information and knowledge means that further experiential aspects
of knowledge—that is, meaning—are excluded from consideration. Work in
this tradition, therefore, offers a relatively limited vision of the way the
economic system functions when the key resource is information. This
limitation is acknowledged by economists when they attend to the relation-
ship between what are referred to in the literature as codiﬁed information and
tacit knowledge, concepts which are helpful in providing a more nuanced
52
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
account of the contested social imaginaries of the information society, an
approach which helps to open up the ‘black box’ of technology.78
As a concept originating outside the framework of economic theory’s
designation of knowledge, tacit knowledge embraces the observation that
‘we can know more than we can tell’,79 that is, knowledge encompasses
intuitive, sensory, and other non-explicit aspects. Economists borrowed this
designation of knowledge to understand scientiﬁc knowledge (characterized
by explanatory theory) and technological knowledge (characterized by prag-
matic applicability), both of which are codiﬁable, and a tacit component of
knowledge related to being able to predict that certain techniques, methods,
or designs will behave in certain ways when guided by explanatory theory.
Tacit knowledge is associated with subjective, experiential learning, or craft
knowledge, and with cognitive skills related to beliefs, images, perspectives,
and mental models. Codiﬁcation refers to means of expressing knowledge
that can be processed as information. Codiﬁcation is seen as a desirable goal
because of the economic properties of information, that is, its low costs of
reproduction. One codiﬁes to ‘economize’ on the more expensive activity of
exchanging tacit knowledge, which is more labour intensive and cannot
beneﬁt from the low marginal costs of reproduction enabled by ICTs. There
are circumstances, however, where investment in codiﬁcation is not deemed
worthwhile, for example, where knowledge is changing rapidly or is highly
situated.
The extent to which the conversion of tacit knowledge to codiﬁed infor-
mation is expected to occur is related to the degree of tacitness that is assigned
to language. Because the acquisition of knowledge cannot be codiﬁed, lan-
guage can be seen as irreducible tacit knowledge. All language learning is
based on the initial acquisition of language through one of the most subtle
and mysterious processes in human experience. Proponents of artiﬁcial
intelligence envisage intelligent machines in the future, but these efforts
founder on the inability to codify language acquisition and language produc-
tion, although there are major advances in codifying language expression.
Some tacit knowledge is needed to ‘decode’ information and advances in
digital ICTs are providing new means of producing digital ‘facsimiles’ and
expanding the scope of the information that can be codiﬁed.80 Codiﬁcation
involves cognitive processes for using symbolic information, that is, heuristics
(or tacitly agreed rules). As technologies such as the Web, spreadsheets, and
computer-supported collaborative tools are applied, the need for such rules
increases in order to manage problems of information congestion and ﬁlter-
ing. Some palliative approaches include ways to ﬁlter information, including
documentation about its location, provenance, ownership, and other features
by tagging. These developments create incentives for companies to invest in
technologies that provide better tools for managing the circulation of increas-
ing quantities of information. Advances in ICTs, consistent with the vision of
SOCIAL IMAGINARIES OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
53

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
intelligent machines that augment the human mind (the machines of loving
grace) will have to tackle that which cannot be evoked in the imagination
through the use of language, accompanied by visual imagery and machine-
controlled bio-feedback (e.g. a Wii or Kinect game controller).81
The contribution to the social imaginary of the information society of
discussions about tacit knowledge and codiﬁable information is a vision of a
cycle of innovation leading to increasing possibilities for reliance on auto-
mated information systems, with the prospect of productivity gains in the
economy. The economics literature on codiﬁcation is sometimes misread as
promoting codiﬁcation, but its principal emphasis is on the most desirable
balance between investment in codiﬁed information and in tacit knowledge.
A desirable goal might be, for example, a ‘post-literate’ world in which
inscription (coding) methods, such as electronic blueprints, ﬂight simulators,
virtual experiments, or interactive hypertexts and images, become increasing-
ly important. Questions about whether the knowledge needed to engage in
coding and decoding algorithms should be the privileged knowledge of the
communities that create them, resulting in the exclusion of those who do not
have or cannot acquire this knowledge are rarely asked because this tradition
does not focus on power asymmetries.82 A key contribution to the social
imaginaries of the information society is insistence on distinguishing between
information and knowledge and criticism of the proponents of automated
information processing who assume that ultimately it is machines that will
make all decisions, rather than human beings.83 In contrast to some of the
visionaries discussed in Chapter 2, it is acknowledged that the application of
knowledge is a complex, partly tacit, process. Research on these issues is
undertaken at the micro-level of analysis.
Other economists examine the macro-level changes associated with innova-
tions in the communication system employing endogenous perspectives.
Although they tend to ascribe changes in society to the impact of revolutionary
developments in General Purpose Technologies (GPTs), including ICTs, their
insights help to draw attention to discontinuities in the institutional (social,
political, and economic) environment that are associated with the diffusion of
digital technologies.84 For instance, the work of Chris Freeman and Carlota
Perez, and others researching in this area, has sought to incorporate the
analysis of technical and institutional change into the mainstream of economic
analysis ‘rather than treating it as part of a rag-bag of “residual” or “exoge-
nous” factors’.85 Their examinations of changes in techno-economic para-
digms suggest that some types of technical change have:
such widespread consequences for all sectors of the economy that their diffusion is
accompanied by a major structural crisis of adjustment, in which social and institu-
tional changes are necessary to bring about a better ‘match’ between the new technol-
ogy and the system of social management of the economy.86
54
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
This work contributes to a social imaginary of disruptive or revolutionary
ICTs in the information society that is sometimes depicted as an exogenous
approach. However, in studies of techno-economic paradigms, greater atten-
tion is given to the justiﬁcations for policy makers to intervene in areas of
social and economic organization that go far beyond interventions aimed
mainly at speeding up the rate of innovation in ICTs or of increasing stocks of
knowledge. This is because as ICTs diffuse widely, they are seen as being
accompanied by new types of organization, skills, product mixes, and patterns
of investment. Innovations in ICTs are seen as radical or revolutionary
because they signiﬁcantly reduce the cost of storing, processing, communi-
cating, and disseminating information, as we have already seen. But the
idea of paradigm change also encourages studies of the patterns of behaviour
that give rise to new organizational practices as managers of companies and
other institutions seek to adapt to the diffusion of the new technologies and,
in some case, to resist these changes.87 Research shows that there are two main
phases in the shift to an ICT paradigm involving the installation of a new
infrastructure, followed by its deployment throughout the economy.88 The
length of time between these phases is not without problems, the most
signiﬁcant being that there is likely to be a worsening in income distribution
during the process of adjustment. Whether or not this is reversed is regarded
as a matter for policy and whether there should be intervention in the market-
led innovation process.
Overall, while there is a concern in this tradition with the broader con-
sequences of ICT innovation, it tends to be presumed that, eventually, a
beneﬁcial match between technology and the social order will emerge. The
technological trajectory, once it is established, is unquestioned in terms of its
wider implications for power relationships in society. Speciﬁc ICT applica-
tions may raise issues for policy, for example, intrusions into people’s lives as
a result of automated surveillance systems with implications for civil rights,
but these are outside the concern of the endogenous model of techno-
economic change. Research in this tradition is inﬂuential in many national
and international policy settings when the focus is on the possible need for
intervention to bring stability to the economic system or to reduce the
negative impacts of the new paradigm on people’s lives.
POWER IN THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
The economics accounts of changes in the ICT techno-economic paradigm
generally lack explicit analysis of power relationships. The way the innovation
process is implicated in the maintenance of power asymmetries in society is
beyond the scope of the models except with respect to analysis of the anti-
competitive practices of companies when issues of ‘market power’ are examined
SOCIAL IMAGINARIES OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
55

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
with a view to possible policy intervention to restrain unfair competition in
the marketplace. In contrast, in the political economy tradition research
focuses explicitly on power relationships and on the unequal distribution of
society’s resources, asking questions about how these relations are constituted
through the production, distribution, and consumption of ICTs and informa-
tion resources.89 Political economy research focuses on distributional issues and
on actors’ ‘inducements for acting in a particular way’,90 motivated usually by
their economic interests or by their interests in the accumulation of political
power. An interest in inducements for the production of ICTs and for their
consumption, including their symbolic content, leads to questions about how
innovation is inﬂuenced by the dynamics of capitalism and how changes
in technologies and in social organization are legitimized or resisted through
social dissent and struggle.91 Research often focuses on the organization and
structure of markets and on the ownership and the control of information and
technologies.92
There is another tradition of work that is located in sociological studies and
which is similarly critical of the dominant information society imaginary with
its emphasis on information processing. This work is often found in studies of
the proliferation of collaborating online communities and is associated with the
open source software movement. I discuss the political economy tradition ﬁrst,
and then highlight some of the features of work on collaborating communities,
emphasizing how they are implicated in the alternative social imaginary.
In the political economy tradition, in contrast to the instrumental tradi-
tion, the ‘natural’ coupling of technological innovation with the values of the
good society is likely to challenged.93 A critical perspective provokes enquiry
into the interests of companies in developing markets and into potential
alternatives to the dominant social imaginary of the information society.
The analysis of economic interests revealed by research in this tradition has
been criticized for its persistent, sometimes Marxist, focus on the exploitation
of people’s labour power, which in some cases does not appear to leave much
scope for the observable and, at times, empowering ways in which people do
appear to avoid exploitation by capitalist owners of the means of production.
As Nicholas Garnham insists, however, relations of power under capitalism
provide scope, under certain conditions, for alternatives to such exploitative
arrangements to emerge, resulting from resistance on the part of citizens or, in
some cases, as a result of policy intervention. As he puts it, there is ‘no
necessary coincidence between the effects of the capitalist process proper
and the ideological needs of the dominant class’.94
In this tradition, the mere manifestation of competition among companies
engaged in marketing ICTs or digital information in the marketplace is not
seen as sufﬁcient evidence of a weakening of the interests of companies in
their capacity to manage consumer demand. This is because here ‘monopoli-
zation refers not to monopoly as such, but to the activities of ﬁrms (usually
56
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
dominant ones) who are seeking to build up, or maintain, a position of
market power’.95 Monopolization refers to a dynamic, ongoing process of
change in the wake of technological innovation and changing conditions in
the marketplace. Market power, then, is associated with pricing strategies that
enable companies to entrench their positions in the market in the face of
destabilizing technological change. Incumbent enterprises have incentives to
monopolize the market, for instance, by controlling the choke points to
information, that is, the gateways in the communication system.96
One way to achieve this is to by ﬁnding ways to ensure that information is
artiﬁcially rendered scarce so that this scarcity can be alleviated by monetizing
its production and consumption. In the dominant social imaginary of the
information society, it is assumed that whatever technologies and applica-
tions emerge from the competitive struggle, they are ‘ﬁt for purpose’, that
is, they are the best available to respond to the problem of information
scarcity. However, this has no necessary bearing on whether the innovations
in technology are consistent with the public interest in a fair distribution of
economic resources. Throughout the history of innovation in the communi-
cation system, there have been contests over market supremacy among
incumbent and new entrant companies, with varying consequences for the
users of technology.97 Arguments about whether technological diversity
should be welcomed, to provide choice for users or to acknowledge diverse
social or cultural values, are continuous throughout the process of techno-
logical innovation, but it is the struggle for market dominance, manifest, for
example, in battles between Microsoft and Google, Oracle and SAP,98 and
others, which attract attention.
In the computing industry, the Web browser produced by Netscape was
overtaken by Microsoft’s Internet Explorer and there are many examples in
the telecommunication and broadcasting industries of competitive battles
that have edged technologies (using speciﬁc standards) out of the market.99
Whether the corporate winner’s technology is perceived as the ‘best’ from the
perspective of users is complicated by factors such as the value of using the
same technology at home and at work, sharing experience of use with others,
and the availability of instructional and training materials. All of these are
reﬂections of an endogenous process whereby a technology succeeds in
winning market share. In the case of Internet browsers, standards co-evolve
with the standards for website creation. A current dominant browser may be
functionally superior because website designers cater to the browser with the
most users. The dominant browser suppliers have an incentive to add new
features in order to improve the users’ experience, which also raises the costs
and barriers to entry for rivals, thereby helping to assure the formers’
continued dominance.
Whatever the outcomes of these battles, questions need to be asked about
how the public interest is affected and whether the practices of these
SOCIAL IMAGINARIES OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
57

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
companies are consistent with empowering people or whether they are
exploiting them, with or without their consent. When research focuses on
power relationships and inequality, ICT platforms can be seen as creating
opportunities to expand the commodity form of immaterial labour, that is, to
develop what some have labelled ‘immaterial labour 2.0’.100 Dallas W. Smythe,
a political economist who studied the economic features of the communica-
tion system, examined the ‘audience commodity’ at the time when the mass
media were predominant. He argues that ‘readers and audience members of
advertising-supported mass media are a commodity produced and sold to
advertisers because they perform a valuable service for the advertisers’.101
Similarly, whether they contribute their work to online activities on Face-
book, or sell their labour using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk and other online
sites that ‘crowdsource’ workers, ‘audiences’ in the Internet Age serve the
interests of the capitalist economy through their online labour.
In the Internet Age, people are being encouraged, and sometimes required,
to take responsibility for their well-being by working on an unpaid basis, or
for low wages, at multiple, globally dispersed online sites on the Internet. In
effect, the owners of Facebook and other websites are building their revenues
around online participants who are willing to co-produce the service using
self-service tools.102 Self-servicing is a concept that predates the Internet, but
which is linked closely to the increasing signiﬁcance of services and digital
information compared to material goods in the economy. The expansion of
self-servicing activity with the shift to the ICT techno-economic paradigm is
not only associated with the empowering possibilities of choice in the pre-
vailing social imaginary of the information society but it is also associated
with the enhanced capacity of companies to ﬁnd new ways to exploit the
labour power of online participants.
The growing capacity of online site owners to exploit the untapped labour
power of site visitors is a development which is concealed by the emphasis in
the dominant social imaginary on the opportunities to develop new online
communities for entertainment or social, rather than for commercial, pur-
poses. Research in the political economy tradition reveals the unequal social
and economic conditions under which labour is offered and their conse-
quences for equality and social justice in the information society. If workers’
labour power is exploited in online forums, in time, we can expect discontent
and active protest against or resistance to the prevailing social imaginary and
these practices. In the instrumental research tradition, it is assumed that the
winners in the competitive battles among websites simply are more ﬁt-for-
purpose and the changes in labour practices are seen as being indicative of a
long-run, unalterable trajectory of change. However, the winner may not serve
the public interest and the progressive development of online forums for virtual
‘work’ (whether in the guise of work or leisure activity) is not always being
organized in a way that is consistent with values of the good society.
58
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
In endogenous models of the information society, especially in the critical
tradition which draws on sociological theories, ICT convergence is sometimes
understood to be empowering for individuals because of choices that have
been made for the conﬁguration of technology. Research in this tradition is
critical of the prevailing market-led, neoliberal model of the information
society, but it is not always explicit about the power relationships that are
responsible for individual empowerment. This is partly because much re-
search which has helped to build an alternative social imaginary of the
information society has been conducted outside the social sciences, in some
cases, by scholars in the legal profession who have little training in the way
power can be theorized. As such, the perspectives developed in this area can
appear to be as technology determinist as their counterpart exogenous models
which treat technological innovation as a shock to the social system.
The difference is that in this case, governance arrangements for the man-
agement of intellectual property rights in information and collaborative
decision-making procedures are seen as creating a space for individual
empowerment within online communities of various kinds. Empirical re-
search is normally conducted at the micro-level of analysis, focusing on
communities of practice, especially communities involved in the development
of software, but increasingly also of communities involving political activists
or consumers. In this research, the persistence of structural asymmetries on
the supply and the demand sides of the market for digital information and
ICTs is downplayed. The picture presented is often one of relatively homoge-
neous communities of empowered information producers and consumers
(‘prosumers’) who engage enthusiastically in blogging, text messaging, social
networking, or gaming.
Proponents of this view envisage a pluralist, open information commons.
The Internet is seen as providing the tools to enable everyone to access digital
platforms, allowing all to participate in society. Thus, in this case, ICT
convergence is assumed to be consistent with the values of equality and
democracy. It is claimed, for example, that the Internet is transformational
because the architectural design of a peer-to-peer (P2P) network favours
cooperation and the ‘wisdom of crowds’.103 This vision is characteristic of
research on the development of open source software (OSS), for example. In
OSS, developers can modify and share software code, in contrast to proprie-
tary software where access is restricted. Software development relies on the
activities of distributed participants who work mainly online. Although the
code is subject to copyright from the moment it is written, the developer
may decide to licence it under provisions including GNU General Public
Licenses104 and licences provided under the Creative Commons initiative.105
F/LOSS (Free/Libre) is software that is ‘free to edit’ without incurring the
threat of restraint accompanying traditional forms of intellectual property
SOCIAL IMAGINARIES OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
59

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
ownership. A variety of licences has been developed without restrictions that
prevent the legal distribution of the software over the Internet.
In place of the values of the commercial market, OSS and other forms of
online social networking are associated with the values of a gift culture and
commons-based peer production.106 In commons-based peer production, al-
though there may be power struggles over the values that best facilitate online
activity, the status and roles of contributors, and the way collaborative values are
translated into the ‘real’ world of experience, there is an emphasis on non-market
values because the gift culture is said to embrace altruism and reciprocity. So far,
there is little evidence that commons-based peer production will supplant
market exchange as the predominant means of exchanging digital information,
despite estimates that more than a ﬁfth of global Internet trafﬁc involves
copyright-infringing downloading of digital content.107
Open source social media platforms are being used to support contests over
power among members of civil society, the corporate world, and the state,108
but these platforms (as well as proprietary ones) are also in use by companies
and the state for surveillance. In practice, democracy does not follow automat-
ically from the values associated with new technical arrangements for online
information production and sharing. However, supporters of OSS and com-
mons-based peer production generally argue against the intrusion of markets
into the public spaces of the Internet and defend the end-to-end architecture of
the Internet in the interests of democratic participation in society.109
The commons-based model is challenging the sustainability of the market-
led model as the dominant model however. In the case of the commons-based
model, non-market relationships, and governance from below are advocated
as the means to minimize potential harms associated with technological
innovation. The strong element of technological determinism that is a feature
of the commons-based production model means that much of the research in
this area pays scant attention to the asymmetries of power in the wider
information society within which this model is developing.110 Nevertheless,
both the practice and the theory of commons-based peer production are
inﬂuential in an increasingly pervasive social imaginary of the information
society, though not one that so far has found an accommodation with the
dominant imaginary, despite the fact that there are signs of a blurring of the
distinctions between them in practice.
Mediation as a Bridging Concept
Apart from the earlier discussion of the implications of tacit knowledge,
the theoretical frameworks considered so far have little to say about the
60
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
symbolic or experiential aspect of the information society. In addition, the
stark oppositions that seem to characterize theories in the instrumental and
critical traditions and the way they depict change in the information society
are not always helpful in providing a sense of the way human beings experi-
ence the dynamics of change in society and the evolution of the communica-
tion system.
The concept of mediation can serve as a bridging concept among these
disparate ways of seeing the evolution of the communication system. This is
because it helps to open up a space for considering the values that are
privileged within the conﬂicting social imaginaries of the information society
and, in an admittedly fuzzy way, it helps to reinforce the idea that these
theoretical traditions are always provisional and unsettled. I referred in
Chapter 1 to Roger Silverstone’s view that ‘mediated connection and inter-
connection’ are part of the infrastructure of most people’s lives in the Internet
Age. Many scholars in the social sciences discuss the mediation processes that
give rise to social, political, and economic change, emphasizing the role of
communication and the media.111 Research on mediated experience draws
attention to the way people engage in meaning construction in their on- and
off-line communities, showing that meanings are understood differently
depending on cultural, social, political, and economic contexts and on the
speciﬁc technologies and practices involved. As Silverstone insisted, ICTs are
‘doubly articulated’ in the economy and in culture.112
The underlying technologies of communication, including the Internet
Protocol which has come to serve as a focal point in debates about the
advantages of the commons-based peer production of information versus
proprietary or market-based models, are unseen by people without program-
ming skills or understanding of the design features of the communication
system. Everyday users of the Internet normally encounter ICTs as a ‘surface’
or simply as an entry point to their virtual worlds. As Sherry Turkle puts it,
‘when we are at our computers, most of us only deal with surfaces. We
summon screen icons to act as agents’.113 Yet technologies behind the screen,
in the ‘infrastructure’ as Silverstone calls it, are just as important in mediating
life in the Internet Age as those technologies which online users are aware of.
The majority of Internet users have few reasons to question the values
embedded in the communication system. For most people, the communica-
tion system is part of their everyday experience, whether of globally dispersed
production, socially or politically active online communities, or of compu-
terized systems that may shut down airports, enable online crime including
potential harm to children, and out-of-control ﬁnancial systems.114
Mediation may occur through symbolic representation, through the social
division of labour, and through the interactions of humans with ICTs.115
These mediated experiences become part of the social imaginary of the
information society and they also become part of the narratives of research
SOCIAL IMAGINARIES OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
61

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
in the instrumental and critical traditions. Insofar as mediation is a multi-
faceted phenomenon, we need to look beyond the realm of the virtual to the
intersections between the virtual and ‘real’ worlds to understand how power
relationships are implicated in the evolution of the communication system.
Mediation is not a new phenomenon, but the intersections of technical
systems with everyday life mean that there is a potential for profound changes
in power relationships and in perceptions and the experience of mastery of
the communication system. The notion of mediation is helpful in providing
insight into how the communication system is implicated in conﬂict—physi-
cal and ‘virtual’—in the information society because those who apply this
concept do so generally from a critical perspective which asks about why
conﬂict emerges and about the dynamics of power.
For example, when the mediation process privileges market values, online
experiences, such as those provided by Amazon and many other commercially
operated online sites, appear to ﬂourish, but with contradictory outcomes.
Amazon, for instance, can be seen as an endogenous development resulting
from the speciﬁc capacities of the Internet to hold large inventories of
virtually represented meta-information about books (and real e-books).
Amazon provides more ‘shelf space’ than a physical bookstore and allows all
its ‘shelves’ to be prominent in its ‘shop window’. Mediated experience can
involve virtual representations, voices speaking from our computers, and
scripts that appear on computer screens. People interact with what might
appear to be human beings, but these may be artiﬁcially animated constructs.
Mediation may be experienced as entertainment or as education and these
developments may enter the social imaginary of the information society
entirely uncontested. However, they may be promoting loss of memory,
disregard for the welfare of others, changes in the values of the workplace,
and superﬁcial human relationships associated with a decline in sociability
and intimacy.116 Thus, the notion of mediation, with its concern with power
relationships, is helpful in suggesting that indeterminant outcomes are char-
acteristic of the evolution of the communication system.
Critical research on mediated relationships in the twenty-ﬁrst century
information society is also helpful in provoking questions about whether
individuals should be expected to assume increasingly greater responsibility
for navigating their online worlds through their self-servicing activities with-
out the institutional supports provided by the state. It raises questions about
whether alternative arrangements are feasible for ensuring that labour stan-
dards are established for online work, encouraging means of curtailing un-
wanted intrusions in virtual worlds, and developing cultural and social
environments that are safe and complement the online worlds that people
inhabit. The answers differ from those provided in the instrumental tradition
insofar as they do not presume that the existing trajectory of change is ‘ﬁt for
purpose’ simply because it exists.
62
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Furthermore, with an emphasis on the symbolic meaning of information, a
consideration of mediation serves as a reminder that information is not a
‘thing’, the view typical of the exogenous information processing model.
When information (or knowledge) is treated as a ‘thing’, akin to Heidegger’s
notion of ‘essence’, then if problems emerge as a result of the communication
system, it seems that ‘only a god can save us’.117 The only recourses seem to be
to a higher (imaginary) order and to the hope that the communication system
will evolve in a benign way. If it is assumed, instead, that technological
mediation binds people together and that their actions transform the experi-
ence of mediation,118 it starts to become easier to imagine alternatives to the
prevailing power relationships in the information society. Thus, mediation is
a concept that helps to amplify insights into the way power relationships are
experienced in the information society that are available from studies of the
economic features of information, from the political economy of the struc-
tural aspects of markets for information production and consumption, and
from sociological studies of online communities.
Conclusion
This discussion of the social science research traditions that seek to explain
the evolution of the communication system in the information society con-
ﬁrms that it is neither the materiality of technology nor the stocks of digital
information that impact on human beings for good or ill. This is a determin-
istic view, characteristic of the exogenous, instrumental model. Critical
perspectives based on endogenous models, such as those concerned with
transformations in techno-economic paradigms, changes in the political
economy of power relationships, and sociological studies of online commu-
nities, make it clear that the empowerment (or disempowerment) of people
needs to be understood as the outcome of change in both the symbolic and
the material environments. The endogenous models provide understanding
of conﬂicting interests of civil society, states, and corporations in the infor-
mation society in the process of change, and the concept of mediation serves
as a useful reminder of the importance of the symbolic and material aspects of
this process.119
In their different ways, work in the instrumental and critical traditions
shows that each step in the process of technological innovation that provides a
basis for the production and consumption of abundant digital information is
accompanied by renewed efforts among incumbent companies to impose
conditions of information scarcity. These efforts are made in the interests of
market development and in the face of resistance from those who seek to
SOCIAL IMAGINARIES OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
63

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
liberate digital information from the constraints of scarcity imposed by
intellectual property rights. But while copyright protects the rights of the
owners of intellectual property, companies are allowing people to copy online
information, using business models that seek to generate proﬁt without
damping the enthusiasm of Internet users by making it difﬁcult for them to
download and share information. The persistence of these conﬂicting strate-
gies is not well explained by the research traditions I have discussed so far.
This is because the technological innovation process is unfolding in a way that
is contradictory to the varying interests of the stakeholders in the economic
and social value of information. This is associated with the paradox of
information scarcity, which I return to later.
In addition, the exogenous models suggest that, as the communication
system becomes more complex, it is inappropriate to intervene in the evolu-
tion of the system—the system is too complex to govern without uncertain
and potentially harmful implications for society. This is the logic in the
dominant social imaginary of the information society. Proponents of an
information commons bias in the information society claim that resistance
to the market-led social imaginary is feasible, but argue also that, because of
the system’s complexity, non-intervention from the state or companies in the
technological system is the best option. On the one hand, the system is too
complex to govern. On the other hand, it is claimed that resistance to the
persistence of unequal power relationships in the information society and to
social injustice depends on the creativity of those who can ﬁnd a way to
challenge the power of the ‘programmers’ and ‘switchers’ (large companies
that control the communication system, and the state). As Manuel Castells
explains, they must seek to preserve ‘the commons of communication net-
works made possible by the Internet, a free creation of freedom lovers’.120
There is an idea that the evolution of the communication system can indeed
be ‘steered’ towards the values of the good society. This is one facet of the
paradox of complexity, which I also address later.
Endogenous perspectives enable us to see that ICT convergence is an
evolutionary process that can be altered, abandoned, or subordinated to
different cultural, social, political, and economic values. However, they offer
a limited basis for analysing these paradoxes because they sequester aspects of
the innovation process (effectively rendering them exogenous), which go on
‘behind the computer screen’, and they are troubled by the implications for
human agency that seem to be characteristic of complex adaptive systems.
They engender ambiguity in their answers to whether policy intervention
with respect to the evolution of the communication system is justiﬁed. To
make sense of this ambiguity, a framework that gives attention to the features of
the technological innovation process that are sequestered in the social sciences,
which I discuss in Chapter 4, provides a complementary way of seeing. Social
science theory struggles when applied to developments at the interfaces of
64
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
social and technical systems, a point made frequently by Roger Silverstone in
his work on the way digital technologies are mediating our lives.121 Yet it is
exactly at these interfaces that, increasingly, life is lived in the Internet Age.
Chapter 4 introduces systems theory and suggests how it can be applied to
make sense of the paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity in the
Internet Age.
SOCIAL IMAGINARIES OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY
65

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4
Communication, Complexity,
and Paradox
Introduction
The social imaginaries of the information society give rise to competing
claims about the evolution of the communication system and its conse-
quences for society, as discussed in Chapter 3. Two important paradoxes are
located at the heart of these imaginaries. One—the paradox of information
scarcity—is the product of an innovation process in which there is pressure
both to maintain the intrinsic or constructed scarcity of information and
to promote its abundance. The other—the paradox of complexity—concerns
the role of human agency in governing a complex system, such as the
communication system, in the Internet Age.
The evolution of the communication system can be depicted as being the
outcome of exogenous shocks or the interplay of endogenous features. Scho-
lars working within the social sciences often acknowledge that the features of
the innovation process operate at multiple levels of individual agency and
institutional change and, in the critical research traditions, that power rela-
tionships are crucial for the outcomes of the evolutionary process. However,
these explanations stop short of developing an understanding of the changes
occurring at the interfaces of the components or levels in a complex system.
In the instrumental tradition, the questions are about how the innovation
process works, but not why the outcomes matter in relation to the lives that
people are able to live. With its instrumental goals, work in this tradition
is restricted mainly to analysis of the adjustments made by agents to bring
institutional systems into alignment with the ‘needs’ of the technological
system: an alignment that is assumed to be consistent with the values of the
good society. Critical research, on the other hand, asks questions about the
interests of those agents responsible for building and using the communica-
tion system and about unequal power relationships. The paradoxes of infor-
mation scarcity and complexity that are generated within a complex adaptive
system are normally invisible in these ways of seeing and so do not ﬁgure in
debates about the information society and the practice of governance.
In this chapter I introduce systems theory with the goal of employing it
alongside endogenous theories of change in a critical assessment of the
evolution of the communication system. I start by differentiating between
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
social science approaches to the complexity of systems, and the systems
theoretical approach to the interfaces within complex systems. I then provide
a brief discussion of the early development of systems perspectives, illustrat-
ing their alignment with the information processing models of communica-
tion encountered in Chapter 2, and the renewed interest in them in the social
and the physical sciences.1 This is followed by a discussion of one strand of
systems theory that is particularly helpful for understanding the genesis of
paradox and its implications for understanding the evolution of the commu-
nication system. This perspective is used to suggest repairs or corrections to
our ways of seeing the technological innovation process, consistent with
Taylor’s insistence on the value of providing a ‘certain reading’ of contradic-
tory statements about developments in society. The penultimate section of
this chapter outlines a critical systems framework that is applied in the
remaining chapters.
It should be noted that, while certain strands of systems theory are helpful,
like Plato’s portrayal of Socrates’s explanation of the allegory of the cave,
theory construction invoking concepts drawn from the social and the natural
and physical sciences should be regarded always as temporary and unﬁnished,
a position consistent with my preference for treating theory as provisional
and ‘unsettled’.2 The discussion in this chapter should be read in this light—it
is provisional. However, I suggest that it does offer a new way of seeing that is
helpful in making sense of paradox in the Internet Age.
From Context to Dynamic System Interfaces
In both the social science and natural and physical science traditions, there is
agreement that the communication system is complex and that this has
profound consequences. In the social sciences, the term ‘context’ is invoked
to signpost the complexity of a system and to delimit components of a system
that are not investigated within the boundary of a particular theory or
empirical study. Context then serves as the residual explanation for a system’s
development or evolution. What the context encompasses is usually vaguely
implied, conveying an impression that, because a system is complex, it is
difﬁcult to say what is guiding the system or who or what might be held
accountable. This approach is typical in economics where the simplifying
assumptions of exogenous theory are used in order to model the dynamics of
change in the market. Technological change, for instance, is often used to
describe the unexplained residual (contextual) factor. This can be explained
in part by endogenous economic theories as discussed in Chapter 3, but
they are limited by assumptions about human behaviour and motivation.
COMMUNICATION, COMPLEXITY, AND PARADOX
67

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Understanding human behaviour and agency may be central in other social
science disciplines, providing greater insight into the situated dynamics and
local features of innovation, and shedding greater light on the residual or
context. But in these other disciplines, too, even when they are concerned
with highly, situated, local features of innovation, explanations of complex
phenomena are frequently said to be conditioned by an unspeciﬁed context
which serves as a limiting assumption for what the theory purports to explain.
Recourse to context as explanation is as common in the instrumental as in
the critical traditions of the social sciences. However, there is a tendency
towards unifying theories to account for the dynamics of power throughout
all the components of a system of relationships in an effort to reduce the
‘residual’ or unexplained phenomena in a complex system. Despite such
ambitions, however, some aspect of a system of relationships is usually
privileged with others receding into the background or context. For example,
Dan Schiller puts analysis of the labour process at the centre of his exploration
of the dynamics of communication practice, although he also calls for the
uniﬁcation of theories of information production and consumption.3 In this
case, the social ﬁeld in which the labour process occurs is the context or
environment for these relationships. Others may argue, for example, that
transformations in the market context must be understood by ‘grasping the
“inside” and the “outside”’ of the market sphere to understand political and
material processes.4 Missing is a framework for investigating systems of
relationships on the ‘inside’ and on the ‘outside’, and yet it is here at the
interfaces of systems that paradoxical relationships have their genesis.
Assertions may be made about power relationships to explain communi-
cation system developments, but these usually are accompanied by the claim
that the context of these relationships needs further analysis. It may then be
argued that analysis of the discursive practices of human agents, that is, the
ways in which meaning is constituted by individuals, provides a way of
understanding complex processes, but invariably ‘extra-discursive’ features
which do not ﬁgure in the analysis of social relations are invoked to explain
change.5 In some traditions, the project of analysing a complex system does
turn to system boundaries or ‘boundary objects’ to trace pathways of innova-
tion, but power relationships that generate paradox are not usually dis-
cussed.6 In a theory of ‘information worlds’, for instance, the boundaries
and interactions among members of multiple small worlds in physical and
virtual social space are accentuated, but the boundary relationships them-
selves are not theorized.7 Some social scientists adopt the language of systems
theories and refer to ‘ﬁrst-’ or ‘second-order’ effects in emergent systems, but
they give few hints about what this implies for human agency or for the
genesis of paradox within a complex system.8
In summary, attempts in the social sciences to develop unifying theories of
the innovation process have something in common: they call for improved
68
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
understanding of complex systems, but pay little attention to the implications
of systems theories and the limitations of systems thinking in the analysis of
the evolution of social and technological systems. I discuss the contributions
of systems thinking and cybernetics to the analysis of ‘self-organizing systems’
and some of the applications of this way of seeing in the next sections.
Systems Thinking and Cybernetics
The social imaginary of systems thinking can be traced to Francois Quesnay
(1694–1774), a French economist who was concerned with the circularity of
ﬂows in the economy, and to Claude Henri de Saint Simon (1760–1825), who
conceived of society as an organic system.9 Interest in systems theoretical
perspectives has waxed and waned in the physical sciences as well as in
contributions from social scientists. When systems theories emerged in the
study of communication, not surprisingly, they focused on issues of informa-
tion control. The work of Norbert Weiner and Claude Shannon in the early
1940s, on systems and feedback (see Chapter 2), spawned huge interest in
control systems, providing mathematicians and scientists with a basis for
exploring the functioning of the human brain and the computer.10 Despite
many scholars arguing that their work had no bearing on meaning construc-
tion, their ideas were taken up in a series of discussions sponsored by the
Macy Conferences on cybernetics, which were held between 1946 and 1953.
These conference attracted social scientists, mathematicians, neurophysiolo-
gists, philosophers, and psychiatrists,11 some of whom had a great interest in
the construction of symbolic meaning and in the dynamics of the social
system.
This was a period of enthusiasm for interdisciplinary research. One Macy
Conference participant argued that the applied aspects of cybernetics ‘relate
to whatever ﬁeld of study one cares to name: engineering, or biology, or
physics, or sociology’.12 Anthony Stafford Beer regards all decision-making as
being concerned with information, but argues that it is ‘logically impossible
to use the language of the network’s description to comment on its own
structure’, indicating that were an attempt made to do so, the result would be
paradoxical communication.13 The idea of ‘emergence’ was present in his
thinking insofar as he stressed that an information system is self-regulatory
and capable of emergent responses not envisaged by its designers. His con-
clusion was that information systems are not necessarily subject to human
control and are best left to evolve without human intervention.
Nevertheless, many attempts were made to apply cybernetics beyond the
realm of electronic signals. These can be traced in the perspectives brought to
COMMUNICATION, COMPLEXITY, AND PARADOX
69

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the Macy Conferences by participants such as Ross Ashby and Frederick
Steier. Both thought that cybernetics could be applied in every branch of
science, although Steier cautioned that a systems perspective would not help
to reveal why things happen, it would inform us only about how they
happen.14 This was because a key concept in cybernetics is ‘difference’, that
is, observation either that two things are recognizably different to start with,
or that one has changed over time and can be explained by understanding the
system constraints that either enable or preclude change. In this framework it
is possible to think about ‘freedom of choice’ within a system, but this refers
to system constraints, not human choices.
In the light of Thomas Kuhn’s observations about theory development (see
Chapter 3), we would expect theory to develop in response to perceived
deﬁciencies in existing ways of seeing. Systems theory is no exception. Some
claim that it developed partly as a response to the reductionism of classical
physics, which was found wanting when applied to biological and human
systems.15 Early systems theorists were concerned about cybernetic systems
and the issues of control, stability, and instability in systems, but most
thought it beyond their remit to make judgements on what might be done
about the social or human consequences of these systems. Stafford Beer writes
that ‘the advance of automation within a country is at once a determinant of
economic progress and a threat to the stability of society’,16 but does not call
for any action.
Norbert Weiner could foresee no theoretical insight from cybernetics for
the social challenges and problems of the immediate post-war period. He
sympathizes with those who hope for a better understanding, but says that it
would not have ‘an appreciable therapeutic effect on the present diseases of
society’.17 For Weiner, problems of indeterminacy and instability in the social
system are created by those who ‘are compelled by their own cupidity to form
coalitions; but these coalitions do not generally establish themselves in any
single, determinate way, and usually terminate in a welter of betrayal, turn-
coatism, and deception’.18 Extending natural sciences methods to the social
sciences, including economics, was seen as symptomatic of the misunder-
standing of scientiﬁc achievement. Nevertheless, Wiener was concerned about
the trajectory of the information system, observing that, ‘it may be used for
the beneﬁt of humanity, but only if humanity survives long enough to enter a
period in which such a beneﬁt is possible. It may also be used to destroy
humanity, and if it is not used intelligently it can go very far in that direc-
tion’.19 To make sense of this, he said that it would be necessary to turn to the
narrative methods of historians and those working in the social sciences.
These pioneers of systems theory, for the most part, were pessimistic
about the contribution of cybernetics to an understanding of the conduct of
human beings, but the ensuing years have seen numerous efforts to apply
systems thinking to the analysis of innovation processes, complemented and
70
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
encouraged by a post-war renewal of faith in the progress of science.20 In the
systems theoretical framework, human agency is deemed to inhere within a
system, that is, within self-generating systems, a perception or metaphor that
is problematic for most social scientists.
SELF-GENERATING SYSTEMS
Ludwig von Bertalanffy’s work on General System Theory provided an
attractive theory for researchers searching for an alternative to the linear
causality that, at the time, was a central feature of scientiﬁc hypothesis testing.
Systems theories, when they deal with the dynamics of systems that are open
to their environment, suggest that a given ﬁnal state can be reached from
different initial conditions, and that outcomes are indeterminate or unpre-
dictable.21 This thinking opened up a new way of seeing, and contributed to
the information processing model that was so central to the social imaginary
of the information society. By the late 1980s, Humberto Maturana and
Francisco Varela, in their book, Tree of Knowledge, were insisting that organic
systems are self-generating since they have the ability to reproduce themselves
recursively, delimiting themselves through their dynamic interaction with a
boundary. In the case of chemical transformations, for instance, a boundary is
essential for a network of transformations. This process is called autopoiesis.22
They argued that systems behave in ways that are determined by their
structure, not by the outcomes of processes of human cognition. Maturana
puts it this way:
the identity of a system is constituted and is conserved as a manner of operating as a
whole in the system’s recursive interactions in the medium that contains it. The
constitution and the conservation of the identity of a system, are dynamic systemic
phenomena that occur through the recursive interactions of the system with the
elements of the medium.23
Systems are understood to be ‘structurally coupled’ through their mutual and
symmetrical interdependence.24 Autopoietic systems are said to reproduce
themselves through the dynamics of their network components, and can be
open or closed. This characterization is deemed to apply to any living organic
system, including the human system. In the human system, the delineation of
boundaries within a whole system is of course very problematic since the
concepts of metabolism and membrane which are at the core of this theory
have no ﬁxed meaning in the social system—social boundaries are humanly
constituted, not given by biological features.
In his work on Self-producing Systems, John Mingers characterizes Matur-
ana’s insights as extending to encompass self-conscious human beings. Thus, he
argues, ‘we are (as self-conscious beings) constituted through our language,
and language is inevitably an intersubjective phenomenon. As Wittgenstein
COMMUNICATION, COMPLEXITY, AND PARADOX
71

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
also argued, there can be no such thing as a private language. Thus language is
essentially a consensual domain of agreements, of structural coupling that
permits the operations of observers’.25 He (like others before him) did not
extend this argument to questions about symbolic meaning or human repre-
sentations. Nevertheless, systems theory had taken hold in the social sciences,
especially in the early work of Talcott Parsons and then later in the work of
Niklas Luhmann.
The Social System by the sociologist and economist Talcott Parsons, was
published in 1951. Parsons drew upon systems thinking to explain social
patterns and the maintenance of social system stability, suggesting that the:
social system consists in a plurality of individual actors interacting with each other in
a situation which has at least a physical or environmental aspect, actors who are
motivated in terms of a tendency to the ‘optimization of gratiﬁcation’ and whose
relation to their situations, including each other, is deﬁned and mediated in terms of a
system of culturally structured and shared symbols.26
His phrasing was a clear response to the then contemporary emergence of the
neoclassical economics paradigm in which society is viewed as being governed
by the pursuit of gratiﬁcation through exchange relationships; his work was
criticized for its emphasis on the way a system maintains stability and resists
change.
Later, the sociologist Niklas Luhmann, whose work was inﬂuenced by
Parsons, became perhaps the best-known contemporary contributor to sys-
tems thinking in the social sciences. He distinguishes among three systems—
the organic, the psychical, and the social. His understanding of communica-
tion refers to the means by which a social system reproduces itself.27 Thus,
‘communications conclude preceding communications and enable connect-
ing ones. The elements of social systems are recursively produced and repro-
duced by a network of communications and cannot exist outside of such a
network. They organize their own renewal autopoietically’.28 Human beings
are ascribed consciousness, but what matters is the communication processes
within the system, where ‘understanding’ happens only when a receiver
acknowledges the information and notices a distinction or difference.29
When the system has a high degree of complexity—as is the case of the
communication—then interventions in the system may lead to outcomes
that are deviant (not valued) and what is selected within the system is no
more likely to produce change that is valued than change that is not valued.
For Luhmann, ‘just like life and consciousness, communication is an emer-
gent reality, a state of affairs sui generis’.30
In the systems theoretical framework, there is an important distinction
between the environment of a system as ‘it really is’ and as ‘it [the system] sees
it’.31 How does a system ‘see’? As Luhmann indicates:
72
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
even in the face of numerous efforts to ﬁnd ethical foundations, second-order cyber-
netics can only ever repeat the question: who is the observer? It can direct this question
to every observing system, and therefore also to itself. Every cognitive, normative and
moral—and therefore also every ethical—code is thus undermined . . . It calls for
something to be made visible which must remain invisible to itself. It contradicts itself.
It executes a performative self-contradiction and thus avoids appearing dogmatic or
prescribing cures.32
This position suggests that interventions in a system are inherently risky, and
it echoes the reluctance of earlier systems theorists to concern themselves with
normative issues and the values of society. This thinking about self-organizing
systems has contributed to the social imaginary of the information society
which envisages it as a complex system that is responsive to its own emergent
‘self-organizing’ properties. In this view it is difﬁcult to engage in ‘prescribing
cures’ for a social system, should certain norms or ethical practices be found
wanting by a group of stakeholders. In the light of emergent complexity, the
system is best left to itself rather than being subjected to haphazard interven-
tions by policy makers acting hierarchically from above through organs of the
state. Autopoiesis (self-organization), as Luhmann acknowledged, is charac-
teristic of systems whose evolution may or may not be consistent with
particular social norms or values.33
SYSTEMS THEORY APPLIED TO HUMAN SYSTEMS
It is one thing to devise theories of system dynamics, but quite another to
examine system evolution empirically. Research in the instrumental tradition
of the social sciences treats the communication system as a system of rela-
tions, leading to many studies on relationships among network nodes.34 In
sociology, network research ﬂourished in the 1930s and 1940s through the
work of Georg Simmel and Jacob Moreno who focused on webs of afﬁliation
from a critical perspective.35 It took off again when low-cost computing
power started to become available and researchers began undertaking struc-
tural analyses of ‘the arrangement of elements in a system and the set of
relationships that connect these parts together’, bringing this work into line
with the instrumental systems theoretical tradition.36 This work became very
widespread towards the end of the 1980s when Everett Rogers concluded
that ‘our progress has been scientiﬁcally imbalanced, atheoretic’.37 A decade
later he observed that cybernetics, as a theory of self-regulating systems, is
a theory of communication, ‘but communication study has not been much
inﬂuenced by cybernetic theory’, partly because of its mathematical presenta-
tion.38 The strong afﬁnity between this work as it developed through
the 1990s and the earlier systems work on information processing is clear.
COMMUNICATION, COMPLEXITY, AND PARADOX
73

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Cybernetics is about feedback, dynamic processes, and control features within
systems, which adjust to feedback and, therefore, are presumed to ‘learn’.39
With the development of more sophisticated tools for processing network
information and storage of large data sets, the mapping (and graphing) of
network relationships has blossomed. Barry Wellman, a sociologist who has
worked extensively on social networking, urges researchers to regard this ﬁeld
as a broad intellectual approach and ‘not as a narrow set of methods’, but to
little avail.40 Social Network Analysis research has proliferated, with little
grounding in the social sciences instrumental tradition (apart from mathe-
matics), and even less in the critical tradition. One verdict on research on
complex adaptive systems is that it has not been helpful in explaining why
developments such as the rise of network forms of organization, their struc-
tures, and dynamics are emerging in the particular way that they are in
modern society.
Because of its mechanistic approach and its absence of a theory of agency,
systems theory offers no means of elaborating theories of human self-interest,
afﬁnities, or means of exchange.41 In the absence of any theory of agency,
systems theory can appear to be inherently limited when it comes to issues of
human intervention in the technological system. In its concern with how
society is ‘constituted by sets of attractors within the range of possible
condition spaces, and . . . how changes in controlling variables for the whole
system can come to reconstitute the form of that attractor set’,42 it is difﬁcult
to ﬁnd any basis for normative evaluation offered by a knowing subject.
Systems theory is a reaction, nevertheless, against the micro-economics
focus on the trajectories of isolated individual ‘atoms’, that is, people bent
on maximizing their utility. It renders the relative simplicity of economics
extremely problematic because the analysis of complex systems does not
provide easy recipes, but, instead, focuses on the ‘capacity of systems to
transform themselves’.43 From a policy perspective, however, this very com-
plexity suggests that the best option is to wait and see, rather than to act by
intervening in the system in an attempt to resolve paradoxes that emerge
through the dynamics of the system’s oscillations.
The contribution to the social imaginary of the information society has
been considerable and has propagated studies on the way network systems
appear to organize their self-renewal, the focus of analysis being on recursive
self-organizing processes.44 Insofar as self-renewal is a core concept in eco-
nomics, systems theory appeals to economists with an interest in the con-
straints under which rule-bound (autonomous) agents make choices. In this
view, ‘the elements of an economy, set within an organization structure, are
agents. Rules provide the connective dimension of such structure and, as
such, rule systems embody and articulate the knowledge contained in the
system’.45 Theory building concerning knowledge, therefore, is understood as
being about system constraints. This way of seeing is applied also to the
74
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
emergent characteristics of organizations within the economic system, where
attention focuses on ‘meso-rules’, which may govern the internal dynamics of
systems.46 The evolution of a complex system is conceived of in terms of the
indeterminacy of the formation and re-formation of connections among
agents intent on experimenting in ways that do not compromise the viability
of the system.
Theoretical work on complex systems draws on the physical science under-
standings of dissipative structures, evolutionary biology and autopoiesis, and
on economic models of learning by doing, the self-organization of markets,
emergence (equilibrium), and feedback (price signals and incentives more
generally), some of which are derived from the physical and biological
sciences in an attempt to explain the co-evolution of technology and society.
The result is a story about how ‘technology creates itself out of itself ’.47 For
Brian Arthur, a major contributor to ‘complexity economics’ along with
others at the Santa Fe Institute in the United States, the beneﬁt of systems
theory, and the analysis of complex adaptive systems in particular, is the
awareness it provides about how ‘the structures that deﬁne the economy
continually change and reshape themselves—and therefore constantly need
reinterpretation’.48 He is clear about what his work is not about: it is not about
the promise or the threat of technology, nor is it about the human side of
creating technology. The idea that systems evolve is seen as being consistent
with the search for insight into evolutionary processes of emergence that
lead to irreversibility. This obviously deﬂects attention from a study of the
outcomes of the process of emergence and whether they are valued or resisted,
and by whom.
As I indicated in Chapter 1, in some branches of the social sciences, and in
the physical sciences, the notion of evolution is a pervasive one which has
been applied in attempts to understand the dynamics of complex human,
technical, and natural systems.49 The analysis that I have presented here is
intended to operate on two levels. One of these levels is an outline of how a
particular tradition in systems theory tries to explain the dynamics of evolu-
tionary processes in a way that is applicable both to human and physical
systems, using the idea of evolution as a metaphor. This is the subject of the
next part of this chapter. In the penultimate section of this chapter, the
emphasis shifts to another level. On a second level, a critical systems frame-
work is proposed as a way of seeing how the dynamics of a complex adaptive
system can be understood to condition actions that are considered to be
feasible in the social imaginaries of the information society. These levels are
not separable in the world of experience and action. However, for the analyti-
cal purpose of explaining a strand of systems theory which is helpful in
understanding how paradox is generated by emergent processes within a
complex system, they are treated separately here.
COMMUNICATION, COMPLEXITY, AND PARADOX
75

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Metacommunication and Paradox
Gregory Bateson, who had a keen interest in systems theory and the emerging
ﬁeld of cybernetics, participated in some of the early Macy Conferences.
Bateson’s formal training was as a biologist and an anthropologist. His
eclecticism enabled him to traverse many of the chasms between disciplinary
perspectives both within the social sciences, and among the humanities,
social sciences, and physical sciences. He began to develop a distinctive
perspective on communication processes within complex systems, focusing
on the genesis of paradoxical communication and the harms that may be
associated with them. By the 1970s, he had developed a theory of mind and
nature, a distinctive perspective on communication processes within a com-
plex system.
Bateson put the processes of communication at the core of his work,
drawing on systems theoretical insights, but in ways that depart from the
framework developed later by Luhmann and discussed in the preceding
section. Systems perspectives give prominence to the information processing
model and to communication, and Bateson’s work is not an exception in this
respect. His work has been criticized for its afﬁnity to systems theory and for
leaving no scope for human agency or moral values and it has been largely
neglected in the social sciences. Nevertheless, it has been applied in the
analysis of power relationships within the communication system.50 Observa-
tions in Bateson’s work and that of some of his colleagues can be interpreted
in a way that is helpful for understanding the genesis of paradox in a complex
adaptive system.
In his book, Steps to an Ecology of the Mind, Bateson claims that: ‘all
perception and all response, all behavior and all classes of behavior, all
learning and all genetics, all neurophysiology and endocrinology, all organi-
zation and all evolution—one entire subject matter—must be regarded as
communicational in nature’.51 As already noted, systems thinking was very
popular in the 1940s and 1950s and it was this tradition that encouraged a
search for generalizations or ‘laws’ which could apply to all ‘communicative
phenomena’ that occur in systems of all kinds. The work of those who were
dreaming of machines that could ‘think’ was complemented by the work of
those who were eager to use the fruits of defence industry research to build a
uniﬁed theory of systems, applicable across the physical and social sciences.52
Bateson, Ju¨rgen Ruesch, and others took up this challenge, one of the results
being a seminal book, Communication: A Social Theory of Psychiatry.53
Although this work was couched in the language of science, it can be seen as
an instance of political positioning and resistance to the then prevailing social
imaginary, inﬂected by the paradigm of medical and physical sciences which
regarded the world through a Newtonian prism as ‘the object’. Bateson and
76
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Ruesch’s book can be seen also as an effort to counter the simplicity of
scientiﬁc models, which provided no scope for an investigation of the com-
plexity of systems. In the light of the then recent past, these appeared to give
research aimed at improving the welfare of people and their communities, a
lower priority than research aimed principally at scientiﬁc and technological
advancement. The post-war period was a time for reﬂection on the prevailing
scientiﬁc paradigm in a period when that paradigm had been used to produce
atomic bombs that actually had been used. Alfred Korzybski, the originator of
General Semantics Theory, observes that ‘the task ahead is gigantic if we are to
avoid more personal, national and even international tragedies based on
unpredictability, insecurity, fears, anxieties, etc., which are steadily disorga-
nizing the functioning of the human nervous system’.54
The concern to avoid the tragedy of more human conﬂict was evident in
the social imaginaries of the scientiﬁc community at this time, with many
aspiring to put ‘science’ into the service of a ‘saner society’. For some
scientists, including social scientists, theoretical research on system dynamics
that could embrace natural and human systems, even if metaphorically in the
case of the latter, seemed to offer hope for understandings that might avert the
tragedies of the past. A means of achieving this seemed to be within reach if
the perceptions from the mathematicians’ information processing model, that
is, communication theory, could be extended into the realm of social or
human systems. The problems tackled by Bateson and his colleagues resonate
with many current debates about the values and choices that should guide the
communication system as it evolves.
DIFFERENCE, PARADOX, AND LEARNING
A key contribution of Bateson’s work is his special treatment of information.
He builds upon the ‘transmission model’ of the physicists and engineers of his
time, and discusses information as a ‘difference which makes a difference’.55
He coins this phrase to express the way the world appears to an observer, from
moment to moment, as change occurs within a system of relationships.
Difference is understood as change. The ability for noting and reﬂecting on
difference is seen as having implications for making connections, and re-
membering over time and under different spatial conditions. Thus, the
communication process is seen as time-binding,56 an idea that also informs
the work of Harold Innis and, later, Marshal McLuhan, on communication
technologies and the media.
Perceptions of difference (change) are understood to arise out of commu-
nication relationships.57 Bateson condenses this idea in the statement that
information can be understood as ‘news of difference’ or changes which we
perceive as maps or patterns that serve as a means of organizing information
COMMUNICATION, COMPLEXITY, AND PARADOX
77

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
in a system.58 For Bateson, composites or collections of perceptions of
difference or distinction, and the connections (relationships) among them,
are understood as constituting knowledge. Some of these composites are
susceptible to consensus, that is, a ﬁrst-order reality in which ‘scientiﬁc’
veriﬁcation or refutation is feasible within the bounds of the prevailing
scientiﬁc paradigm which infuses the social imaginary. However, there is
another order, which is normally dismissed in the prevailing way of seeing,
that is subject to indeterminacy and uncertainty because of the dynamics of
complex systems of relationships.59
In my assessment of the social imaginaries of the information society, the
challenge is to understand the dynamics of the system and ‘the pattern which
connects’ the various components of that system.60 In this framework it is
important to take account of the way human beings recognize or guess at
patterns that emerge, some of which may be ‘stable (constant, invariant,
similar) and others unstable (inconstant, variable, dissimilar) over time’.
This process serves as a set of ideas or rules ‘by which and through which a
speciﬁc structure is organized’, resulting in the awareness of a particular
pattern,61 or as Thorstein Veblen might have put it, a particular ‘habit of
thought’.62 Thus, the social imaginary can be regarded as a set of rules and
norms through which relationships of power are organized and ‘evolve’.
In Bateson’s model, the communication process is understood as being
comprised of messages as in the information processing model of communi-
cation, but the messages, in turn, are understood on two levels, rather than
simply as a message (or byte of information) that is sent and received. There is
the content level, which provides representational information, and the
relational level, which provides cues or presentational information. The key
to human ‘understanding’ for Bateson is the emergence of multi-level pat-
terns of information (news of difference), or as he describes them ‘ecological
wisdom’—basically, ‘knowledge of the larger interactive system’.63 He puts it
somewhat cryptically, referring to emergent changes in a system as resulting
from ‘chance’ which ‘is tamed within the overall pattern’.64 Unexpected
developments or moves within a system can be revealing of consistent devel-
opments, and discrepancies or noise within a system spawn new patterns, that
is, new understandings.65 Thus, system evolution is not about adjusting to a
consensus (or an equilibrium state). Rather, it is a process in which innova-
tions are selected or rejected, and in which awareness of new or emergent
patterns occurs by traversing the boundaries in a multi-level system. This
process produces paradox because of contradictions between the content and
presentational information emerging through the dynamic process of change.
The idea of multi-level communication is central to Bateson’s understand-
ing of the genesis of paradox. Beginning with the level of interpersonal
communication, and seeing how perceptions of paradox at this level can be
scaled up to address the dynamics at other levels in a system makes this idea
78
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
easier to understand. Bateson’s arguments about the genesis of paradox in a
complex, multi-level system of relationships are derived from type theory.66
Type theory arose from efforts to solve mathematical and logical paradoxes
where it was argued that a proposition about a proposition, that is, a
proposition which has as its reference at least one proposition, is of a higher
order, is of a different logical type, than the proposition to which it refers.67 If
no class can contain itself as a member, then this class must be of a higher
logical type than its members. To argue otherwise is to permit contradiction
and paradox. For Bateson, this insight provides a way of differentiating
among communication relations that occur in systems organized in hierar-
chies as opposed to ‘heterarchies’, where communication relations occur in
multiple forms, but where power is shared horizontally.68 What is important
here is that complex systems, such as the communication system, are multi-
level systems. They are organized in hierarchies and in heterarchies of rela-
tionships. This means that hierarchies cannot be claimed to have vanished as
the result of the architecture of one component of a complex system, such as
the Internet Protocol with its horizontal architecture.
For Bateson, ‘metacommunication’ refers to ‘communication about com-
munication’, that is, propositions about the relationships between commu-
nications within a system that are presented at a different level.69 Paradox can
emerge when statements are presented at different levels where ‘every com-
munication has a content and a relationship aspect such that the latter
classiﬁes the former and is therefore a metacommunication’.70 Thus, meta-
communication is a way of ‘talking about’ relationships, and is especially
helpful if those relationships are contested and infused with asymmetric
power relationships. When this idea is applied at the individual level to
understand communication with psychiatric patients, the notions of ‘double
bind’ and a paradoxical intervention become relevant, concepts that I suggest
have implications not only at the level of interpersonal communication but
also at the level of institutions and policy.71 The core idea of the double bind is
that ‘no matter how one may try, one cannot not communicate’.72 All changes
to information, all notice of difference, convey some information about a
system.
Insight into the genesis of a ‘double bind’ was developed initially in work
with schizophrenic patients, but Bateson stresses that this phenomenon,
which arises out of the dynamic changes within an interpersonal communi-
cation system, is also a feature of all communication.73 His daughter, Mary
Catherine Bateson, comments that, ‘the double bind is not only a clue to
understanding schizophrenia and a wide range of other learned or acquired
psychopathologies . . . , but [also is] part of the fabric of ordinary life’.74 This
approach was developed by Paul Watzlawick, Donald Jackson, and Janet
Bevin, who suggest that if hostility or aggression in a communication rela-
tionship is unacknowledged, the result may be a denial of contradictory
COMMUNICATION, COMPLEXITY, AND PARADOX
79

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
messages.75 As Watzlawick and his colleagues explain, in a double binding
communication relationship:
(1) Two or more persons are involved in an intense relationship that has a high degree
of physical and/or psychological survival value for one, several, or all of them. . . . (2)
In such a context, a message is given which is so structured that (a) it asserts
something, (b) it asserts something about its own assertion and (c) these two asser-
tions are mutually exclusive. Thus, if the message is an injunction, it must be
disobeyed to be obeyed; . . . (3) Finally, the recipient of the message is prevented
from stepping outside the frame set by this message, either by metacommunicating
(commenting) about it or by withdrawing. . . . (4) Where double-binding is of long-
standing, possibly chronic duration, it will turn into a habitual and autonomous
expectation regarding the nature of human relationships and the world at large, an
expectation that does not require further reinforcement. . . . (5) The paradoxical behavior
imposed by double-binding . . . is in turn of a double-binding nature, and this leads to
a self-perpetuating pattern of communication.76
One party in a relationship may ﬁnd that he or she is unable to comment on
a contradictory message, but does so metaphorically to deal with an unequal
power relationship. This pathology is recognizable only on a different level, by
metacommunicating. Whether any action is taken depends on whether a
victim believes that a given relationship is signiﬁcant for his or her survival.
The experience of a double bind can result in an effort to ﬁnd a change in the
experience of paradox, that is, a way of averting a ‘self-perpetuating pattern of
communication’ or, in Taylor’s terms, giving statements a ‘certain reading’. In
the case of the social imaginaries of the communication system, the relevance
of this is that metacommunications can be helpful for demonstrating the
genesis of paradox, for explaining why these relationships may be persistent,
sequestered, and denied, and for revealing new ways of seeing them.
A further insight is the importance of analogue (difference/cooperation) in
contrast to digital (distinction/competition) forms of representation. Ana-
logue communication is conceived as nonverbal communication (tone, facial
expression, physical gesture) while digital is conceived as relating to content
involving complexity, versatility, and abstraction.77 When these are con-
founded, the result is perception of paradox. When the digital process of
communication starts to be dominant in human relationships, this can be
seen as a ‘mispunctuation’ of the communication relationship into binary
oppositions which are presented as either/or alternatives, when in fact they
are both/and relationships organized in a hierarchical, rather than a heter-
archical, system. This means that it is possible for apparently contradictory
statements to be valid, that is, that both/and relationships may be what
characterize the dynamics of an evolving system. ‘Runaway relationships’
can result from mispunctuation and double-binding and can escalate towards
aggression, violence, and destruction (at the interpersonal level), and these are
80
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
patterns of communication that are very difﬁcult to alter.78 However, there is
always a possibility for ‘adaptive action’,79 such that a circular, self-referential,
communication circuit can be disturbed by metacommunication, and where
‘the qualities and characteristics of metacommunication between persons will
depend upon the qualities and degree of their mutual awareness of each
other’s perception’.80
Thus, metacommunication, that is, communication about communica-
tion, provides a means for interventions aimed at dealing with paradox.
Apparent contradictions may be polarized through splitting, conﬂicting feel-
ings can be projected onto another person (scapegoating), repression or
denial can block awareness, or regression can lead to understandings deriving
from experience, and reaction may lead to the display of opposite feelings or
ambivalence or yield compromise.81 Identifying paradox and ﬁnding means
of adaptive action depend on being able to move outside a framework by
metacommunicating about it at a different level. This, in turn, becomes a
strategy for intervention.
In the therapeutic context, for instance, in this view, the therapist is
an outsider, ‘capable of supplying what the system itself cannot generate:
a change of its own rules’.82 By analogy, insofar as all communication involves
both participants and observers within a social system,83 it is possible to
conceive of interventions, even in a complex system that may, after all, be
productive. For example, if they expose contradictions between apparently
oppositional positions which are better understood as being generated by
different positions in a hierarchy of power relationships, it may be feasible for
contesting parties to alter their ways of seeing and the nature of their
dialogues by relocating them with respect to the power relationships and
beginning to pursue a new pathway.84 Persistent patterns of communication
are present not only at the individual level but also within the dynamics of
debates among groups and institutions.
If a communication system is regarded as being comprised of both ana-
logue and digital components as deﬁned by Bateson, we can see that insights
may emerge from understanding relationships as being both/and as well as
being constituted by either/or relationships. In this view, the digital world is
the ‘domain of opposition and identity as well as difference; it allows for the
analytic epistemology of either/or as well as for the dialectical epistemology of
both/and’ relationships.85 This goes unacknowledged within ways of seeing
that do not account for multi-level, systemic relationships and the paradoxes
engendered by their dynamic interaction. This view suggests that maintaining
an authoritative position at the cost of another’s well-being is associated with
the perception of threat and vulnerability.86 It suggests also that decisions may
be taken without accounting for the damage they introduce into a system of
relationships. Klaus Krippendorf, a scholar of communication in the United
States, puts it this way: ‘it is the very network of communication that sets the
COMMUNICATION, COMPLEXITY, AND PARADOX
81

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
boundaries of what its participants may come to know about the system in
which they partake as well as about the network of communication through
which this knowledge is revealed’.87 In other words, what we see ‘in reality are
the products of the punctuation and the organization of reality by the
activities of society in history’.88 As Krippendorf insists, Bateson’s view of
communication involves a shift away from individualistic conceptions of
power towards a view in which ‘power always resides in social relationships’.89
In this view a paradox or trap is not possible to recognize from a position
‘within a pathological reality construction’.90 By extension, it is not possible to
recognize the paradoxical ways of seeing within the prevailing social imagin-
aries of the information society using that framework. However, one way to
reveal the paradoxes of a social system is to metacommunicate about them, to
demonstrate how that ‘reality’ is replayed recursively within a pattern of
relationships. Mispunctuations occur at different levels in a communication
system. In this respect, there is little difference between the interactions of
nations or of individuals. If discrepant punctuation leads to different views of
reality, it is likely to produce apparently irresolvable conﬂict.91
Analysis of system relationships, without reference to power, errs towards
self-maintenance of the system, regardless of the values espoused within a
given system.92 Conservatism is a feature of the systems theoretical approach.
For many of its proponents it is a means of searching for system stability and
maintenance, not change. While it does allow for emergence, the determi-
nants of change derive from a ‘within system’ dynamic, not from mental
processes, practical consciousness, or the choices of human beings. In Bate-
son’s framework, ‘causes are not effects’93 because, although selections are
made, human systems are open and the set of possibilities is not pre-given.
The set of possibilities is constituted by selections that are remembered,
forgotten, and reinvented, and which cannot be predicted from knowing
the qualities of the system in which they arise. Emergence and unpredictabili-
ty do not mean that there is no learning. Just as Michel Foucault argues that
‘power must be understood in the ﬁrst instance as the multiplicity of force
relations imminent in the sphere in which they operate and in which they
constitute their own organization’,94 there is a possibility of learning within
complex systems.
In summary, in a systems theoretical framework, learning does occur, with
the potential to change habits and redeﬁne the self and the environment, that
is, it can lead to changes in the social imaginary and in practices. Learning
involves interpretation and higher order cognitive reasoning.95 And liberation
from ‘false learning’ or the double binds created by paradoxical communica-
tion requires acknowledgement of participation in them, contestation of
them, and that others are able to contest them too.96 This liberation offers a
means of assessing the evolution of the communication system by explaining
how paradox is generated, where it might be visible in the social imaginaries
82
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
of the communication system, and when policy intervention might help to
cope with double-binding (paradoxical) power relationships.97
METHODOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS AND CRITICISMS
A focus on communication within a complex adaptive system, with recogni-
tion of multiple hierarchical and heterarchical levels within a system, offers a
way of making sense of paradox and the way it gives rise to habitual conﬂicts
between the prevailing social imaginaries of the information society. Asym-
metries of power within such multi-level systems are often sequestered or set
aside so that chronic patterns in our ways of seeing become legitimized.
Bateson argues that, ‘without context, words and actions have no meaning
at all’.98 Meaning is emergent. It arises from interactions among individuals,
groups, and institutions. Methodologically, this means that if the question we
are interested in is about why (not simply how) things happen, then we
cannot focus only on the effects or impacts of the communication system.
A more productive approach is to examine mispunctuations that generate
paradox, especially at the interfaces within a complex system.
In the instrumental ways of seeing, a search for causal relationships and for
impacts often suggests that individuals should be blamed for their own
misbehaviour (e.g. their failure to learn the skills required to use the Internet)
or the misbehaviour of others (e.g. the emotional distress ‘caused’ by parti-
cipants in online interaction). In contrast, by focusing on paradox and by
punctuating analysis from different positions in a complex system, self-
perpetuating and harmful patterns of communication can be brought to
light, including those generated by unacknowledged relations of power. In a
systems view, understanding is conditioned by where one punctuates the
system:
Choosing a causal beginning is arbitrary. The bracketing of a start and a ﬁnish creates
the illusion of ﬁrst causes. . . . The illusion is inviting because people use a vocabulary
of one-way causality to explain social phenomena. In so doing, they implicitly claim
that certain phenomena are ‘the causes’ and certain phenomena are ‘the effects’.99
Examining system boundaries or interfaces in this way has implications for
judgements about human values and purposes. Bateson said that we live by
propositions whose validity is a function of our belief in them.100 This means
that study of the communication system is inseparable from study of human
purposes and values. This approach provides a way of understanding the ‘out
of control’ system scenarios in the social imaginaries of the information
society. From a systems perspective, the apparently self-destructive features
are as much reﬂections of the dynamics of the system as they are of
the cognition of human beings. Equally importantly, the evolution of a
complex adaptive system is understood as being always in progress, always
COMMUNICATION, COMPLEXITY, AND PARADOX
83

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
being ‘regenerated, negotiated and challenged’.101 Working with a systems
framework also means that there is a potential for ruptures to chronic
patterns of communication. When a pattern of paradoxical communication
persists, there is likely to be ‘trouble’ of some kind. This may take the form of
persistent inequality and social injustice or, indeed, of psychopathology.
Intervening means acknowledging paradox, but also devising means of re-
pairing the conditions that are giving rise to it.102
A criticism of this way of proceeding is that it entails negation of the agency
of self-aware human beings. For instance, some analysts warn that a focus on
‘emergent complex systems’ represents an attempt ‘to reduce human society
completely to ordinary complexity’, resulting in catastrophic theories and
policies.103 They argue that the use of the language of self-organization,
attractor sets, and responses to the ‘outside’ of a system implies automaticity,
which can lead to claims that intervention in a complex adaptive system is
pointless (and even dangerous).
Another feature of systems theory that concerns many social scientists is
the recursiveness of emergence which suggests the absence of reﬂexivity,
cognition, and learning. For some, this produces anxiety that it is impossible
to ‘know the dancer from the dance’,104 or, to put it in social science terms,
how we can discern meanings, associations, and values if the analytical focus
is on control of information or communication (transmission) systems.105 As
sociologist, John Urry, says, there is a danger of ending up with ‘social
physics’.106
However, the systems framework for examining paradox gives us purchase
on the dynamics of evolution of a complex adaptive system because it serves
as an antidote to would-be simpliﬁcations that succeed in endowing paradox
with mystery. In reviving an approach that could be characterized as being
‘under existential threat’107 (partly because metaphors of evolutionary sys-
tems become associated with Darwinian natural selection), I suggest that a
risky move towards theoretical eclecticism is very productive. This is because
it disturbs persistent claims about the ‘effects’ of technologies on individuals
and about the ‘impacts’ of technology which can then lead to apparitions of
technological ‘folk devils’.108
In studies of effects or impacts of the Internet, insights into power relations
can be buried beneath the weight of disputes about the reliability or represen-
tativeness of empirical results.109 This is characteristic of studies, for example,
on whether the use of the modern communication system leads to increased
or decreased social involvement and personal well-being. Widely cited instru-
mental research from the mid-1990s claimed evidence of an ‘Internet Para-
dox’: ‘the Internet is a social technology used for communication with
individuals and groups, but . . . it is associated with declines in social involve-
ment and the psychological well-being that goes with social involvement’.110
This led to media warnings that people should moderate their use of the
84
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Internet. By 2002, these negative effects appeared to have dissipated.111 These
conﬂicting ﬁndings were attributed to the passage of time and the diffusion of
the technology, without considering why the paradox was experienced in the
ﬁrst place.
Thus, studies of impacts or effects polarize an idyllic future (or past) with
an alienated life, without acknowledging that ‘communication power is at the
heart of the structure and dynamics of society’, as Manuel Castells puts it.112
Research on the effects of the Internet or the information society persists,
attracting substantial funding, and is frequently reported in the press. For
instance, a news headline claims that ‘surﬁng the web can make you de-
pressed’.113 The researchers stress that whether the Internet causes mental
health problems or whether people with such problems are drawn to the
Internet cannot be ascertained using their research design and methods,114
but the instrumental character of the research questions means that paradox-
ical power relations involving personality, identity, and changes in sociability
that may be implied by the experience of online communication are ig-
nored.115 An interdisciplinary approach, combining concepts from the system
perspective elaborated by Bateson and others, with those from endogenous
theories such as those highlighted in Chapter 3, provides a basis for an
evaluation of paradoxes common to the Internet Age. It enables investigation
not of effects, but of the implications of the interpenetration of technological
and human systems and the scope for policy intervention.
A Critical Systems Framework
The communication system historically has been a site of struggle for ‘control
of the world’, with its extension always offering the promise of a better
world116—the good society. In the prevailing social imaginaries of the infor-
mation society, a system is promised, emerging out of constant technological
innovation, and encouraged by visions of ‘thinking machines’. This process
gives life not only to opportunities for beneﬁcial change but also to new forms
of social, political, and economic inequality and injustice, partly through the
genesis of paradox. Even if analysis of these paradoxes reveals ‘no obvious
avenues along which repair can take place, other than in and through the
critique offered in the analysis itself’,117 as sociologist Michael Billig says,
I suggest that it is better to examine the evidence than to wait for the
‘machines of loving grace’.
Figure 4.1 shows the cluster of concepts that I draw upon to analyse the
paradoxes generated by the evolution of the communication system in infor-
mation society. This cluster brings together—though not harmoniously—
COMMUNICATION, COMPLEXITY, AND PARADOX
85

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
concepts from a systems perspective on the genesis of paradox and from
endogenous models of change in technologies within a complex adaptive
system.
By punctuating analysis from the perspectives of different stakeholders,
discrepant ways of seeing that generate paradox and possibilities for repairing
dysfunctional patterns come to light. Analysis of metacommunications
(stories about ‘what goes on between us’) opens up possibilities for examining
‘the deeper normative notions’ and how these are carried in ‘images, stories
and legends’118 of the Internet Age. This analysis is supported empirically by a
comprehensive survey of the relevant literatures, analysis of policy documen-
tation from a large number of formal governance institutions, contributions
from scholars, policy makers, and practitioners in formal and informal set-
tings relating to policy over several decades, and my direct participation in
research aimed at designing digital technology platforms.
Application of this framework enhances the possibility of ‘adaptive action’,
that is, for building a new social imaginary of the information society and for
considering governance approaches consistent with values of the good society.
It helps to show how the mispunctuation of relationships among the stake-
holders involved in the development of the communication system is com-
plicit in the chronic persistence of the dominant and alternative social
imaginaries and in the genesis of the paradoxes of information scarcity and
complexity discussed in earlier chapters. Some of the differences between
these imaginaries are presented in Table 4.1. This table shows that the visions
of different stakeholders are aligned with both similar and different compo-
nents of imaginaries about what is valued in the information society.
Normally, the implications for governance of these social imaginaries are
presented as being in opposition, with each ‘side’ denying the legitimacy of
the other side’s goals. This is partly a result of the failure to acknowledge the
paradoxes that inform these conﬂicting ways of seeing. When the genesis of
paradoxes is explained, different judgements are possible about the need for
Figure 4.1. Concepts for a Critical Systems Framework
86
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
intervention to correct the pathway of change, reconciling it with the interests
of the stakeholders, but acknowledging that stability and balance are unac-
hievable because the conﬂicts are enduring.
POWER AND COMPLEXITY
An analysis of paradox in the Internet Age calls for investigation of the
complexity of the communication system and it challenges the assumption
that technological innovation is inevitably in concert with aspirations for the
good society. There is something very important about our relationship with
information and its production, circulation, and consumption, beyond mat-
ters of quantity, velocity, or circulation—the main problems addressed by the
models of information processing. Having more and more information in
‘Internet Time’ carries risks for human beings. With T. S. Eliot we need to ask,
‘where is the wisdom we have lost in knowledge? Where is the knowledge we
have lost in information?’119 Critical endogenous perspectives emphasize that
we should neither oversimplify the dynamics of innovation in the communi-
cation system nor reduce them to questions about quantities or stocks of
Table 4.1. Social Imaginaries of the Information Society
Dominant social imaginary
Alternative social imaginary
Corporate vision
Market exchange
Commons
Individual preference
Collective norms
Technological progress
Technology assessment
Information processing
Mediation
Information scarcity
Information abundance
Science and
engineering vision
Complex system
Complex system
Technological mastery
Generative commons
Emergence
Emergence
Information processing
Information processing
Individual agency
Collective action
Political vision
Governance from above
Governance from below
Multi-stakeholder governance (overseen by
governance from above)
Networked coalitions
Intellectual property rights
Sharing communities
Security and surveillance
Creativity and experimentation
Privacy
Anonymity
Civil society vision
Empowerment (in front of the screen)
Empowerment (behind the screen and
in front of the screen)
Risk minimization through individual
control
Collective control
Market-led
Community-led
Source: Author.
COMMUNICATION, COMPLEXITY, AND PARADOX
87

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
‘knowledge’. But they make it difﬁcult to tease out the dynamics that produce
the stabilities and instabilities in the complex adaptive system of which the
communication system is a part. Systems theory is helpful in this respect.
However, we should not lose sight of human perceptions, motivations, or
agency, so we need to be clear about what is understood by power in this
critical systems framework. Charles Taylor does not equate the social imagi-
nary with ideology, but ideology is clearly a factor in conﬂicting social
imaginaries. Ideology can be seen as being relatively autonomous in the
reproduction of economic relations. For Louis Althusser, for example, ideol-
ogy takes material and symbolic forms; it ‘ﬁxes’ people as social subjects,
simultaneously, creating the illusion of ‘free choice’ or agency.120 Even for
Antonio Gramsci, people are said to have ‘strangely composite’ characters and
ideology refers to ‘a conception of the world that is implicitly manifest in art,
in law, in economic activity and in the manifestations of individual and
collective life’.121 Thus, whatever we take to be the limits of agency and choice
within the constraints of the capitalist economy, ideology operates in compli-
cated ways and assumes a certain understanding of power.
Steven Lukes, a political theorist, offers a three-fold classiﬁcation of power,
beginning with a one-dimensional view where power is distributed in a
pluralistic way. It is observable, and it is visible in decision-making behaviour
in situations where there are conﬂicting interests. A second dimension takes
account of bias with respect to values, beliefs, norms, and procedures and
power is as much about non-decision-making as it is about decision-making.
The third dimension presumes that conﬂictual power relations may be covert
or latent, and the ‘real’ interests of stakeholders may be difﬁcult (not impos-
sible) to detect. Lukes insists that ‘any view of power rests on some norma-
tively speciﬁc conception of interests’.122
My interest is in exploring normative conceptions of interests that have
become entangled in the paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity.
Lukes deﬁnes power as ‘human agents, separately or together, in groups or in
organizations, through action or inaction, signiﬁcantly affecting the thoughts
or actions of others (speciﬁcally, in a manner contrary to their interests)’.123
This is a ﬂexible deﬁnition that requires neither the assumption that stake-
holders operate in a rational and transparent way nor that agents cannot
know their ‘real’ interests. In addition, Foucault says that biopower is ‘what
brought life and its mechanisms into the realm of explicit calculations and
made knowledge-power an agent of transformation of human life’.124 Power is
developed through technique in the academy, other institutions, and in
everyday life. It is partial and temporary, even if in a given moment it seems
stable and hegemonic.
Some scholars, such as communication law and policy scholar, Sandra
Braman, distinguish a new form of power in the Internet Age—informational
power—suggesting that it ‘dominates power in other forms, changes how
88
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
they are exercised, and alters the nature of their effects’.125 Informational
power is related to the collection, processing, and interpretation of digital
information for surveillance, cyber warfare, or commercial and social com-
munication purposes. And Manuel Castells identiﬁes ‘communication power’
as the salient form of power in the network age.126 I prefer not to privilege a
new category of power. In my analysis I retain the ﬂexibility to examine
exemplary situations in which power is at work, but focus on changes in
information or in the communication system that are not ‘authored’ or
‘sponsored’, but, instead, emerge from the intersection of interests of different
stakeholders.
COMPLEX SYSTEMS AND POLICY
This discussion of power has a bearing on the way the visions of the informa-
tion society discussed in Chapter 2 are understood. They are reﬂections
of a complex articulation of power relationships in a multi-level system
which is also interpreted in the social imaginaries where multiple, sometimes
conﬂicting, visions come together. Thus, an analysis focusing on the visions
alone would provide little guidance for building an equitable and just informa-
tion society. This is because ‘there is nothing about a highly idealized abstrac-
tion, a vision, for us to know how to go on together every day, in particular
contexts’.127 The beneﬁt of a framework that draws insight from theories of
complex adaptive systems is that, instead of seeing power relationships within a
system as tending towards stability and equilibrium as is common in exogenous
models in the social sciences, the outcomes of paradoxical communication can
be understood to tend towards stability and instability at the same time, albeit,
on different levels within a system. Human agents can be understood to act and
respond in patterned ways, inﬂuenced by power but not in a deterministic
way.128 And paradoxical relationships are such that while a vision may come to
dominate, there is a chance that a novel (better) outcome will emerge.129
This understanding of the dynamics of power relations in a complex
adaptive system has substantial implications for the way we conceive of policy
and the policy making process. The instrumental tradition of research on
policy making sees decision-making processes as being evidence-based and
procedural and focuses on the (quasi)rationality of discourse, persuasion, or
argumentation. Policy making is mainly understood to be a matter for institu-
tions established by the state, and the outcomes depend on the information
available to various communities of decision-makers.130 Participants are pre-
sumed to have relevant expertise and, in democratic countries, to represent
broadly-based interests.131
In the prevailing social imaginaries of the information society, this pluralist
concept of policy making is invoked when it is assumed that all the stakeholders
COMMUNICATION, COMPLEXITY, AND PARADOX
89

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
can exercise their power in shaping policy outcomes in line with deliberative
theories of democracy.132 The new digital platforms are expected to support
deliberative forums, which may depart from the Habermasian ‘ideal speech
situation’, but are still presumed to favour political self-efﬁcacy. Thus, for
example, some ﬁnd new potentialities for consensus formation and rational-
critical discourse in digital platforms and social media—from Twitter to the
BlackBerry Messenger Service. However, decision-making in a multi-level
complex system must be expected to involve contraints that limit inﬂuence
over decision-making by those in authoritative positions, as well as new
possibilities for the exercise of power.133 The idealization of the relation of
the new technologies to the public sphere makes it seem as if participants in
policy debates are objective and disinterested in their search for the ‘truth’,134
consistent with the information processing model.
This view neglects the diversity of identities and the search for justice. As
Nancy Fraser points out, ‘claims on behalf of “the global poor” are pitted
against the claims of citizens of bounded polities’.135 She argues that policy
makers face a ‘spectre of incommensurability’ with respect to the distribution
of resources and a misframing of the voices of those who are not integrated
within the dominant communities.136 The result is persistent opposition
without apparent solution. A different standard for public deliberation is
offered by the notion of agonistic pluralism which acknowledges contested
interests and accepts that the terrain of policy making is always vulnerable.137
This is a view that is easier to work with in a complex adaptive systems
framework because vulnerability can spring from the multiple ways in which
power is exercised—that is, from the full spectrum of dimensions discussed
by Lukes.138
Finally, with a focus on paradox, claims that policy intervention is harmful
can be seen to have a certain validity just as can claims that policy intervention
is needed from either above or below. This is because these perspectives are
about the dynamics of change at different levels in a complex adaptive system.
Thus, Clay Shirky, an American new media scholar and activist, may be partly
right in his claim that the Internet ‘lets us design new kinds of participation and
sharing’, consistent with a utopia organized around scientiﬁc and technical
reason and the pursuit of freedom, and requiring that all the fruits of techno-
logical innovation be allowed to ﬂourish. He agues that those inconsistent with
the good society will fail because of the ‘natural braking functions of social
diffusion’.139 However, this view, while not entirely invalid, mispunctuates the
public interest in the evolution of the communication system.
A systems perspective emphasizes the interfaces between the components
in a system, sites where conﬂict leads to the genesis of paradox rather than the
endpoints or outputs of this system which may (sometimes) be subject to
selection and, hence, to ‘natural braking effects’. Bateson’s concern is with
how we should ‘conduct our civilization’ and he warns that ‘we should be
90
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
careful what we pretend because we become what we pretend’ and ‘[w]hat
people presume to be “human” is what they will build in as premises of their
social arrangements, and what they build in is sure to be learned, is sure to
become a part of the character of those who participate’.140 As the learning
process takes place, certain social imaginaries become self-reinforcing. They
go unquestioned. The systems perspective sensitizes us to the possibility that
any system that ‘destroys its environment ultimately destroys itself ’.141
Conclusion
For early proponents of cybernetics and statistical, biological, and compu-
tational systems theories, conﬂating mind and machine, and nature and
society were permissible in the effort to formulate a universal theory of
complex system dynamics. Meaning and symbolic representation were not
at the top of the agendas of most participants in the early Macy Confer-
ences, for instance. As Philip Mirowski points out in his book, Machine
Dreams: ‘If there was one tenet of that era’s particular faith in science, it
was that logical rigor and the mathematical idiom of expression would
produce transparent agreement over the meaning and signiﬁcance of vari-
ous models and their implications’.142
Much of this work was politically conservative in its search for the deter-
minants of system stability, and it responded to the prevailing post-World
War II political climate. In this sense, early systems work can be seen as a
critical response to the then prevailing scientiﬁc paradigm (physics). Over
time, systems theory has experienced a ‘rebirth’ within the sciences, in work
on complex adaptive systems. An afﬁnity to this way of seeing is apparent also
in some areas of the social sciences, which can be understood as a reaction to
the prevailing ‘effects’ paradigm.
A one- or, at best, two-dimensional approach to power in policy making,
combined with instrumental perspectives on technological innovation and
economic, and other changes in society, prevails as the ‘scientiﬁc’ paradigm in
the social sciences. These approaches, and especially the information process-
ing model, are very visible in the current social imaginaries of the information
society. Critical theories of power have visibility in the academic community
in research on the information society and, speciﬁcally on the communica-
tion system. Critical scholarship provides an understanding of the reasons
why policy interventions yield unanticipated consequences, and this can act
as a buffer against the search for ‘curative’ or instrumental policies. Instru-
mental responses may be welcomed, for instance, as measures to curtail the
distribution of child pornography or help citizens to be more aware of the
COMMUNICATION, COMPLEXITY, AND PARADOX
91

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
way their activities are monitored in virtual space, but they do not suggest
means to repair the harms of the persistent paradoxes.
Advocacy for a ‘self-organizing’ market to guide the evolutionary process
and a justiﬁcation for non-intervention by policy makers in a complex
adaptive system is found in some readings of the systems approach, for
example, in claims that a technological system is subject to evolutionary
change in response ‘not primarily to human need but to its own needs’.143 In
this view, there is no alternative to hoping that the evolution of the system will
respond to its own ‘need’ for survival. Some systems analysts in the social
sciences locate their hopes for empowering social transformation in ‘the
realization of practical forces of change that have a potential to rise from
the inside of the systems in question in order to produce a transcendental
outside that becomes a new whole’.144 The suggestion is that we rely on the
emergent potential for transformation.
Theoretical perspectives that focus on power asymmetries often set the
‘context’ of change on one side, providing some explanation for conﬂict, but
rarely for the genesis of paradox. In contrast, a critical systems framework
can be applied to help in achieving liberation from ‘false learning’ which is
associated with the dynamic of paradoxical communication. It offers a basis
for a new approach to intervention based on adaptive learning, by focusing
attention on the genesis of paradoxes in the Internet Age. The next chapters
focus on various sites for the genesis of paradox, ﬁrst, in the role of the
communication system in everyday life (Chapter 5), then in the develop-
ment of new digital platforms and means of controlling digital information
(Chapter 6) and, ﬁnally, in policy and governance forums (Chapter 7).
92
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5
Communication Systems in
Everyday Life
Introduction
The communication system mediates every aspect of experience in the
information society. Roger Silverstone, in his studies of mediation, insisted
that this system, including its infrastructure and content, is increasingly
indispensable to the fabric of people’s everyday lives and that we must study
it in all its complex dimensions—cultural and social, and political and
economic. Silverstone included all forms of electronic media in this system,
examining them especially with respect to what they mean for the way
people value close and distant others, and what motivates people to take
action to alleviate suffering, to redress social injustice, and to promote
equality. He argued that ICTs are ‘doubly articulated’ in the economy and
in culture because of their status as objects and communication media. For
this reason, the communication system needs to be studied not only as a
very material object but also as symbolic message.1 While there may be little
disagreement about the importance of mediated communication among
scholars and many of the stakeholders in the information society, there is
a huge variety of views about its consequences and what, if anything,
should be done about them.
The work of social scientists on the way the communication system med-
iates people’s lives is based mainly on their studies of people’s interactions
from their positions ‘in front of the screens’ of computers, mobile phones,
BlackBerrys, and iPads or their narratives about these interactions. Computer
scientists and engineers, in contrast, are also informed by their work on what
goes on ‘behind’ these screens. This research contributes to the prevailing
social imaginaries of the information society, as does the work of science
ﬁction writers. William Gibson, for example, introduced the term ‘cyberspace’
in the mid-1980s, in his science ﬁction tale, Neuroromancer. His vision was
stimulated by his observations of young people playing video games and what
he surmised they might be imagining about their virtual worlds. He com-
ments that ‘everyone I know who works with computers seems to develop
a belief that there’s some kind of actual space behind the screen, someplace
you can’t see but you know is there’.2 The social imaginaries of the Internet
surfer or the online game player are differentiated from those of the systems

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
developer by the latter’s understanding of what the surfer and games player
can only speculate about.
In this chapter, I examine differences among the social imaginaries of the
interactions ‘in front of’ and ‘behind’ the screen to illustrate how these
contribute to the genesis of the paradoxes of information scarcity and com-
plexity in the Internet Age. My purpose is not to suggest that the imaginaries
of one group are more ‘valid’ than those of another in terms of their experi-
ence of the virtual world. The critical systems framework developed at the end
of Chapter 4 emphasizes the importance of social imaginaries of the commu-
nication system punctuated from different vantage points. Different ways of
imagining the mediated life of social scientists, computer scientists, and
engineers are usually ignored because disciplinary approaches are segregated
by their incommensurate epistemologies and methodologies. For example,
the imaginaries of engineers are partly based on their understanding of
hardware and software components which they are able to map in terms
of their functionality and the way they can be organized to form a global view
of a system. This is a way of seeing that then becomes familiar and supports
meaning construction that can be translated into systems functionality in
reassuring ways. The imaginaries of participation in front of the screen
in mediated environments generally are not based on these ways of seeing
and, in some ways, may be richer as a result. These perspectives are based on
different levels of abstraction and they imply power relationships that can give
rise to paradoxical outcomes.
These social imaginaries can be treated as metacommunications about
the communication system. Their analysis can be punctuated, ﬁrst by a
consideration of those whose experience is mainly in front of the screen,
and then by examining the views of those who are developing behind
the screen technologies. In contrasting different views, the way the para-
doxes of information scarcity and complexity are expressed in prevailing
social imaginaries begins to emerge. On the one hand, the social imaginary
of the Internet Age is about a new cultural form; one that embraces the
economic, the political, and the social; one where innovation in the
system is welcomed and explored creatively. On the other, there is a social
imaginary where mastery of the communication system is associated with
automating virtual relationships, for better or for worse, and for corporate,
military, or political purposes.3 In this case, an intelligent self-organizing
system is sought as a solution to nearly all of society’s problems.
The features of the system from the user’s perspective may be described
as ‘user customizable and adaptable’, as ‘supporting collaborative work’, or
as ‘user-sensitive displays and features’—all of which are designations
consistent with the values of adaptability and ﬂexibility, collaboration,
and sensitivity to human emotion. Nevertheless, these labels also signify
an increasingly complex system behind the screen, the dynamics and
94
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
implications of which generally are not part of the social imaginaries of
everyday users.
The next section sets the scene for considering these developments in the
communication system by highlighting some of the ways it is associated with
the challenges of augmenting the human mind through increasingly sophisti-
cated technologies that mediate our lives. I examine some of the social
imaginaries revealed by research in the social sciences where ‘in front of the
screen’ developments have been found to have implications for intimacy,
identity, authenticity, and creativity; the boundaries between public and
private; and what it means to be a participant in mediated everyday life.
I then shift to an examination of the perspectives of those with the technical
skills required to work ‘behind the screen’, especially on developments in
software agent-based computing that enable, among other things, human
interactions with the communication system. For some technologists, the
Web is evolving to ‘become a giant brain capable of analyzing data and
extrapolating new ideas’.4 One of the attractions of these developments is
the capacity to interact with each other through virtual representations.
In some imaginaries of the future, we might be represented, by design
or inadvertently, entirely by our avatars. By highlighting the different perspe-
ctives as metacommunications, that is, stories about these innovations,
differences in what is being assumed about human choice and control over
the mediated environment are brought to the fore as are insights into the
differing interests of participants in the evolution of the communication
system. The dreams of those who hope for a future in which digital technol-
ogies are employed to amplify the capacities of the human mind provide
a good place to start this account.
Amplifying the Mind
The communication system is becoming more sophisticated in its capacity to
process, store, and circulate digital information. There is little disagreement
about this. Differences emerge when we enquire into what sophistication
actually implies for the mediation of everyday life. The capacities of the
system are due to innovations in hardware and software and their informa-
tion processing capabilities, but it is the developments in software that are of
concern in this chapter.5 The visions (discussed in Chapters 2 and 3) of Paul
Otlet and Vannevar Bush, among others, were central to dreams of augment-
ing human information processing capabilities, of using technologies to
enhance human memory, to the ultimate, if contested, goal of devising
a system that ‘thinks’. In ‘As We May Think’, Bush described the memex as
COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS IN EVERYDAY LIFE
95

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
a machine that can augment human capacities for indexing information,
leaving highly valued information trails that ‘do not fade’, and enhancing
scientiﬁc memory. The goal of automating human intelligence was consistent
with the prevailing social imaginary of a world in which ‘man’ could ‘better
review his shady past and analyze more completely and objectively his present
problems’, in the interests of building the good society.6 Since Bush’s time,
developments in software programming and in the protocols for information
distribution, such as the Internet, have provided the means for further
advances in the automation of information processing.
Howard Rheingold, a keen observer of the information society, described
the developments ‘behind the screen’ as life-afﬁrming because of the way they
enable people to interact with them. His hope is that they will reduce
loneliness and foster a sense of belonging within the social fabric of society.7
In his work, he depicts the technological innovations behind the screen as
being consistent with a belief in computers as intelligent machines that
eventually will be able to mimic our values and preferences, whatever they
might be. His imaginary of the information society evokes a self-organizing
ecology; a system in which there are nominal fragments of human control
behind the screen, but which is beneﬁcial for all those in front of the screen.
His is an imaginary in which intelligent software agents are designed to
evolve, avoid detection, and pursue all manner of purposes on our behalf.
In one variant of this imaginary, the arrival of the Singularity could see
a merging of our biological existence with technology. For Vernor Vinge, the
computer scientist and science ﬁction writer whose ideas were mentioned in
Chapter 2, the system’s evolution including an exponential increase in scien-
tiﬁc output held the promise of artiﬁcial intelligence. He expected these
developments to feed on one another, driving the potential for the Singularity
to ‘a point where our old models must be discarded and a new reality rules’:8
a point whose avoidance or conﬁnement is beyond human control. In a tale of
science ﬁction which Vinge refers to, neocytes are implanted with molecular
memory and transmitted from generation to generation, embracing and
then transcending the ‘human’ in all its manifestations.9 Other writers
favour a more techno-entrepreneurial approach that puts less emphasis on
the progress of science and, like Ray Kurzweil, argue that, ‘there will be
no distinction, post-Singularity, between human and machine or between
physical and virtual reality’.10 In Kurzweil’s view, the primary goal of innova-
tion is to achieve sophisticated computerized pattern recognition and prob-
lem-solving capacity that eventually encompasses all human knowledge.
For Vinge, however, the post-human era does not necessarily signal loss
of knowledge, memory, or reﬂection even though humans pass from centre-
stage. His vision, nevertheless, gives reason for concern about the trajectory of
innovation in the communication system and whether there is a need for
intervention.
96
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
In the early 1990s, Rheingold and others, with great optimism, were
trumpeting the beneﬁts of virtual life. They were convinced that the
mediated experience of life in virtual communities would be beneﬁcial,
despite some worrying developments. A decade later, Rheingold began to
see that ‘we are changing what it means to be human’,11 and to question
how these changes might be controlled so as not to invoke the Singularity,
or at least, not accidentally. The mastery of technology in the face of
technological innovation has been an ongoing concern for social scientists.
How tenuous is our mastery of behind the screen communication
system operations? If it is very weak, should we try to repair this by
strengthening our understanding and making choices about possible direc-
tions for change?
For most people, developments in the ﬁeld of software automation are very
far removed from the experiences of everyday life. Nevertheless, we interact
daily with software—online identities are asserting themselves increasingly,
expressing their hopes and making their choices for our lives. These choices
may relate to existential questions about the meaning of human life, or
searches for ﬁsh and chip shops or euthanasia clinics—they involve both
the trivial and the profound. The innovation process behind the screen is
enabling engineers and computer scientists to launch agents into our world,
only a very few of which we control. What began as creatures of our making is
becoming a jungle of virtual creatures—some predatory, some parasitical,
some cooperative, some competitive, and some feral. In the poem, The
Sorcerer’s Apprentice, the apprentice uses magic to accomplish his tasks, but
it soon goes beyond his control. He needs the Sorcerer to put things right,
suggesting a conservative return to the wisdom of seniority.12 However, for
those who favour instead an organic solution from below, the issue of control
of the communication system must be a concern. One response is to see
interventions to ‘put things right’ as manipulations from above which are
both unsafe and authoritarian.
Another response is that more research is needed to enable us to develop
a better understanding of these developments before we make decisions about
possible action. Rheingold, for example, argues that ‘the great lever is still
understanding—if enough people can understand what is happening, I still
believe that we can have an inﬂuence’.13 Manuel Castells comments that these
developments occur ‘through a speciﬁc code of communication, which we
must understand if we want to change our reality’.14 Some seek this under-
standing in the way the immersive environments of the digital world can be
said to be augmenting the human mind through the novel connections
enabled by hypertext and new forms of electronic media, suggesting that
each individual mind remains in control.15 For most people, most of the
time, however, our interactions with the communication system in front of
the screen involve calling up information without understanding the values
COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS IN EVERYDAY LIFE
97

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
built into the operations that select and present it, or which bring it to our
screens, invited or uninvited.
In the next section, I consider what social science research tells us about the
social imaginaries of virtuality in everyday life in front of the screen life. This
is followed by an examination of these imaginaries from the perspectives
of those more familiar with behind the screen developments. In both cases,
I treat the results of research in different disciplines as metacommunications
that help us to understand different facets of the prevailing social imaginaries
of the information society and the paradoxes of information scarcity
and complexity. In Chapter 6, I punctuate analysis of the social imaginaries
of the information society from the perspectives of the companies in
the creative industry and then from the perspectives of the developers of the
behind the screen technology platforms.
Virtuality in Everyday Life
Social science research on the experience of virtuality in everyday life often
considers processes of identity formation and the way peoples’ encounters in
the online space created by digital services and social media platforms enable
them to augment their participation in the ‘real’ world. Sherry Turkle
writes that, ‘computers, with their reactivity and interactivity, stand in a
novel and evocative relationship between the living and the inanimate’.16 It
is not surprising that the ways that social scientists approach analysis of the
electronic mediations of everyday life differ. In the administrative tradition,
research on the way people incorporate virtual worlds into their everyday lives
tends to be preoccupied with what Internet users do, how this is inﬂuenced by
their social and cultural environment, and how online and ofﬂine practices
become integrated. That is, it examines mainly instrumental concerns about
how things happen and their impacts, while research in the critical tradition is
more likely to focus on the meanings people attribute to their online partici-
pation and on the power relationships that are invoked.17
In both traditions, however, whether the topic is online experience of
language development, identity construction, political debate, or religious
afﬁliation, research results invariably ﬁnd both beneﬁts and risks associated
with immersive virtual worlds. Researchers afﬁliated to these different rese-
arch traditions tend to be partisan, notwithstanding claims to the contrary.
Researchers working in the instrumental tradition report the empowering
potential of virtual life and tend to discount the risks associated with online
participation (although this is not always the case). Critical researchers, in
contrast, are more likely to provide evidence of disempowerment, inequality,
98
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
alienation, and exploitation although they also ﬁnd evidence of an empower-
ing potential of online participation to resist the imposition of power from
above. They frequently emphasize one set of outcomes and de-emphasize the
other. Although researchers in both traditions often focus on procedures to
enable the virtual world to be incorporated into people’s lives in ways that
they value, attention to the power relationships which inﬂuence the way
the virtual world is experienced is typical of the critical research tradition.
The resources available for studies of the impact of life in front of the screen,
in the instrumental tradition, are much larger than those available for critical
analysis of the power relationships articulated in and outside virtual worlds
(supporting cultural, social, business, or political life).
The generalizability of most studies of mediated life is limited by the
propensity of researchers to focus on the most popular social media sites,
such as the US-based Facebook or sites based in other regions where
single providers of particular kinds of sites dominate the market. Also,
research published in the English language (or translated into English) relies
disproportionately on empirical studies involving online participants based in
Europe or North America and, frequently, on questionnaire surveys involving
university students acting as respondents, interviewees, or participants in
ethnographic research. Cultural difference tends to be overlooked, there are
few cross-cultural comparative studies, and the implications of online partic-
ipation involving both commercial and non-commercial activities tend to be
downplayed.18
Critical assessment of online interactions from the perspective of what they
can tell us about the imaginaries of experience of mastery of the mediated
environment is difﬁcult because the main source of data is self-reporting by
those engaged in virtual worlds.19 When people are asked whether this
engagement is consistent with well-being, they are invited to reﬂect on how
they are spending their time. This leads to responses that are biased in various
ways that are familiar to methodologists, but a positive regard for virtual
participation is a frequent response.20 Ethnographic research is better able to
elicit critical reﬂection on virtual experiences, but this method is much less
popular than empirical study of the impact of virtuality using surveys and
various kinds of interviews. Nevertheless, social science research does provide
insights into some aspects of the social imaginaries, especially concerning the
way people accommodate or resist the mediations of everyday life, how they
participate and work and how they try to control their mediated lives.
Thorstein Veblen’s analysis in the nineteenth century of consumption
patterns, mainly in the United States, led him to conclude that our ‘habits
of thought with respect to the expression of life in any given direction
unavoidably affect the habitual view of what is good and right in life in
other directions also’.21 He insisted that people’s economic interests were
never distinct from their cultural, social, or political interests. The mobile
COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS IN EVERYDAY LIFE
99

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
phone is an example of a technology that has become emblematic as a symbol
of power in the social imaginary of the information society. Umberto Eco
emphasizes the symbolic power of the mobile phone in this way: ‘So anyone
who ﬂaunts a portable phone as a symbol of power is . . . announcing to all
and sundry his desperate, subaltern position, in which he is obliged to snap to
attention, even when making love, if the CEO happens to telephone’.22 The
mobile phone is at the heart of efforts to commercialize virtual space.
Of course, innovations in the technologies that support what Veblen calls
conspicuous consumption are not new. However, the transformations in
socio-cultural constructions of what it means to human beings to conduct
their lives online are new. The social imaginary of the virtual that has emerged
since Sherry Turkle’s book, The Second Self, can be understood as a composite
of the creative thinking and resourcefulness of human beings who imagine
new forms of organization and online practices.23 This construction is inﬂu-
enced by interactions among virtual communities in the ‘real’ world, and
crossovers between the ‘real’ and the ‘virtual’, enabled by the organization of
communities around social media platforms which include Facebook, You-
Tube, and Twitter, among many others.
Divisions within the social sciences persist in undermining our capacity
to examine the relationships between the cultural and symbolic worlds and
the economic or material aspects of life in the information society. The result
is that with the exception of economics and some branches of management
studies, most work in the social sciences provides few insights into the
relationships between trends in the mediated environment that privilege
commercial incentives and those related to social and cultural values. Here,
I focus on what can be learned from studies of the socio-cultural experiences
of mediation in everyday life in front of the screen.
MEDIATION OF EVERYDAY LIFE
Much instrumental research is devoted to tracking and explaining the diffu-
sion or take-up of technologies that enable the mediation of everyday life.24
This tradition largely ignores the different symbolic meanings associated with
use of the Internet and social media platforms and provides no information
about the power relations associated with this use. Its concern mainly is with
how rapidly people are accommodating or adjusting to their mediated en-
vironments, an approach informed by the information processing model
(discussed in Chapter 3). Technology and service diffusion patterns are
evidenced by statistics on growth in the take-up of competing social network-
ing sites. Much effort is devoted to measuring the number of ‘friends’
in online networks. For example, one study indicates that social networkers
have an average of 195 ‘friends’; another shows that membership in social
100
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
networks is growing at a linear rate; and yet another, that Facebook is enabling
more than 25 billion exchanges of information monthly.25 These sorts of
results tell us something about patterns of use, scale of activity, and the
centrality of individuals or communities in their networks,26 but not about
the qualities of relationships and whether they are experienced as empowering
or disempowering.
The signiﬁcant issue in these studies is how many online friends one has.
There is a frequent assumption that social media participants are intent on
maximizing their online networks, and these quantitative approaches are
informed by an instrumental agenda. While they may be able to trace the
diffusion of new technologies, the assumptions made about the social, psy-
chological, and economic characteristics of ‘laggards’ and ‘lead users’ camou-
ﬂage substantial differences within online populations. The demise of an
online application may be explained by its failure to capture the popular
imagination or by the idea that a particular application or technology is ahead
of its time. But, this yields little insight into why a particular technology and
its associated practices become incorporated into people’s lives, or the variety
of patterns of accommodation and resistance across cultures.
For economists, an eventually successful diffusion process indicates that an
initially ‘imperfect’ design has been perfected through competition in the
marketplace, becoming the dominant design. But this perspective does not
probe the social imaginary of alternative technology choices that might priori-
tize different values. Cultural and social values shape how online participants
relate to each other and whether they value small- over large-scale commu-
nities, for instance. Resistance to what the market offers is one strategy which
may sustain the variety of alternatives available to people, but the result is not
necessarily desirable. Resistance that leads to a greater variety of social media
platforms or online services may lead to inefﬁciencies in production, and to
exclusion, if the price of access becomes higher. From the perspective of the
mediation of everyday life, the best outcome may be to wait, and to see what
comes later, slowing the take-up of what the virtual world has to offer.
Application of the diffusion model leads to a neglect of the speciﬁc contexts
for the production and use of virtual environments and ignores the fact that
people are active producers and innovators—an observation common in the
critical traditions of research in this area. Research in these traditions shows
that social interaction, accessing the Internet via a networked computer or
a mobile phone, is becoming pervasive, particularly among young people,
and is being perceived increasingly as essential for the conduct of all aspects of
life.27 It shows that people of all ages generally are accommodating—and
welcoming—the virtual world into their lives. Social networking platforms
are mediating the lives of children and adults increasingly intensely, and
people are employing their positions in front of the screen to enable multiple
information-seeking and communication practices.
COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS IN EVERYDAY LIFE
101

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Research often measures people’s perceptions of their social well-being
based on concepts such as integration, acceptance, and actualization, as well
as trust, security, and comfort. The use of such social media as Twitter
appears, for example, to be encouraging new modes of conversation, new
forms of collaboration and information sharing, fostering a sense of connect-
edness, and providing gratiﬁcations associated with social network surﬁng
and the constant updating of online status. However, this work tells us little
about the social and cultural values that are being privileged as the virtual
world expands, or about the variety or diversity of information production
and consumption being encouraged through the mediation of everyday life at
numerous online sites. It also contributes little insight into the social imagin-
aries of the information society that are being privileged as the innovation
process behind the screen runs its course.
PARTICIPATING IN MEDIATED VIRTUALITY
In the prevailing social imaginaries of the information society, ﬁnally free of
the constraints of the mass media that allowed few opportunities to contrib-
ute, participants in online social media sites are envisaged as involved crea-
tively in the production of a ‘collaborative culture’. This is variously labelled
‘mass creativity’, ‘prosumption’, ‘co-creation’, and even ‘produsage’, all of
which may be associated with some of the features of commons-based peer
production (see Chapter 3), although these terms often invoke the value of
private intellectual property ownership rather than the value of public do-
main information which is prominent in information sharing in the infor-
mation commons.28
A P2P model of online interaction is seen as enabling the transparency of
online interactions where decision-making power rests increasingly with the
person in front of the screen. Several authors, including Don Tapscott in
Wikinomics and Charles Leadbeater in We-think, celebrate the digital collective
culture which the virtual mediation of everyday life seems to be fostering.29 In
this version of the social imaginary, social media are facilitating changes in the
way people communicate, create, and share information, consistent with the
values of cooperation, democracy, and inclusion. This view presumes that
behind the screen developments in technology are consistent with these values,
encouraging diversity and variety in the mediated communication environ-
ment. This view is inﬂuential in the metacommunications about transforma-
tions in relations of power in the virtual world and, implicitly, in the ‘real’ world
when it is assumed that these favour the empowerment of citizens and
consumers.
These social imaginaries of the information society are indicative of a one-
dimensional view of power relations associated with these empowering
102
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
transformations, but there are other perspectives which highlight the poten-
tial for disempowerment. Lev Manovich, for instance, argues that user-
generated content is produced by participants who ‘make their own cultural
products that follow the templates established by the professionals and/or rely
on professional content’.30 He suggests that the social imaginary is being
colonized by conventions that are designed into the behind the screen
technology and that the disempowering implications for the mediation of
everyday life are greater than in the mass media era, insofar as they constrain
the creative imaginations of participants. Online interactions involve man-
aged forms of activity that constrain the diversity of productive forms
of online engagement, something often forgotten in the celebration of the
creative potential of digital platforms. Whether these conventions are under-
stood as the product of hegemonic ideology about how to turn virtual
environments into spaces for the production and sale of cultural commodities
or are understood broadly as the result of emergent social imaginaries which
condition widely accepted practices, they become taken-for-granted ways of
seeing the possibilities for creativity and experimentation in the information
society.31
Conventions embedded in the design features of online spaces limit what
can be achieved at the sites available to online participants. This is not to say
that there is no space for creativity and initiative, such as when young girls
invest their identities in their Barbie Dolls, or young boys do the same with
their GI Joes or baseball trading cards. The vast majority of cultural expres-
sion may well be imitative and ritualitistic, with creativity as we ordinarily
understand it being the province of the few. Nevertheless, the conventions
built into the behind the screen software (and hardware) are inﬂuencing
people’s tastes and aesthetic values, similar to the conventions in the mass
media era. This should not be forgotten in our analysis of information society
imaginaries.
Wittgenstein observes that ‘what we cannot think, we cannot think: we
cannot therefore say what we cannot think’.32 When the conventions con-
strain what people are able to think or imagine, they cannot realistically be
understood as being empowered in the sense of being fully released from the
constraints imposed by others in the virtual age. Instrumental accounts often
overlook the fact that conventions reﬂect interests that differ from those of
online participants, for instance, in ensuring that participants are put to work
directly or indirectly in the service of generating revenue, or to assist in the
surveillance of others with little or no transparency. What is downplayed in
privileging the consumer and her or his empowerment are the constraints
that accompany embodiment within virtual arrangements that are, at least
partly or episodically, disempowering.
Comparatively little attention is given to the way that ‘places, bodies and
selves are unavoidably translated into the conventions of the medium’.33 For
COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS IN EVERYDAY LIFE
103

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
instance, the activities of artists who use online spaces to facilitate the
production of art works or to display their performances are constrained
by online design features.34 Research on the visions and practices of artists
using online platforms, for example, virtual synchronous production
spaces, indicates that few of them have the resources to go behind the screen,
or to become mavericks able to challenge the values or conventions that
constrain their practice.35 The result is that the majority of participants in
virtual life experience social media according to the conventions laid down by
site owners.
Research on conventions of this kind provides us with a rather different
vision of online participation compared to the social imaginary of collab-
orative and democratic online participation. Technological platforms are
perceived differently depending on one’s mastery and understanding of the
conventions embedded in the technology, and one’s position with respect to
the authority of the state or corporate owners of online sites. In this social
imaginary of the information society, everyone is a generator of content,
yielding enormous diversity and variety for social, cultural, or political
purposes. The potential for participation in social protest movements, politi-
cal contests such as online deliberation or voting, or artistic creation, is
regarded as unbounded.
If we take account of the conventions and constraints embedded in tech-
nology, and the variation in participants’ skills and propensities to participate,
however, a different vision emerges. This raises questions about how ‘partici-
patory’ the mediation of everyday life really is, and about the experience of
both empowerment and disempowerment. Motivations for contributing dig-
ital content vary and participants’ levels of activity differ. For example, there
are reports that only 0.5–1.5 per cent of users of Flickr, YouTube, and
Wikipedia were making their own content contributions, based on world-
wide estimates in 2007. In the United States, however, it is estimated that
some 17 per cent of Americans had posted content in the form of text,
feedback at websites or discussion on the Web and that more than half of
teenagers who have gone online had created content for the Web by 2005.36
However, the nature of participation is inﬂuenced also by the level and type of
skills that teenagers and adults acquire. A relatively small proportion of online
participants has the software programming skills to go beyond making basic
contributions to content, for example, at sites such as Second Life, where only
a small proportion of participants engages in ‘modding’ using the software
tools provided by the site owner.37 Similarly, collaborative platforms, hosted
by the Facebook Developer Platform or Google’s OpenSocial platform, report
that a small fraction of users accounts for the majority of activity.38 In
addition, there is increasing evidence of what Cass Sunstein calls ‘cyberbalk-
anization’, where deliberation among like-minded people may lead not only
to the reinforcement of certain views but also to more extreme perspectives.39
104
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
CROWDSOURCING AND LABOURING IN VIRTUAL SPACE
Research on crowdsourcing provides yet another view of the experience of
mediated life.40 Crowdsourcing refers to soliciting help with tasks from large
communities of potential contributors. In the prevailing social imaginaries,
online crowdsourcing, an increasingly popular business strategy, is under-
stood to promote opportunities for participation, diversity, and choice.
Participants in crowdsourcing are encouraged to contribute to certain web-
sites and to undertake tasks for commercial and non-commercial organiza-
tions. This enables the organizations to tap into the creative potential of
globally dispersed contributors. Examples include giffgaff, a mobile virtual
network operator that invites customers to provide ideas, and Microsoft’s
Most Valuable Professionals which enables online participants to answer
millions of questions annually.41 In the prevailing social imaginary, these
activities are said to be leading to the demise of hierarchical organizations,
such that external and internal teams can work to make products and services
‘for a better world’.42
Apart from the fact that participants at these sites generally have little idea
about whether their contributions are valued, this perspective also omits
critical assessment of the labour practices and power relationships established
among the site owners, those who commission the online work, and the
online participants. The social imaginary suggests that participation fosters
the values of ‘co-creation’ and increases opportunities for employment, but
the wages and working conditions of virtual workers are rarely examined.
When they are, wages are often found to be low and working conditions
poor.43 This type of online contributing also includes voluntary unpaid work
for various social organizations.44 However, these voluntary opportunities do
not negate the fact that participation is not always empowering in the Internet
Age. The willingness of online participants to visit websites and to produce or
consume content in larger or smaller quantities contributes to the social
imaginary of the abundance and diversity of information resources.45 Never-
theless, the development of these and other social media platforms is respon-
sive to the interests of the consumer electronics industry which produces the
tools for, and proﬁts from, the ‘work’ of online participants.
CONTROLLING MEDIATED LIFE
Developments in software programming and in the interactive applications
that can be accessed and modiﬁed at online sites are providing the means for
enhanced automation of information processing. These developments have
implications for perceptions of the boundaries between public and private
life. Instrumental research is mainly concerned with the implications of
COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS IN EVERYDAY LIFE
105

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
automation for in front of the screen experience. Research focuses on facets of
‘hyperpersonal’ modes of communication,46 some of which resemble the
social imaginary of the ‘post-human’, and there is interest, for example, in
changes in message composing time, editing behaviours, use of language and
sentence complexity, and relational tone, as well as awareness of others.47
Much attention is given to how emotions are conveyed in online interac-
tions, the depth of the emotion displayed online, and the interactional norms
for ‘good’ behaviour. There are studies of changes in the patterns of who is
communicated with, who is avoided, and the consequences for personal stress
of being ‘always there’.48 Instrumental research, however, focuses primarily on
individual attitudes and behaviours, and this ﬁlter level does not indicate
changes in the norms governing collective behaviour or the way developments
behind the screen in software capabilities are inﬂuencing choices about
mediated interactions, especially with respect to personal privacy and expo-
sure to risk.49 This research tradition tends to enquire into whether social
media participants are able to tailor their online experience (within the
constraints of the platforms they can access) by selecting privacy features, or
clicking on ‘do not disturb’ icons and learning to recognize phantom or other
intrusions by spammers. However, while they may be intending to protect
their interactions, people upload considerable amounts of personal informa-
tion. This suggests that while they may claim to understand privacy issues,
people do not behave as if they associate personal risk with the provision of
such information.50
Research from a critical perspective draws attention, in contrast, to social
media site owners’ control over the boundary between public and private life.
For example, owners of sites, such as Facebook, continuously work behind the
screen to tweak their sites’ privacy conditions to improve their automated
systems, claiming this to be in the interests of users. However, if site partici-
pants are unhappy with the features available, they have little choice but to
continue using a site to maintain connections with other users and they do
not seem to leave sites, such as Facebook, with a major market share, even if
they are unhappy.51 In the prevailing social imaginary, responsibility for
managing privacy rests with the user. The interests of social media site
providers are imagined as being benign except when there is a ﬂurry of
media coverage about, for example, ostensibly ‘bad behaviour’ in the form
of an automated system’s ‘accidental’ collection of personal information.52
In the political realm, the social imaginary of mediated everyday life
conveys a vision of openness and transparency in the public realm of the
state, and of empowering participation for those who go online. Social media,
including blogs, wikis, social networking sites, and microblogging platforms,
are portrayed as means for enhancing government transparency, with accom-
panying expectations of lower levels of corruption, and new information
resources that journalists and citizens can use to hold the state to account.
106
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Virtual platforms that support alternative media, citizen journalism, or polit-
ical protest movements clearly are empowering, for some users, some of the
time.53 Citizens are using digital platforms to monitor government activities,
and ‘open government’ is acknowledged as important and is welcomed in the
wealthy democracies at least,54 so long as it does not infringe state interests in
security or corporate interests in proﬁt.
Critical research portrays a different vision of these developments and
addresses such issues as the values informing both human activities and
those embedded in the software systems that support online activity.55 For
example, the openness of government may be reduced if digital transparency
is revealing too many of the state’s ‘secrets’, as illustrated by the Wikileaks
story. Also, online platforms enabling participants to build relationships and
access information about government services may be used for malicious
attacks against individuals and the state.56 Finally, states can capitalize on the
automated capabilities to respond with force to protest groups.57 When the
techniques of power and control remain hidden, except to those with sophis-
ticated programming skills, it is impossible for people to know what values
are embedded in the systems that are mediating their lives. They may be
assumed to be values consistent with democracy and social justice until one is
subjected to, or is disconnected from, them. If, as Sandra Braman observes,
no-one knows who is storing and processing personal information and the
stories released by the authorities are misleading or wrong,58 the social
imaginary of control and surveillance and its intrusions into everyday life
are likely to gain little traction in the general population as something to be
resisted.
CONTESTED IMAGINARIES OF LIFE ONLINE
In summary, these examples illustrate contested claims about the implications
of the mediation of everyday life. Research in the social sciences offers us
metacommunications mainly about changes in front of the screen, although
there are some exceptions. Its main contribution is a better understanding of
how online mediation is associated with creativity, and generosity towards
others, enabled by an emerging culture of online sharing. I referred in
Chapter 4 to Clay Shirky’s argument that innovations in the Internet Age
will fail if they are not valued by most citizens. He says also that decisions
about the mediated environment rest with citizens, since this is the ‘only
group who can legitimately decide how they want to live’.59 What is valued,
however, depends on one’s position in a system of power relationships in a
society where the online world is only one, albeit an important, component of
everyday life. The availability of social media allows social groups to enable
their voices to be heard,60 but there is also a need for procedures to ensure
COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS IN EVERYDAY LIFE
107

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
that the voices of those favouring an inclusive society are heard and acted
upon. Shirky and others promote a decidedly one-sided view of empow-
erment that favours a social imaginary of a relatively conﬂict-free world
enabled by progressive innovation in technology.
Sherry Turkle, in Alone Together, however, depicts the changes accomp-
anying the experience of virtuality as a ‘perfect storm’. Building on more than
two decades of detailed analysis of the online experiences of children and
adults, she concludes that being:
overwhelmed, we have been drawn to connections that seem low risk and always at
hand: Facebook friends, avatars, IRC chat partners. If convenience and control
continue to be our priorities, we shall be tempted by sociable robots, where, like
gamblers at their slot machines, we are promised excitement programmed in, just
enough to keep us in the game.61
Her work yields a different social imaginary of the information society from
that offered by Shirky. She suggests, for example, that most people have
become so enmeshed in their virtual relations that they neglect others, that
elders have not given young people sufﬁcient understanding of empathy for
the other, and that insufﬁcient attention is being accorded to ‘what is real’.
Corrections may be possible, she says, but her work provides few hints about
what form these might take.
The prevailing social imaginary of mediated life online is that ‘we’ are in
control and that the virtual environment is a ‘natural environment’ that we
can trust. The presumption, if there is any further consideration of this
situation, is that people are aware of what is going on behind the screen or
that they can place their trust in others.62 In the vast majority of these
accounts, there are no hints about how the paradoxes of information
scarcity and complexity are working themselves out and inﬂuencing
which experiences of the mediated online world are feasible and which
are not. A feature common to experiences of mediated life is automated
information processing operations. Some of these are examined next, em-
phasizing especially those with a bearing on issues related to mastery or
control in the virtual world.
Automating Mediation of Everyday Life
The contemporary social imaginaries of the mediation of everyday life suggest
that the development of the communication system is consistent with a better
life—progress towards the good society, or at least one that is no worse than
that of the present. This imaginary is deemed consistent with the goal of
108
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
automating the communication system, building progressively on its ‘self-
organizing’ potential and on the anticipation of ‘machines of loving grace’.
However attractive this evocation of machines, the vision is highly individu-
alistic and ultimately may be more compatible with the centrality of indi-
vidual identity construction and effort, rather than with collective endeavour.
Brautigan, who composed the ‘machines of loving grace’ poem, arguably
was more concerned with people and their relationships. His corpus of work
includes a story about a library that receives books, but never lends them out.
Authors deposit their work in order for it to be curated or archived, but no
one
visits
the
library
unless
they
have
something
to
contribute.63
The ‘machines of loving grace’ may be providing us with Internet spaces for
creative endeavour that are more like museums than the common characteri-
zation of open spaces and virtual online communities as bazaars bustling
with transactions—both social and economic.64 The Internet has created
opportunities for many people to self-publish—for an audience of one,
themselves—although of course this is not the only purpose of online en-
gagement: contributors to blogs or Facebook may have many objectives.65
The point is that it cannot be assumed that there is always a correspondence
between increased immersion in virtual worlds and the good society, that is,
a society in which an appropriate balance between individual pursuits
and cooperative and collective action is valued. The design of the Internet
may enable us to keep a ‘record of all the books we get day by day, week by
week, month by month, year by year’ to cite Brautigan.66 But if no one ﬁnds
them or reads them, the accumulation of knowledge, so often praised by the
champions of automated communication systems, will be fruitless, except
perhaps for its curators.
This imaginary is evocative of dreams of a computerized communication
system that serves as a thinking tool or ampliﬁer of the mind, for the
resolution of complex problems in the scientiﬁc world, and to support
individual human activity.67 These dreams have always depended on advances
in computer programming. In the late 1960s, Joseph Licklider and Robert
Taylor presented this computing science vision as one in which people would
be active participants, ‘not merely passive’ senders or receivers of inform-
ation. In their vision, each person would have an ‘OLIVER’—a computer
programme residing inside the network which would act as a buffer against
the world, bringing enormous beneﬁts.68 Computer scientists tend to think
about mediation as the way negotiations by software agents facilitate transac-
tions that are in line with ‘good behaviour’.69
This vision of automated life is very consistent with the practices associated
with online mediated life in the wealthier countries today. As a citizen of
a wealthy country, I can sit in front of my computer terminal and arrange all
the transactions required to conduct a satisfactory life. I can sell my labour,
and gamble or speculate on my wages to produce more wealth; I can order
COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS IN EVERYDAY LIFE
109

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
material goods and procure many human services. Even meeting a prospec-
tive partner and marriage can be achieved exclusively through engagement
within the virtual world.
Behind the screen automation is reshaping what we remember collec-
tively—the injustices as well as the generous acts of others. Collective memory
is now potentially life spanning—what one did and expressed as a young
person can survive indeﬁnitely due to the expansion of storage capacity,
which allows a whole lifetime of human online communication to be cap-
tured, archived, and, potentially, retrieved. The control of intelligent software
agents is not exclusive to the online participant. The agents being deployed
and relied upon have multiple masters. In an environment that is accepting of
these agents, there is a corollary that agents are designed to spy on and
supervise, as well as to be subservient to, human beings. The implications
of the automation of the communication system go beyond the goals of
efﬁcient information processing or new forms of sociability. Software agents
become the mediators of our lives in place of human beings.
SOFTWARE AGENTS AS MEDIATORS
Software developers decide on the constraints imposed on the ‘choices’ of
intelligent software agents. Developers engineer protocols that govern these
agents, deciding which other agents they can interact with, and how and
when. Once operational, a software agent may never encounter a human
being, and its designers have no obligation to make their choices explicit,
or at least not in a way that is accessible to non-specialists. Only a few of these
agents have left the laboratory, but those that have are embedded in the
digital applications and services that are encountered daily. These agents are
programmed to adopt strategies for making choices. They need realistically to
mimic the choices that a human being might be expected to make in a variety
of different contexts. Some of these contexts are benign and the agent’s choice
would be to share the information available to it. Other situations may be
risky or untrustworthy and the agent must respond in a way that is less
transparent or less cooperative. In the social imaginary, it is these kinds of
possibilities that are invoked by references to a system having ‘a mind of its
own’.70 Once the agent is designed and implemented, the online participant
has little or no control over the programmed choices.
In computer science, efforts to design sophisticated agents usually are
presented as efforts to improve the analysis of unstructured information,
without regard to social values. The intelligent agent may be designed to
gather information, analyse it, and develop clusters based on information
tags. For instance, an agent initially may monitor someone’s online activity,
but if the programming of the agent is sufﬁciently sophisticated, it will ‘learn’
110
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
how to classify this information to enable the task of information selection by
auto-categorization.71 From the online participant’s point of view, choices
about what to tag and how to organize information are being made
behind the screen, and the values and implications for collective memory,
for example, are not generally part of the engineering discourse. The highly
valued outcome is software agents able to curate our digital photos, emails,
and mementos, not to decide how long they should be retained, for example.
The speciﬁc conventions are developed and employed in popular online sites,
but are not imagined by most online participants.
Software agent-based tools of this kind have many beneﬁcial, ‘real’ world
applications, but little attention is given to the potential for their ‘misbeha-
viour’ in selecting or failing to select or process information. For example,
socially valued developments include archives of photographs relating to
HIV/AIDS that are constructed by agent-based searches and can be used for
training and information. Disease control and prevention services have
been enhanced by the support of software agents that collate vast quantities
of information from social media sites.72 These agents enable electronic
commerce, including location-aware, mobile, and networked comparison-
shopping, auction bidding, and contract negotiation, for example. However,
these programmed agents are subject to a variety of malfunctions, and
inappropriately evolving behaviour is not usually signalled to users. In addi-
tion, what may be a desirable choice in one context may not be so in another.
SOFTWARE AGENTS AND ONTOLOGIES
The development of intelligent software agents is underway in efforts to
employ Semantic Web technology based on formal ontologies.73 Ontologies
involve decisions about meaning. Software developers aspire to create tools
for the integration of heterogeneous data on the Web by making the seman-
tics of data explicit using ontologies. Their metacommunications about these
developments sometimes suggest the pursuit of ‘manifest destiny’ in response
to the need to make sense of huge volumes of data which otherwise would
simply generate noise.74 Online participants are encouraged to trust in auto-
mated reasoning ontologies and there are many beneﬁcial applications of this
work in the scientiﬁc community and beyond. For instance, ontologies are
being used in biomedical networks to analyse disease-causing genes and drug
efﬁcacy. They are used in neuroscience, in the study of human anatomy, and
in earth and environmental sciences. They are also being developed to link
digital content with the aim, for example, of creating ‘data gardens’ which
could enable Web developers to use the information resources of broadcasters
in creative ways (assuming some resolution of intellectual property rights
issues).75
COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS IN EVERYDAY LIFE
111

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
For most online participants, these developments are portrayed as neutral
technical solutions that enable them to make sense of their virtual worlds.
However, the ontologies of search engines and social media platforms are
becoming masters of our mediated world, organizing and categorizing with
less and less accountability. Trust is coming to be regarded as relating to the
trustworthiness of the software ‘system’, not the human beings who design
and manage it. The conventions of research in this area deﬁne trust as ‘a belief
an agent has that the other party will do what it says it will (being honest and
reliable) or reciprocate (being reciprocal for the common good of both), given
an opportunity to defect to get higher payoffs’.76 Consistent with the idea of
a self-organizing (metaphorically autopoietic) system, the aim is to design
agents such that each develops ‘beliefs’, often premised upon optimism, about
whether the other agents with which it interacts are honest and willing to
reciprocate. Agents are said to ‘reason’ about the reciprocal reliability and
honesty of others.
The theme of mastery of the online environment is prominent in the social
imaginary of the virtual world, but some critics offer a different view. The
schemas that are programmed are not neutral,77 as there are many different
ways of organizing information. Meanings may be contested, and inform-
ation may be hierarchically ordered, paralleling constructions in the ofﬂine
world, and unclear to the online participant. These developments are instru-
mental responses to data overload and confusion. Seen by some as a way of
creating holistic knowledge in distributed knowledge communities,78 they are
considered by others to be segmenting communities into exclusive domains
whose access is determined by a person’s prior training, and knowledge
about the choices employed to structure meaning. Automated systems orga-
nize information and are becoming the gate-keepers of information and
interactions online which the ‘average’ user believes are ‘reliable’.79 Although
there are countermovements aimed at developing bottom-up toolkits for
knowledge systems,80 these are much less pervasive than the developments
discussed here which serve as technical mediations that are rendering the
bases for human choice increasingly less discernible.
SOFTWARE AGENTS AND SURVEILLANCE
Transparent design of software agent-based systems is an issue because these
systems also create opportunities for the control of information by those with
malicious intent. Automation requires a micro-recording of what participants
are doing online, and sophisticated systems purportedly can ascertain
their users’ cognitive and emotional states.81 In the prevailing social imagi-
nary it is presumed that more knowledge invariably is a positive contribution
to individual and social welfare. However, the accumulation of facts about
112
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
a person’s search history or email and text communication patterns is only the
beginning of the opportunities for analysing the metadata concerning our
interactions in the virtual world as well as, increasingly, our movements in
the ‘real’ world. The goal is to develop systems that can analyse keystroke
anomalies, word choices, and activity patterns based on knowledge about
gender, age, and whatever other personal characteristics can be gleaned in
increasingly ﬁne detail by deploying agents that can ‘reason’.82 Thus, surveil-
lance of everyday life online is proliferating in tandem with the development
of our ‘thinking machines’.83
Software agents engage in surveillance to collect metadata in order to
extract ‘signiﬁcance’ from large amounts of information. The assumption in
the prevailing social imaginary is that the origins of data can be traced and
veriﬁed, but this assumes that both agent designers and the evolving
(learning) agents have incentives to behave in trustworthy ways. However,
information asymmetries are typical characteristics of commercial markets,
and the need for deceit, forgery, or an effective competition strategy may run
counter to idealized trusting behaviour. The demise of the News of the World
in the United Kingdom, owned by Rupert Murdoch’s News International, is
indicative of how far journalists are alleged to have breached common con-
ceptions of trusted professional production of news stories. The phone hack-
ings that led to the newspaper’s closure were possible because of the design of
phone systems. The metaphor of trust in ‘system to system’ relationships is
being promoted in research, but at a time when larger and larger mass data
storage devices are being brought online, less attention is being given to
intrusions into personal privacy and to surveillance.84 Crime prevention
gives rise to demands for identity authentication and strengthens incentives
for investment in agents that can collect and analyse larger amounts of data.
From an instrumental standpoint, it would be better for people to fail to
separate their virtual identities and to conﬂate the boundaries between their
public and private lives, which would make the work of ‘agents’ engaged in
surveillance and data linking more straightforward. This incentive of course
stands in stark opposition to the social imaginary of the creative, playful,
online participant with multiple identities.
In the case of commercial surveillance (tracking), personalized interactions
for transactions require trusting relationships, but there are few limits or
bright lights signalling how far companies can breach the implicit trust given
to them by customers, who generally have poor awareness of how their data
will be used. Information is collected through the active participation of
customers registering online, monitoring home pages, and tracking use by
‘cookies’.85 People leave traces in each moment of their mediated lives, and
they often provide information in exchange for access, or to complete trans-
actions, leaving open the potential for breaches of trust by the human or
software agents receiving it. Cloud computing is being marketed as the latest
COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS IN EVERYDAY LIFE
113

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
advance in self-organizing, self-managed ‘bioteams’. Clouds could liberate
online participants from large commercial vendors, but, at the same time,
people are being encouraged to entrust their content to the ‘keeping’ of the
cloud service provider, with few guarantees with respect to the use that might
be made of their data.86
‘Spyware’ and other techniques can be installed on personal computers
or linked to the use of any Internet facility, exploiting underutilized compu-
tational and communication capacity to report to a remote processing site.
Internet users do not have a good understanding of the security requirements
for a trustworthy online environment.87 Organized criminal gangs employ
people to contact Internet users and offer to install anti-virus software; the
software installed harvests credit card details and personal information that
sustains these criminals’ further efforts. These gangs may be based anywhere
in the world,88 extracting personal information sufﬁciently successfully to
keep their efforts alive. There are an estimated 6.5 million ‘botnets’ that
send spam messages that trick Internet users into providing information
that can be used in unlawful ways. In instrumental research, these kinds of
compromises of human agency result from the mastery of online mediation
by non-human agents, and it is mastery that is the goal of successful software
agent development.
In summary, these developments are fostering new relationships between
‘virtual’ and ‘real’ reality. Avatar identities presently are believed to be
constructions bounded by the imaginations of the person who creates them
and by the software designer-provided menu of features and attributes. In the
prevailing social imaginary, it is assumed that there is a connection—no
matter how tenuous—between a constructed online presence and a ‘real’
person and that it is the latter who governs the ‘virtual’ presence.89 Of course,
the ‘real’ is also the product of the interplay of appearances. Perspectival
distortion, to use Slavoj Zˇizˇek’s term, is always a feature of human experience.
As he says,
today, we experience cyberspace as a new transparent artiﬁcial life-world whose icons
simulate our everyday reality – and this new environment is by deﬁnition uncont-
rollable, it displays an opacity of its own, we never master it, we perceive it as
a fragment of a larger universe; our proper attitude toward it is therefore not
a programmatic mastery but a bricolage, improvising, ﬁnding our way through its
impenetrable density.90
Software engineers and others with the relevant expertise, however, are
making choices that are shielded from most online participants by their very
complexity. Those choices may be consistent with the values of the good
society or they may discriminate unjustly, exclude, or intrude in ways that are
inconsistent with the values of a democratic society. Improvisation is one
response, but it is a reactive one. It is consistent with the prevailing social
114
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
imaginaries which counsel us to adapt to a complex technological system. The
volumes of data that need to be searched to ﬁnd information of interest to law
enforcement agencies, to companies, and to other social groups are growing
exponentially. But what software agents can and cannot do in terms of
auditing information and tracing its origins is not widely debated, at least
not as far as most Internet users are concerned.
Conclusion
Studies of the mediation of everyday life in the social sciences focus mainly on
features of online participation in front of the screen in relation to such issues
as creativity, identity formation, relationship maintenance, intimacy, privacy,
and surveillance. When Internet and Web-based tools are used to support
choices and decisions, from an instrumental perspective, these choices are
assumed to be optimized and consistent with enhancing social welfare. This
assumption is contested in critical research which is more likely to examine
the implications of asymmetric power relations. However, there is remarkably
little work in the social sciences on the implications of the way human agency
is compromised by the software agents behind the screen that guide the
choices available to online participants, or on the consequences of the pursuit
of enhancements to automated information processing systems.
The prevailing social imaginaries of the mediation of everyday life suggest
that an empowering communication system consistent with the values of the
good society is emerging for users in front of the screen. There are clear
beneﬁts from the increasing complexity of automated communication sys-
tems. However, the social imaginary of information control in the service of
human beings does not negate the potential for disempowerment. Celebra-
tions of empowerment in front of the screen are visions of the information
society that are partial, as are dystopian visions of the risks of surveillance and
other potential harms. Research is characterized by partisanship with respect
to the interests of stakeholders, whether technology developers, investors, or
everyday or corporate users of the communication system. Virtual life is
associated either with creativity and generosity or with loss of intimacy and
control. People are depicted either as accommodating and even welcoming
computer-mediated interactions, or as being hampered in their ability to
discern the basis for the choices presented to them by automated systems.
Studies in the critical tradition are more likely to ﬁnd that online relation-
ships are experienced differently, depending on factors such as ethnicity,
gender, socio-economic status, or location, for example. Critical studies also
highlight online information processing conventions which are invisible to
COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS IN EVERYDAY LIFE
115

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
most online participants, and the ways in which the boundaries between
public and private life are being conﬂated, with implications for the self-
management of identities, for political empowerment, and for what ‘partici-
pation’ in society really means. Nick Couldry, a media sociologist in the
United Kingdom, reminds us that, ‘the apparently free space for new voices
that these sites offer may be dominated by norms and strategies that replay, in
performance mode, the values and logic of neoliberalism’.91 Many online ‘free
spaces’ also mirror anarcho-syndicalist views, such as those of the Free
Software Foundation advocate, Richard Stallman, who argues that innova-
tions in software agents are translating political discourses into automated
virtual spaces, and not always for the good when the discourse is about the
beneﬁts of self-organizing markets.
In this chapter, I have explained why it is important to question the
adequacy of the guarantors of the consistency of innovations in software
and other aspects of the architecture of the communication system, with
the values of the good society. If Sherry Turkle is correct that the outcome
is mediation of life by ‘sociable robots’, this issue is crucial. If these robots are
operating principally in the interests of information control, efﬁciency, and
proﬁt, then protections are needed against unwanted intrusions into ostensi-
bly private virtual spaces. The construction of computerized intelligence of
ever-greater complexity rarely is addressed in depth in the social sciences,
which helps to sustain the paradox of complexity. The more our lives are
mediated by technology, the more difﬁcult it is to discern whether this
outcome is favourable. The drive towards computerized intelligence, impedes
access by online participants to—or at least masks—the values and motiva-
tions of those who are designing the system. When these developments are
seen as the outcomes of a complex self-organizing system, the assumption
often is that this is simply the result of an optimizing evolutionary (a ‘natural
selection’ of the ﬁttest) process. And whether adaptation to the system is seen
as voluntary or enforced, adaptation becomes the most persistent ‘habit of
thought’.92
The social imaginaries of the engineers and computer scientists who design
the behind the screen agents tend to be remote from those who might be able
to inﬂuence the choices they are making on behalf of human beings, despite
efforts to involve people in various user-centred design forums and pro-
grammes. Their remoteness from the users in front of the screen does not
mean that their imaginaries necessarily differ in terms of what they value, but
there is no basis for simply assuming that they are the same.93 Furthermore,
the persistence of the paradox of complexity is such that, in an effort to
manage complexity, everyday users of the communication system are encour-
aged to trust software agents and adapt to their potentially intrusive role in
their lives. At the same time, the very use of the agents that augment the
human mind disempowers users by removing their volition over what is to be
116
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
shared and revealed to others. The complexity of the system behind the screen
is offered as an argument for non-intervention to address this paradox
because of the unknown or detrimental consequences that might result. In
the dominant social imaginary it is claimed that the evolution of the complex
adaptive communication system is consistent with the goals of companies in
generating proﬁts from the production and sale of digital information.
Therefore, at least some of the developments in software agent-based com-
puting are biased in this respect—they certainly are not neutral. In the
alternative social imaginary, it is assumed that some of these developments
are guided by those who value an information commons—a different bias,
but one which, nonetheless, is far from transparent to the user.
The paradox of information scarcity means that the development of soft-
ware agents as mediators and information selectors, automated ontologies
for managing information (‘knowledge’), and the application of these ampli-
ﬁcations of the mind for intrusion via surveillance are challenging the ability
of companies to proﬁt from digital information in traditional ways based on
their control of information. This control is being weakened by the fact that
software agents ultimately may not be fully responsive to their goals. These
same developments are challenging the capacity of governments to control
the production and circulation of information that is deemed harmful.
In the next chapter (Chapter 6), I examine more closely the social imagin-
aries of communication system developers and the imaginaries of the com-
pany stakeholders who are promoting investment in the technologies in front
of and behind the screen.
COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS IN EVERYDAY LIFE
117

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6
Emergence and
Communication Systems
Introduction
The dreams of scientists and the engineers of machines that can ‘think’, but
are controlled by their users in front of the computer screens, are undergoing
a transition to dreams of software agent-based machines that are able to
‘think’ and make ‘choices’ on behalf of human beings.1 In the prevailing
social imaginaries, this is the result of emergence. It is attributable to the
self-organizing properties of a complex adaptive system. In Chapter 4, every-
day users of the communication system and its ever-increasing variety of
social networking platforms were shown to be linked to enhanced control
over the mediated environment in front of the screen.
Online participants are being empowered by these developments to make
choices about their lives in an enormous number of ways. They are becoming
information creators, information sharers, and information consumers as
they exploit the vast array of tools to personalize their environments and to
construct online identities. However, the sense of mastery that people are
acquiring for cultural, social, political, and economic purposes is being
provided by the tools created by a new entrepreneurial class of knowledge
workers whose work is conducted largely behind the screen. In addition, there
is a conﬂict between the dominant social imaginary in which all these devel-
opments are spurred principally by incentives created in the commercial
market and an alternative social imaginary where they are encouraged princi-
pally by the ethos of collaboration in an open information commons.
Many of these developments are extensions of behind the screen software
or ‘wetware’ programming, that is, the possibilities of ‘intelligent’ software
agent-based computing discussed in Chapter 5.2 Information creators and
online participants in social networks in front of the screen are constrained by
pre-deﬁned scripts and rules that govern their activities, whether these involve
leisure activities or unpaid labour, developed by those working behind the
screen. In the dominant social imaginary, these developments are welcomed
as innovations that are consistent with efforts to augment the human mind
and with the interests of companies in proﬁting from exponential increases in
the capacities for producing and processing information. This is seen as
consistent with the values of the good society because it enhances the
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
prospects for economic growth through information and knowledge-related
activities. Yet the complexity of ‘thinking machines’ in a complex adaptive
system is such that interventions by policy makers or advocacy groups are
believed to slow the progress towards the desirable features of the ‘machines
of loving grace’. In the alternative social imaginary, it is suggested that the
direction of evolution in the communication system is favouring an open
information commons, consistent with the values of democracy, equality, and
social justice. Similarly, proponents of this view insist that the evolution of the
communication system is compatible with the values of the good society and
that intervention to guide the evolution of system will disturb the generative
features of the new ‘thinking machines’.
Neither of these social imaginaries takes into account the multi-level
character of the communication system, which involves both hierarchical
and heterarchical power relationships (see Chapter 4). They also ignore the
agency of the actors that are seeking to secure their prospects in the informa-
tion society. This chapter focuses on the agency of two main groups of
stakeholders—the companies seeking to secure proﬁts from the production
of digital information in the face of the continuing evolution of a complex
communication system, and the system developers who are guided by a
commitment to the values of democracy and an open information commons.
The aim of this chapter is to illustrate how the prevailing social imaginaries
are complicit in a denial of the harmful outcomes, associated with the
paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity. These paradoxes are pre-
senting policy makers and advocacy groups with numerous problems, raising
questions about whether they can or should seek to guide the evolutionary
process to ensure that the communication system is responsive to the public
interest. Two cases are discussed in this chapter, both of which dispel the
mystique of autonomous, self-organizing systems, a mystique that is ﬁrmly
embedded in the way people ‘imagine their social existence’ and ‘how things
go on between them and their fellows’.3 The evolution of the communication
system may be guided by its own ‘needs’ when we punctuate the dynamics of
the evolutionary process from the perspective of systems theory (as discussed
in Chapter 4), but these cases illustrate that this is a very partisan view which
helps to camouﬂage the ‘real’ interests of stakeholders in the information
society.
In the ﬁrst case, I focus on the actions of the companies that confront the
paradox of information scarcity in the Internet Age. The behind the screen
technologies are enabling the automation of digital information systems, but
these same developments are threatening the capacities of companies to
maintain online environments in which digital information is perceived as
being relatively scarce. In the face of this threat, notwithstanding claims about
the dangers of intervening in a complex adaptive system, governments and
large creative industry incumbents are adopting all manner of tactics in their
EMERGENCE AND COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
119

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
efforts to ‘regulate’ information through their enforcement of intellectual
property rights to enable companies to proﬁt from the sale of information
in the marketplace. Denial of the paradox of information scarcity means that
both industry and government are complicit in retarding the economic
growth of digital information and restricting the chances for the development
of an equitable information society that will allow all those who choose to
participate to enjoy the beneﬁts of a mediated environment.
In the second case, I punctuate the analysis of the increasingly automated
self-organizing complex adaptive system behind the screen, from the perspec-
tive of the developers who build components of the communication system.
The aim in this case is to show how the values of openness and democracy in
the construction of an open Internet-based platform, designed for use by
researchers and small businesses, are confronted by the values of the market-
place. The innovation process involves multiple human interventions which
‘direct’ the evolution of the communication system through choices about
practices and design conventions. The social imaginary of an autonomous,
emergent, self-organizing system is a very partial view which serves to attract
attention away from the implications of the paradox of complexity. Claims
that the communication system is involved in its own autonomous self-
organization, which renders any intervention—apart from instrumental cura-
tive policies—too risky to consider, neglect the fact that power is expressed in
numerous ways by human actors through their agency in making choices
about the design and operation of the communication system. The arguments
about the risks of intervention and the beneﬁts of non-intervention are symp-
toms of a false opposition. Bothways of seeing have some validity depending on
how the analysis of the communication is punctuated. But the combination of
commercial interests and an increasingly autonomous communication system
is making it less feasible for human agents to direct the evolution of the system
in a way that respects the autonomy of human agents and their right to make
choices about how they navigate life in their mediated environment.
Controlling Digital Information
Agent-based software developments are offering many possibilities for people
to control the production and distribution of digital information in terms
of format, timing, and cost, including the option of nearly costless sharing of
digital information within online communities. The challenging feature of
these technological developments is that they are increasingly feasible without
regard to whether or not they infringe intellectual property rights law. Com-
panies in the creative industries are responding to these developments by
120
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
seeking more effective means of restricting the circulation of digital informa-
tion to enable them to retain the ability to extract economic value from the
online ‘publishing’ of information, that is, by inducing scarcity.4 Their efforts
to do this are a reﬂection of a strategy that Paul A. David, economic historian
of technical change, observes is ‘shaped more by the economics of “publish-
ing” than by the economics of “authorship”’,5 that is, more by the economic
interests of publishing companies than by the creator’s interests in royalty
payments. The economic value of publishing information in the marketplace
is driving the dominant companies especially, to assert their information
ownership rights under existing copyright legislation to enhance their control.
The creative industry companies want to restrain online participants from
making illegal use of digital information because much of this use threatens
their traditional revenue streams. The means of restraint are coming into
direct conﬂict with the aspirations of those who are inﬂuenced by the social
imaginary of ‘free’ information, and the interests of online community
participants in the cultural and social value of information. This conﬂict is
at the heart of the paradox of information scarcity because the aims of music
publishers and other creative industry companies are consistent with the
imaginary of the Internet as a marketplace, underpinned by the private
ownership of intellectual property.
CONSTRUCTING INFORMATION OWNERSHIP RIGHTS
In the framework of intellectual property protection, copyright law aims to
promote invention and authorship, and to safeguard the rights of creators and
encourage the dissemination of ideas.6 The goals of intellectual property rights
legislation are to promote invention and authorship of new works, to encourage
the dissemination of ideas and the disclosure of inventions, and to protect the
rights of authors to receive income from their works.7 Few would disagree with
these goals. However, there are increasingly large numbers of online participants
who either disagree with the manner in which these goals are being pursued in
the information society or are unaware of the conﬂict between their ambitions
to download and beneﬁt from digital information and the purposes and protec-
tions available to authors and publishers provided by existing copyright law.
Copyright grants to the creators of particular types of work an exclusive right
to control the making of copies and the broadcasting or other forms of distribu-
tion of that work to the public in order to beneﬁt from the sale or rental of this
property. Copyright is intended to balance society’s interest in the disclosure and
dissemination of ideas with the interests of authors in relation to compensation
for their efforts. But as Paul A. David argues, ‘the legal institutions of copyright as
we know them are properly seen as consequences of “industrial policy” actions’.8
EMERGENCE AND COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
121

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
They are not indicative of a ‘natural’ balancing of the interests of individual
information creators and information consumers.
Proponents of the right to exclusive information ownership take the
statutory provisions of copyright legislation as the embodiment of ‘natural
law’, rather than the legal resolution of conﬂicting interests among the
beneﬁciaries of its enforcement and other members of society.9 This is in
line with the dominant social imaginary of the information society with its
emphasis on market-led development. It is based on the rationale that digital
information is a commodity whose ownership can and should be transferred
under explicit contracts governing the buying and selling of information. The
efforts of representatives of the creative industry companies to suppress
copyright infringement are aimed at those who seek to beneﬁt through
what these companies regard as ‘misappropriation’ of protected information.
These efforts often target online participants who ‘misappropriate’ informa-
tion with no expectation of monetary gain from the activity and they spawn a
cycle of innovation in technology behind that screen that enables further
misappropriation. This is not in the interests of either the companies seeking
to enforce copyright protection or many of the participants in virtual worlds.
Protection of copyright comes into conﬂict with the variety of purposes for
which information is created, such as the expression and preservation of
language, history, and culture, the promotion of voluntary associations with-
in networks, and the exchange of useful knowledge. With some exceptions,
the right of the information creator to legal protection is absolute in law. ‘Fair
use’ or ‘fair dealing’ provisions that allow access to and reproduction of
copyrighted information for education and scientiﬁc purposes are exceptions
to this form of ‘absolute’ protection. These provisions are regarded by indus-
try rights holders as concessions that should not be extended to create a
signiﬁcant alternative to their exclusive control over and interest in proﬁting
from the sale of digital information.10
Innovations in digital technologies are making it increasingly easy for
people to infringe copyright law. Although it is becoming more difﬁcult to
enforce the law in the face of these changes—and particularly with the spread
of P2P methods of uploading and downloading digital information, copy-
right legislation is unlikely, in the short or medium term, to be rewritten to
alter the present balancing of interests. This is because the creative industry
companies continue to favour an approach that is predicated on private
ownership of information.11 This is despite evidence of the way their intran-
sigence is making their existing business models increasingly unsustainable.
In some jurisdictions, there are tentative moves to consider how greater
emphasis should be given to the interests of non-rights holders, but in
general, governments are upholding and seeking to enforce the existing
‘balancing’ of interests.12
122
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Representatives of the creative industries argue that only by enforcing copy-
right legislation will incentives be created to promote innovation in the digital
marketplace. Such is the power of the prevailing social imaginary that enforce-
ment of existing law is seen by most legislators, and the majority of creative
industry companies, as the optimal means of stemming declining industry
revenues in lucrative markets for music, ﬁlms, television programmes, and
books. The global market for online digital music, for example, is increasing
in value, but this has yet to compensate for the losses that the industry claims
are due to copyright infringement using the capabilities of contemporary global
networks.13 The industry is demonstrating remarkable resistance to innovative
responses to changes in the way online participants engage with digital infor-
mation in their everyday lives. This is especially evident in the case of responses
to the explosion of online P2P ﬁle-sharing during the ﬁrst decade of the 2000s.
SUPPRESSING THE DYNAMICS OF INNOVATION
An increasingly popular means of accessing digital information of all kinds is
P2P ﬁle-sharing which enables the uploading and downloading of digital
content by anyone with an Internet connection.14 Online participants are
experimenting with the innovative features of online platforms that facilitate
ﬁle-sharing. These practices are being reﬂected in changing social and cultural
norms of moral behaviour online,15 and these changes are inﬂuencing atti-
tudes to the copyright regime and pitting the proponents of the dominant
social imaginary of the information society against advocates of the alterna-
tive social imaginary associated with an open information commons. This
imaginary embraces a commitment to the idea that creativity and altruistic
behaviour are fostered best if people face minimal constraints on their ability
to engage with digital information.16
In this conﬂict, it is important to distinguish among the interests of the
champions of this alternative social imaginary as they by no means uniformly
advocate the same solutions. Some would seek to enable the direct appropri-
ation of copyrighted music without the threat of legal sanction; others seek to
enable the use—or remix—of copyrighted recordings and other digital con-
tent as inputs into other creative works. For example, Lawrence Lessig, a US-
based legal scholar, depicts creative online activity as a ‘remix culture’, and
Henry Jenkins sees online experimentation as consistent with a ‘collabora-
tionist’ culture.17 This refers to the participatory culture of the Internet Age
that we saw operating in Chapter 5 (and which was discussed in Chapter 3),
where people are engaging with social media sites on the Internet in numer-
ous creative ways. The voluntary and altruistic ethos that typiﬁes these
developments is associated with the notion of a ‘free culture’ and is giving
rise to activism aimed at preserving an open information commons.
EMERGENCE AND COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
123

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
In most cases, supporters of a remix culture advocate a more expansive
view of ‘fair use’ or ‘fair dealing’ provisions under the existing law, and argue
for the possibility of reconciliation around the principles of ex post compen-
sation. An example would be remixes becoming subject to a royalty if and
when they generate revenue. The problem with this solution is that it directly
contests the derivative use features of existing copyright law, and infringes the
droit d’auteur principle, which is intended to assure authors that the integrity
of their works will be respected. It may also lead to signiﬁcant competition
even if all parties are involved in producing digital content for proﬁt. In the
contested debates over the ways in which the paradox of information scarcity
presents itself in an ever-changing technological environment, it is important
not simply to elide the interests of participants in the remix culture with those
who would prefer to collectivize creative endeavours, without ensuring some
direct beneﬁt to the individual creators.
In the alternative social imaginary, notwithstanding differences in the
practices and legal regimes being advocated, efforts to suppress creative
experimentation are regarded as antithetical to innovation.18 Lessig says
that copyright law is ‘captured in a way that undermines some of its most
important values and tradition: a tradition that supported innovation and
creativity, has supported the new against the old, is now increasingly captured
by the old to protect itself against the new’—all this in the wake of techno-
logical change.19 Some efforts to redress what Lessig and others see as an
inversion of the original intentions of intellectual property law have been
made through the establishment of Creative Commons licences. Creative
Commons licences enable creators to retain some part of their rights, about
which they decide, while permitting digital content to be copied, distributed,
edited, and built upon. This enables universal access and a rebalancing of the
relationship with copyright law which requires permissions to be granted in
advance for the use of digital information.20
For academics such as Yochai Benkler and Martha Nissenbaum, respectively
legal scholar and philosopher, the expansion of commons-based peer produc-
tion, where information is produced with the intention of its being shared
on the Internet, indicates a shift in cultural norms. This shift, in their view,
is sufﬁcient to warrant a rethinking of the ‘natural’ balance between the
interests of information creators, information owners, and information con-
sumers.21 The conﬂicts of interests among these groups are not new,22 but the
force of the collision between conﬂicting social imaginaries and their asso-
ciated practices is becoming greater and more pervasive with the spread of the
Internet.23 Publishers regard their efforts to maintain control over digital
information as consistent with a ‘proper order’ because their initiatives are
providing proﬁt incentives for both their artist clients and themselves, and are
ﬁnancing many of the costs of generating and promoting the content they
publish. This same emphasis on control through copyright enforcement can
124
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
be seen also, however, as a barrier to the growth of markets and the opportu-
nities for citizens to engage in online activities. This results in negative out-
comes in terms of both corporate proﬁt and the beneﬁts for, or welfare of,
citizens based on access to digital information.24
There is increasing ﬂuidity between ‘paid for’ and ‘free’ access (at the point
of consumption) to digital information, reﬂecting industry and user practices
that enable the sharing of digital content. Nevertheless, the campaigns
mounted by creative industry companies aimed at suppressing currently
illegal aspects of these practices, such as the downloading of copyright
protected content for personal enjoyment, or non-commercial sharing, or
for future monetary gain, are instructive. They illustrate the relatively slow
pace at which the larger industrial players seem able to ‘adjust’ to the
technological changes that are implicated in the genesis of the paradox of
information scarcity in the Internet Age.
THE CAMPAIGN FOR DIGITAL INFORMATION CONTROL
The variety and intensity of efforts to enforce intellectual property rights on
digital information are indicative of the strength of the dominant social
imaginary which aligns market-based contractual transactions in information
with the good society. These efforts include industry-led initiatives to enact
legal measures that intrude increasingly in the everyday lives of online parti-
cipants, regardless of their guilt or innocence with respect to infringement of
existing copyright law.
The creative industry companies, backed by their trade associations, have
campaigned in the United States to encourage legislation aimed at curtailing
digital ‘piracy’ of all kinds and, speciﬁcally, infringing P2P ﬁle-sharing.25 The
ﬁrst successful legal challenge was against Napster, which operated a free service
from 1999 to 2001 to provide an index to sources of downloadable content
(much of which was copyright infringing). This has been followed by a succes-
sion of efforts to tackle the biggest online sites facilitating illegal ﬁle-sharing,
either by encouraging their host countries to bring law suits against them or, in
the case of China, encouraging the government to suppress this activity.26
In the United States, the Recording Industry Association of America
(RIAA) and the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) have ﬁled
thousands of lawsuits against people accused of downloading or uploading
copyright-infringing digital content.27 Cases against those charged with in-
fringing activity continue to make their way through the courts, and a
voluntary agreement among the largest Internet Service Providers (ISPs) is
set to implement a copyright enforcement programme.28 The agreement
positions ISPs as gatekeepers acting on behalf of the rights holder companies,
taking on the problem of infringing-downloading using P2P ﬁle-sharing, just
EMERGENCE AND COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
125

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
as Internet users are moving to streaming services which make it more
difﬁcult for creative industry companies to detect infractions.
The International Federation for the Phonographic Industry (IFPI), the
International Intellectual Property Alliance (IIPA), and other trade associa-
tions in the United States are promoting arrangements in other national
jurisdictions that permit them to obtain the names of people accused of
infringement. These associations are seeking legislation aimed at implement-
ing a ‘graduated response’ or a ‘three strikes’ strategy with ISPs legally
mandated to warn their customers that their activities have been monitored
and show involvement in suspected infringing downloading. After a certain
number of warnings, ISPs are being obligated (albeit in most jurisdictions,
subject to the permission of the courts) to disclose the identities of customers
suspected of copyright-infringing activity.29 In some national jurisdictions,
such as France, the intermediation of a court is being reduced to an adminis-
trative, partly automated, role, and ISPs are being required to suspend or
terminate customer accounts on the basis of an accusation which might later
prove to be unfounded.30 Representatives of the creative industry acknowl-
edge that ‘there cannot be a one-size-ﬁts-all approach to the problem’,31 but
their commitment to implementing an information control regime in line
with the dominant social imaginary of the information society is clear.
Similarly clear is the political commitment to the policy consequences of
the dominant social imaginary. In the United Kingdom, for example, follow-
ing a series of reports on the development of the information society, the
Digital Economy Act was passed in 2010, providing for a graduated response
strategy.32 Some ISPs claimed that its implementation would harm their
business reputations, incur unnecessary costs, and be a disproportionate
response to the problems created by P2P ﬁle-sharing. Their resistance led to
a judicial review of the legislation, but the Court found that the Act should be
implemented.33 The judge in this case concluded that it should be for
parliament rather than the courts to decide the appropriate balancing of the
interests of the creative industry companies and Internet users. Notwithstand-
ing claims about the implications of changes in digital technologies and social
norms, it was argued that ‘existing copyright does strike a fair balance’
between the respective interests of rights holders and those seeking access to
digital content online. The judgement read as follows:
Parliament, through current copyright legislation, has already struck a balance be-
tween, on the one hand, the aim of providing incentives to actual and potential
creators of audio-visual material, and, on the other, the potential welfare loss to those
consumers who would, in the absence of copyright protection, enjoy such material
either free of charge or at substantially reduced prices but who, as a result of copyright
restrictions, are either deprived of the material or are required to pay higher prices for
it. Existing copyright legislation may strike that balance in a way that is controversial
or open to criticism. However, in my view, Parliament, when considering measures
126
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
such as the contested provisions, which could be expected to enhance copyright
protection, is entitled to proceed on the basis that existing copyright law does strike
a fair balance between the interests referred to.34
The issues raised by these measures extend beyond rights to access and use
the digital information circulating through the Internet. They encroach on
the domain of personal privacy protection as ISPs are being authorized
to monitor and report on their subscribers’ online activity.35 The ambitions
of the creative industry companies normally are privileged, despite contests
over the interests that should be accorded the greatest inﬂuence by policy
makers. There is resistance to these measures, but opponents are not nearly as
well-resourced as the creative industry associations and are forced to rely on
data related to economic harm that are reported by these associations.
Opponents have been ineffective at suppressing the political momentum to
introduce new copyright enforcement legislation although they have argued
that legislative moves towards stronger copyright enforcement are too harsh
and do not respect democratic civil liberties.36
In the European Union (EU), for instance, the European Parliament’s
investigation of copyright enforcement in the light of European goals to foster
innovation and competitiveness was summarized in a draft report that includ-
ed the statement that ‘criminalising consumers so as to combat digital piracy is
not the right solution’,37 a statement that was subsequently removed from the
ﬁnal report. Among those contesting the imposition of a stronger copyright
enforcement regime in Europe, the French activist group ‘la Quadrature du
Net’ (QdN),38 together with others, brought pressure on members of the
European Parliament. The result was an ‘Internet freedom’ provision calling
for a ‘prior fair and impartial procedure’ to be in place before law suits are
brought against those suspected of illegal online ﬁle-sharing39 and concerns
have been expressed about the potential for suppression of illegal entertain-
ment content in ways that do not respect the rights and freedoms of citizens.
CHILLING INTERNET USE
The consequences of legal measures aimed at enforcing legislation to reduce
the rate of illegal downloading activity reach beyond charging and with-
drawing Internet access from infringers, imposing ﬁnancial penalties, or
exacting prison sentences. For example, efforts to trace alleged copyright
infringers may affect individuals who are not infringers, or have negative
consequences for the organizations providing Internet access because of the
threat of actions taken against alleged infringers. Household ISP customers
may be notiﬁed about the behaviour of household members suspected of
infringing acts or individuals who have accessed the Internet via WiFi or local
area networks.40 Schools, libraries, and other public organizations as well as
EMERGENCE AND COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
127

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
businesses and users in the third sector (charities and other not-for-proﬁt
organizations) may need to track and ‘log’ individual users’ Internet connec-
tions or disable the usual means of using the Internet in order to limit their
liability under the new laws. Everyday users of the Internet may become
confused about what constitutes legal and illegal use of the Internet based
on conﬂicting claims in the media. All this might lead to reductions in
Internet use—a chilling effect—that would reduce the potential beneﬁts
from online activity. These are just some of the possible consequences of
the creative industries’ graduated response strategy and legislation being
introduced to implement it.
There is little evidence on how people will respond to the threats associated
with this strategy,41 but the champions of stronger enforcement undoubtedly
will continue their campaign. There is a growing gap between legal and
everyday life perspectives on what constitutes good online behaviour. The
creative industry companies’ campaigns give priority to the rights of the
enterprise over those of individuals, encouraging surveillance behind the
screen, and leave companies in a position of power over ordinary Internet
users.42 These measures involve ISPs approaching subscribers, who, in their
turn, may need to approach other users of their Internet connections (family,
friends, or strangers in the case of public access) to discuss their private
actions. Encouraging such behaviour on the part of ISP subscribers involves
them in the presumption of the wrongdoing of others.
This behaviour can be seen as a form of surveillance by individual or
institutional ISP subscribers that is out of step with norms of good behaviour
with respect to the privacy of online activities and inconsistent with develop-
ing a culture of cooperation and online information sharing. Research on risk
perception and trusting behaviour indicates that people’s perceptions of a
change in the level of risk associated with their activity often are dispropor-
tionate to the incidence of the risk. Perceptions of heightened risk may be
intensiﬁed by media treatments of the issue of online copyright infringement
and rumours circulated within online communities. Loss of trust in a for-
merly trusted entity such as an ISP is difﬁcult to regain.43
The chilling effect is potentially strengthened each time the creative indus-
try companies take another step towards curtailing online infringement of
copyright law. However, at the same time, new websites spring up providing
information about what to do in the case of receipt of an infringement
notiﬁcation. New infringing technologies and websites take over as fast as
others are shut down. Information is provided about how to ﬁnd infringing
content such as music and to use direct downloading technology, streaming
music and video, and anonymous virtual private networks, making it ex-
tremely difﬁcult for authorities to enforce legislation aimed at suppressing
these online behaviours that are increasingly common especially among
younger Internet users.
128
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
CONTRADICTORY INDUSTRY STRATEGIES
All these developments are indicative of the contradictory strategies being
adopted by governments and promoted by the creative industries, and they
are symptoms of the paradox of information scarcity. While for some groups
the open sharing of information is consistent with their interests, for others it
is not. The interests of some groups in copyright enforcement are coming into
conﬂict with the interests of those seeking a shift in the balance of copyright
protection in favour of others who seek to access and share digital informa-
tion outside the market system. Internet users are far from homogeneous.
Thus, while some social movement organizations lobby for an open informa-
tion commons and against measures that unduly penalize copyright infring-
ing online participants or which might reduce content diversity,44 other
Internet users have reason to welcome efforts to enforce the protections
afforded by intellectual property legislation.
Online users, for example, are becoming increasingly interested in protect-
ing their rights to the virtual objects they create in the virtual worlds of online
games, especially if there is the prospect that their virtual money might be
exchanged for ‘real’ money. In the online gaming world, virtual markets are
beginning to mimic conventional ofﬂine markets.45 For players of ‘gold
farming’, a popular multiplayer online game, for instance, ‘resources are
scarce, not abundant; the number of ore veins and bosses is not inﬁnite,
and they are rivalrous: whoever gets them denies others. Indeed, gold farming
overall exists only because it combines virtual-world scarcity of currency and
items with real-world scarcity and unequal distribution of time and money’.46
The monetization of virtual currencies, combined with the interests of game
players in the wage labour provided by players who ‘prospect’ on behalf of
other players, is creating new sites of struggle over ownership rights to digital
information.
A further complication is that some creative industry companies are
allowing people to copy online information. In some instances, the same
companies that are seeking stronger copyright enforcement are also experi-
menting with business models that will generate proﬁts in a way that does not
dampen the enthusiasm of Internet users by making it difﬁcult for them to
download and share information. The result is increasing differentiation
among information products and the ﬁrst hints of the novel ways in which
creative industry companies can accommodate the changing technological
environment. Digital content at some online sites is serving as the advertising
content that is used to attract online participants to support services that
aggregate, ﬁlter, and integrate information, and which generate revenues from
those services rather than from access to the content itself. Thus, some
companies are acknowledging that market sustainability requires changes
EMERGENCE AND COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
129

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
that take account of the emerging social norms of online participation (such
as P2P ﬁle-sharing) and the ways that people prefer to consume digital
content.
Apple’s launch of its iTunes Music Store in 2003 is a classic illustration of
these changes in strategy. Following the launch of iTunes, Apple’s sales rose to
70 per cent of the level of infringing downloads by users of Apple MACs.
Although initially conﬁning downloading to iTunes subscribers, Apple iTunes
soon started offering online music without copy protection. Apple is expected
to start offering users the capacity to store their entire music libraries online
in the ‘cloud’ (the global network of Internet servers with immense and
growing storage and processing capacity). This service will be provided for
a relatively modest annual fee and is not expected to be conditional on
whether music is purchased from iTunes or acquired by other means.47 The
new functionalities and services being offered through the packages available
with the paid services being offered by other companies include improved
reliability, measures to reduce security problems, faster access, extra features
such as celebrity playlists, exclusive music tracks, album art, gift certiﬁcates,
allowances, and audio streaming capabilities.
In addition, some of the creative industry companies are negotiating
revenue-sharing arrangements with online communities who want access
to their content. Spotify, for instance, has introduced copyright licensing
arrangements that allow music to be available online. Activity in the
subscription-based and ‘free at the point of consumption’ markets indi-
cates that there is potential for growth in the variety and scale of these
kinds of services. The increasing availability of material where the copy-
right owner, through various means, has included a Creative Commons
licence, indicates that those who copy may not be required to pay in the
future and that the industry is belatedly adjusting to what users are
coming to understand as good behaviour. In some cases, the industry
itself is using P2P ﬁle-sharing technologies, such as BitTorrent, to enable
access to content as well as other means of downloading. Governments,
too, are making use of this technology.48 These changes are leading to the
enhanced attractiveness of the legal offerings provided by companies in
the creative industries and to new ways of managing markets in the face of
the paradox of information scarcity.
The abundance of digital information, and easier reproduction resulting from
innovations in ICTs, raise difﬁcult questions about how creators should be
recompensed for their efforts. The present means of achieving monetary reward
is to ensure that access to creations is limited. A price is set that is in excess of the
reproduction cost, creating an incentive to reimburse creators, but this requires
some means of rendering the information creations scarce. Some advocates of
a ‘free’ culture seem to ignore the issue of how creators should make a living.
Denying them revenue is inconsistent with equitable treatment. However,
130
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
when digital information is restricted by a pricing regime that excludes potential
creators, the opportunities for innovation and creative production are restricted,
and this suppresses the beneﬁts to society.
In addition to their efforts to develop new business strategies and to enforce
copyright legislation, companies in the creative industries promote education
campaigns to promulgate values consistent with the private ownership of
information which then becomes subject to long periods of monopoly control.
When education campaigns promoting the value of private ownership are
included in digital literacy initiatives, rights holders deem them to be fully
justiﬁed means of policy intervention.49 However, when education campaigns
recommend alternatives such as Creative Commons licences or downloading
copyrighted information for private use, the industry accuses those associated
with such campaigns of promoting illegal behaviour.
In summary, as James Boyle, a legal expert in the intellectual property
rights ﬁeld, argues ‘an author-centered system has multiple blindnesses’.50 It
has proven very resistant to change because the dominant companies in the
creative industries have a huge stake in maintaining the existing copyright
regime. Smaller, independent content creators are proposing various means
of breaking the pattern of dominance of the large rights holder companies in
the digital content industries. The Canadian Songwriters Association, for
example, has proposed a small monthly Internet usage fee to provide Cana-
dian consumers with a licence to download unlimited numbers of songs. In
this proposal, song writers would receive payment, but the major record label
companies would not. Not surprisingly, this proposal generated a new round
of protest from the corporate rights holders.51
GLOBAL IMPLICATIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE
The implications of the paradox of information scarcity are replicated at the
global level where international agreements in trade in information are a
persistent feature even in the face of an increasingly ubiquitous informa-
tion-sharing environment. Economists conﬂate the terms ‘information’ and
‘knowledge’ for the reasons explained in Chapter 3. Analysis of the respective
interests of producers and consumers of digital information in the informa-
tion society as they respond to the paradox of information scarcity usually
suggests that there is a contest over the balance between their interests. This
interpretation is promoted typically without regard to the location of these
information producers and consumers. Disputes are conducted in the light of
claims about industry losses and contested estimates of revenues that cannot
be veriﬁed independently. It is not just the economic value of information
that is at stake, however. The social value and meaning of information are also
important in assisting people in making choices about how to live their lives.
EMERGENCE AND COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
131

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
The enforcement of intellectual property rights, therefore, has implications
for the diversity of information and for whether that diversity is consistent
with cultural priorities in the virtual (and the ‘real’) world.
The successes of the creative industry campaigns at the national level have
been replicated regionally and internationally. The regions that have intro-
duced copyright enforcement legislation in recent years include the EU
through directives on harmonizing copyright and related rights in the infor-
mation society and on intellectual property rights enforcement. Discussion
continues about how to ensure a legislative regime that promotes innovation
and boosts creativity in the European marketplace.52 In addition, a new Anti-
Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA) has been negotiated among national
governments.53 Complementing national initiatives to suppress the growth of
infringing P2P ﬁle-sharing, the ACTA agreement provides for national
authorities,
to order an online service provider to disclose expeditiously to a right holder
information sufﬁcient to identify a subscriber whose account was allegedly used for
infringement, where that right holder has ﬁled a legally sufﬁcient claim of infringement
of trademark rights or copyrights or related rights and where such information is
being sought for the purpose of protecting or enforcing the right holder’s trademark
rights or copyright or related rights.54
The successful negotiation of ACTA is indicative of the persuasiveness of
the creative industry companies’ arguments and their insistence on the need
for measures to control digital information to protect their interests. ACTA
implicates ISPs in monitoring the online activities of their customers and
reporting the results on the basis of a ‘sufﬁcient claim’, leaving considerable
scope for interpretation of ‘sufﬁcient’. The companies backing ACTA include
Google, e-Bay, Dell, News Corporation, Sony Pictures, Time Warner, and
Verizon, that is, large companies with an interest in maintaining the relative
scarcity of digital information in order to beneﬁt from its exchange in the
marketplace. These initiatives are resulting in somewhat different approaches
when they are implemented. The differences relate to variations in the per-
mitted technical methods of ﬁltering and blocking, the willingness of creative
industry associations to bring charges against individuals, and differences in
claims about whether a decrease in ﬁle-sharing trafﬁc is likely to follow the
implementation of new legal measures. The evidence required by the courts to
convict offenders also varies across countries, as do the punishments for those
found guilty. There are differences, too, in whether ﬁle-sharing of copyrighted
content is allowed for non-commercial purposes. Overall, however, the main
trend is to employ legislation to ensure that copyright law is respected by
Internet users.
Intellectual property rights enforcement, consistent with the prevailing
social imaginary of private information ownership, is invoked on behalf of
132
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
those seeking to protect indigenous or local knowledge in the poor countries
of the world. To stem the exploitation of such knowledge by the world’s
dominant enterprises in the creative industry, these countries are being
recruited to the principles of private ownership in an effort to support their
local control of this intellectual property. For example, the Bollywood Inter-
net Anti-Piracy Alliance supports the interests of ﬁlm-producing companies
in India, frequently in alliance with the MPAA. This serves the interests of
enterprises (and individual creators) in poor countries that are seeking to
beneﬁt economically from their indigenous information resources. It is not
surprising that efforts are being made to enlist intellectual property owners in
lower income countries, given the premise that they have something to gain.
However, in these countries the capacities (both technological and political)
of individuals to resist enforcement measures may be less well developed and
there is a possibility that enforcement actions will be even more severe than
thus far in the wealthy countries.
The global contest over the enforcement of intellectual property rights
serves to veil the self-interest of companies in the wealthy countries that are
seeking to extend and deepen their markets. This is illustrated by debates
sponsored by the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), the
United Nations agency charged with promoting the effective use and protec-
tion of intellectual property worldwide. WIPO is committed to the view that
‘development depends on the existence of reliable institutions within which
human beings think, interact and carry on business, and that one of the
essential elements supporting such institutions is property rights’.55 Private
ownership of information is seen as central to unlocking human potential
through access to knowledge.
Within WIPO, the Roundtable on Intellectual Property and Indigenous
Peoples provides a forum for debate on the way the global intellectual
property regime is inﬂuencing access to digital information by developing
countries, and the possibilities available to them to protect their indigenous
knowledge bases.56 The intention is that debates should be community-led
and beneﬁt-sharing, respecting the interests and value systems identiﬁed by
the participating countries themselves.57 This might suggest that measures to
foster information diversity would be high on the agenda. However, efforts in
this forum to accelerate the move towards internationally agreed instruments
for strengthened intellectual property enforcement have been slowed by the
diverse views of those involved. Failure to reach agreement in this forum
provides an impetus for negotiation of potentially stronger agreements, such
as the ACTA (discussed above), which involved only a subset of WIPO
member countries. If and when countries sign up to it, it will provide a
means of circumventing the United Nations agency.
At its ﬁrst Roundtable meeting, the existing Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS)58 was depicted as offering ‘an
EMERGENCE AND COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
133

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
opportunity to use intellectual property protection to accelerate economic,
social, and cultural development, as well as to increase awareness of intellec-
tual property as a key natural resource in developing nations’.59 TRIPS was
described as encompassing ‘the protection of traditional knowledge and
indigenous technology and folklore as they relate to the development needs
of the LDCs’.60 Its meetings have focused mainly on the development of
technical standards to provide protection for intellectual property, however,
not on whether the balance struck among the conﬂicting parties with interests
in the economic value of digital information by TRIPS is appropriate in the
wake of social and technological innovation. Other United Nations agencies
such as the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) have been more actively involved in calling for consideration of
people’s interests in access to information as a freedom and right that should
be valued, although it too afﬁrms the importance of intellectual property
rights protection for sustaining cultural production.61
In summary, some individuals, public institutions, and companies uphold
the traditions of private ownership of information and market exchange as
optimal to foster economic growth and human development. Others are
actively promoting an information commons in which rights to beneﬁt
from the creation of digital information are established in a way that is
deemed to fairly compensate creators while also respecting rights of access.
The scarcity of information, a fundamental requirement for the traditional
publishing industry, is being threatened by innovations in the communica-
tion system both behind the screen and by changing social and cultural norms
in front of the screen. In the light of these changes, alternatives are being
considered, and in some cases introduced. This is broadening the range of
possibilities for producing and accessing digital information, both ‘paid for’
and ‘free’. However, there is little sign of awareness in policy debates that this
is a symptom of the paradox of information scarcity or that the numerous
interventions in the marketplace by governments and the creative industry
advocates of copyright enforcement are, in fact, interventions in a complex
system.
With each move towards greater abundance of digital information, there
are countermoves to impose the condition of scarcity through copyright
protection. In addition, there are developments behind the screen which
promote the further evolution of ‘machines of loving grace’, encouraged by
the social imaginary of the information commons. As we will see in the next
section, some of these also are in conﬂict with the dominant social imaginary
of a market-led information society. In this case, the complexity of the
communication system is invoked in a bid to secure a space for the emergence
of a self-organizing system consistent with the values of the open commons.
However, despite claims about the complexity of a self-organizing system,
moves to secure this space cannot avoid coming into contact with the values
134
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
of the dominant social imaginary where the network infrastructure develop-
ments and the interests of companies in the commercial world prevail.
Democratizing an Online Digital Platform
The convergence of ICTs has made it feasible to develop many new kinds of
digital platforms that are accessible using the Internet and Web-based tech-
nologies. A digital platform can be deﬁned broadly as a technical means of
accessing a set of distant, interactive, or non-interactive services. These may
be broadcast or provided online, and available for a price or for free.62 These
platforms are being developed by companies to support their strategies
related to all kinds of electronic commerce and to support the work of
many research communities. Most platforms, especially those provided by
companies in the entertainment industry, network operators, and online
aggregators of services for particular research and business sectors, are
based on proprietary systems, aimed at ‘locking in’ those who access them,
thereby generating potential revenue for their owners. The aim is to construct,
by whatever means, an information environment in which information is
rendered scarce from the point of view of those who have a potential use for it.
These platforms serve as intermediaries providing, for example, information
exchange and communication between customers and suppliers, enhanced
brand recognition, and direct sales of material products (automobiles, clothing,
horticultural products, etc.) or immaterial goods (digital content, insurance,
holiday, construction, transport, retail, or other services). For researchers, they
provide a growing variety of data processing and storage tools, organized
centrally as in developments in cloud computing, or on a decentralized basis.
Insofar as they require a fee, they are more attractive to large than to small
companies and research organizations. In Europe, smaller companies and
research institutions lag in the adoption of digital technologies and platforms
that might be expected to enhance their work.63 Open Source Software (OSS)
combined with open, distributed network architectures and platforms are
providing alternatives to the available proprietary platforms in an attempt to
open up and democratize the market. All of these developments involve the
activities of ‘knowledge workers’ behind the screen.
The discussion in this section focuses on the development of an open digital
platform undertaken by a collaborating community of developers (mainly
university researchers) speciﬁcally for small- and medium-sized businesses
and for the research community. It was funded as part of a European Commis-
sion digital business ecosystem research initiative.64 I examine the extent to
which the development of this platform and the arguments employed by the
EMERGENCE AND COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
135

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
developers were able to shape the initiative in line with the values of openness
and democracy. I consider how the values of the market compared to those
typical of open collaborating research communities became important consid-
erations, and—notwithstanding the extensive use of language referring to
complex self-organizing systems—how the decisions that guided this initiative
illustrate responses where the implications of the paradoxes of information
scarcity and complexity were not acknowledged.
In the course of its development, the platform developers experienced
pressure to conform to the values of the competitive marketplace, despite
their efforts to design system components aligned with non-market values.
Initially, the behind the screen technological components of the platform were
discussed using the metaphor of a self-organizing system, but, far from being
a system that was responsive ‘to its own needs’,65 the system was modiﬁed to
meet the requirements of communities with conﬂicting interests. There were
differences among the participating research teams in the extent to which
perceptions of the development process were consistent with a complex
adaptive systems view. The projects were described in this way partly in
response to the political project of bidding successfully to the European
Commission for funding. At the time, those responsible for the potential
line of funding were strongly inﬂuenced by the prevailing social imaginary of
generative self-organizing systems and their assumed compatibility with the
values of the good society.
The choice of an OSS digital platform was driven partly by political
momentum in the EU aimed at countering the stronger presence of foreign
(mainly American) providers of proprietary digital platforms compared to
European-owned companies. It was driven also by the developers’ commit-
ment to challenge the intellectual property rights protection discussed in the
preceding section. These protections were granting corporate rights holders
control of most of the digital platforms on the market in Europe. In line with
the social imaginary of the information commons, the developers sought to
emphasize information sharing and skills pooling, and to tackle contractual
and technological lock in to proprietary systems. This approach was believed
to offer a means of reducing online transaction costs for smaller ﬁrms
(including contract opt out penalties) and creating incentives for collective
ownership and sharing of an important component of the digital infrastruc-
ture which would support the conduct of business and research.66
DIGITAL BUSINESS ECOSYSTEM ASPIRATIONS
The digital business ecosystem projects were undertaken by an interdisciplin-
ary research team that included computer and social scientists, and represen-
tatives from public research institutes and universities, mainly in the EU,
136
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
several large companies representing industry interests, as well as small- and
medium-sized enterprises, participating as users of the platform. They were
described as aiming to build the foundations for a self-sustaining, self-
governing ‘digital business ecosystem’. Initially, this ecosystem was envisaged
as being ‘able to evolve into distributed cognitive systems, engineered to
embed mechanisms of evolution and adaptation to local needs and cultures’.67
In contrast to collaborating OSS communities, which generally work on
a project basis and have governance arrangements for negotiating the
conﬂicting requirements of the gift and the commercial economies, the
developers found they were having to cultivate norms and practices to foster
the values of openness and reciprocity.68 They were required to do this in an
environment in which they needed also to respect the values of limited access
and membership, privacy and conﬁdentiality, intellectual property rights,
contracting and trading (liability, fair trading, and competition), data and
consumer protection, and legal jurisdictional issues.
They tried to separate development of the components of the open plat-
form infrastructure from the service requirements of the competitive market
in which the business users would be operating. Their logic was that these
could be treated as separable components in a complex system,69 despite the
vision of a self-organizing ecosystem (even if only a metaphor) which would
highlight the interdependence of the human actors and technology and their
co-evolutionary roles in developing the digital platform.70 The ambition was
to develop the distributed coordination of transactions among Web services
which, while not technologically incompatible with proprietary Web-based
business services, required a means of enabling cooperation among different
machines and the joint development and maintenance of the platform and
languages used to run them. The goal was to create possibilities for collabo-
ration among ‘peer’ institutions (e.g. research institutes), distribution of
resources among communities of interested users (e.g. information about
municipal services), and the formation of ‘ecosystems’ of related businesses
(e.g. tourist sites in a particular region, or researchers working on a particular
problem). The design concept emphasized individual agents exploiting Web
services with local autonomy, using customized interfaces and means of
accessing services. There was no incompatibility between relying on the
distributed coordination of transactions between Web services in ‘run time’,
in the technological infrastructure, and employing proprietary business mod-
els and private data for speciﬁc services involved in a complex business
transaction for the services that would run on this infrastructure. For some,
this suggested that this distinction could be maintained throughout the
development process.
The developers were concerned with three types of openness—OSS,
distributed coordination of the run-time of distributed software to support
transactions, and open knowledge for the research community—each
EMERGENCE AND COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
137

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
implying somewhat different strategies. As far as the transactions were
concerned, it was decided that they would be based on P2P interactions
rather than on a centralized provider, aggregator, or database.71 The aim
was to develop a platform for reusable and reconﬁgurable Internet-based
services that would meet a variety of business needs requiring automated
data exchange outside a company, and satisfy the information-related needs
of researchers working in organizations such as universities. The P2P tech-
nology, Flypeer, was new, and the developers also wanted to employ a
decentralized data storage system,72 which, however, was only partly imple-
mented due to technical challenges and the different requirements of the
potential communities of users.73
In summary, the digital business ecosystem development initiative was
conceived as being located at the interface of the gift and commercial econo-
mies, and as an opportunity to ensure that potentially different interests in the
features of the system (e.g. its simplicity versus its complexity, and its open
versus proprietary design features) could be resolved. It was positioned
between two social imaginaries of the innovation process. The ﬁrst was an
‘associative’ vision, in which people were understood to shape democratic
arrangements for the development of the communication system. The second
was akin to the social imaginary of an evolving, autopoietic or self-organizing
system, in which the agency of the developers was assumed not to be a central
feature. These features of the imaginary inﬂuenced the practices of the devel-
opers in a variety of ways and the vision was not fully accepted by all the
participants. For instance, some of the developers did not believe that autop-
oiesis could be realized in practice, and the computer scientists were described
as simply working with this social imaginary in order to obtain the ﬁnancing
to pursue their own methods and technical architecture.
Nevertheless, the overarching vision of the digital ecosystem initiative was
of a complex system that would be aligned with the values of an open
information commons.74 For example, the new platform was expected to
‘help raise awareness of the importance of and lifestyle beneﬁts to be gained
by, a more holistic way of living’,75 and the technical system was intended to
be open, inclusive, and transparent for all its participants.76 The decentra-
lized, distributed, technical system was to be designed to incorporate the
values of credibility, trust, and security important for business users, along-
side the values of openness and transparency important for researchers. To
achieve this, the idea of hierarchy was invoked as a means of understanding
and, potentially, resolving the contradictions among these values, that is,
between openness and decentralization and the need for organizational and
technical closure, often achieved using proprietary design features. In line
with this ambition, the initiative was described as a nested, hierarchical
system where ‘the ecosystem-oriented architecture ﬁts inside a digital ecosys-
tem, which ﬁts within one or more cultural contexts, which ﬁt in one or more
138
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
geographical contexts. Similarly, the different epistemologies ﬁt one inside the
other like Russian dolls’.77 Thus, while the conﬁguration of a networked
ecology also suggested the characteristics of the heterarchical networking
phenomenon, these hierarchical features of relations within a network were
much in evidence.
As the work progressed, the effacement of human agency, which is charac-
teristic of the social imaginary of the systems view of a self-organizing system,
even when used as a metaphor, proved extremely challenging. Work on one of
the technical components illustrates the problem of reconciling the
conﬂicting values. This was the Open Knowledge Space (OKS).
AN OPEN KNOWLEDGE SPACE
The idea of an OKS was to allow online communities to use collaborative
digital tools to organize the production and dissemination of their informa-
tion. The OKS Desktop was intended to be the access point to the commu-
nity’s knowledge and to include a wiki, ﬁles, an issue tracker, Web mail, a blog,
and an online forum.78 The approach was described as:
a process-oriented, community-driven option within a loose and dynamic organiza-
tional structure that is directly coupled to the community’s governance process and is
of greater relevance, value, scalability, and signiﬁcance to members of the community,
particularly those who have participated in its development. Naturally, the outcome
of this democratic, collaborative and thus less structured approach is more difﬁcult to
predict and will also present some challenges in the visualization and representation
of the knowledge, as well as in the mobilization of the community to participate.79
It was to be consistent with the values of commons-based peer production.
The platform could serve as a host or intermediary for software, scientiﬁc
outputs, or for business-related information, but its common feature was the
use of a distributed network infrastructure and shared hardware and software
resources.80 While it proved possible to work out a ‘common language’ or sign
system for components, such as images, buttons, icons, text, etc., the devel-
opment of the underlying system of meaning with regard to consistency,
integrity, and connections among signs proved to be more difﬁcult and was
not addressed despite being at the core of the digital ecosystem idea.81
The developers faced problems when the emphasis shifted to researchers as
users of the OKS (business users were interested mainly in support for reliable
complex Web services) and values became conﬂicting. There was a need, for
example, for visualization tools that would enable the integration of data
generated by the developers as part of the research community and by the
business activities of small- and medium-sized enterprises. For example, a
hotel using the platform might publish on it several different services, such as
booking, availability search, or booking cancellation, and all these data need
EMERGENCE AND COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
139

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
to be visualized, interoperable, and (some of them) retained, in a private
domain, for commercial reasons. When the ﬁrms were approached, they
indicated that they were interested in the support for Web services and had
little real interest in the knowledge layer of the initiative. Consistent with the
values of the marketplace and competition, a hotel’s local needs, for example,
would be for a system that would protect sensitive data and ensure anonymity
of transactions to competing users of the system.82 The developers believed
that what was needed was ‘a clear deﬁnition and representation about what
the ﬁrm is, how it operates and how it can communicate and co-operate with
other ﬁrms’.83
A clear deﬁnition was exactly what was lacking. The developers reverted to
answers from conventional business models and a global data repository
proved impossible to implement because business users needed data that
were exploited mainly locally and only some made public. Data ownership
issues, and the labour on the part of small user companies involved in
resolving them, meant that not all the data could be accessible and there
was no means of ‘dictating’ the use of a common taxonomy or language to
agree the meanings of terms employed to specify tasks in different research
areas. There was also no consortium-wide recognition of the utility of the
tools that the OKS provided. The tools were ‘empty’ and some lay ‘gathering
dust’.84 In addition, some requirements could be met by tools already avail-
able on the market. Regardless of the preferences of some developers for an
emergent platform open to all and adhering to the democratic principles of
data sharing and cooperation, it was necessary to address information own-
ership, privacy, and security.
It was not feasible to maintain a separation between the, apparently,
distinct technological and the other components in this complex system.
The social imaginary of a self-organizing system was called into question at
the technical level as well. The reliance on the self-organizing properties of
software was dependent on ‘blue skies’ research that had nothing to do with
social science components and little to do with the approaches of the com-
puter scientists.85
The important issue was how private sector companies would generate and
capture economic value through their use of the open resources and capabil-
ities provided by an online platform.86 Although initially intrigued by the
prospect of an OSS platform that would release smaller ﬁrms from depen-
dence on proprietary platforms, some companies concluded that closed,
proprietary platforms were more consistent with their competitive strategies
and business needs. An uncomfortable mix of values and approaches became
embedded in the digital ecosystem.
Despite a move towards a platform design supported by digital resources in
an open environment, it was necessary to ﬁnd ways to control information, to
enhance its perceived scarcity in line with the interests of the companies. The
140
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
OKS developers valued the freedom to beneﬁt from and to use and improve
upon other people’s ideas, but the businesses wanted to generate revenue
from ownership of their accumulated intellectual property with respect to
their transactions, by creating the means to ensure its scarcity. The ‘self-
organizing’ digital ecosystem needed to conform to the demands of the
participating enterprises or risk being abandoned in favour of the proprietary
digital platforms already familiar to many of them.
It may also have been that the traditional proprietary tools were favoured
because they were easier to use, more reliable, and already in mass use. It was
claimed that the OSS distributed platform had no technical implications for the
use of proprietary services running on the platform and no direct implications
for the conﬁdentiality and privacy of information or for intellectual property
rights. However, a reading of some of the responses of user ﬁrms suggests that
there was considerable slippage in the social imaginaries of what the digital
ecosystem was about. The separation between the domains of business and
research was not as clear cut as some of the participants imagined it might be.
IMAGINARIES OF SELF-ORGANIZATION, EMERGENCE, AND CONTROL
The emphasis on the social imaginary of self-organizing systems downplays
the signiﬁcant role of human agency. The people who were expected to
become users of the digital platform would have needed to have, or be
prepared to acquire, a considerable amount of knowledge about how to
conﬁgure their access, to provide greater value than was already achievable
using pre-deﬁned ‘menus’ for accessing resources (information or services) or
engaging in transactions (such as bookings, purchases, requests). In this
respect, the development initiative was more akin to an experiment in
‘engineering openness’ in response to the need to re-invent the infrastructure
for Web-based services that had become established on the market, than an
instance of the self-organizing imaginary being put into practice. The P2P
infrastructure was partly implemented and tested, and the participants in this
digital business ecosystem subsequently set up a non-proﬁt association to
enable them to continue their research.87 However, far from relying on the
emergent self-organizing properties of the system to favour a new infrastruc-
ture platform, the developers intervened to manage the power relations
associated with competition among the, mainly, small- and medium-sized
enterprises intending to use the digital platform, and to respond to the
requirements of the research community.
This experience was in stark contrast to the social imaginary of a ‘digital
environment that evolves naturally to support a sustainable economy, where
interactions through e-commerce are an integral part of that economy. In a
sense the e-infrastructure will become “invisible”, or non-intrusive, with
EMERGENCE AND COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
141

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
regard to the continued development of a sustainable economy that resides
within that infrastructure’. In a fully distributed P2P design, there should be
‘no dependencies on single organizations, as there is no central authority, and
no critical points of failure’.88 Although in practice the computer science
partners did not expect the self-organizing behaviour of the system to achieve
this, project partners found themselves writing and talking as if they did,
partly in response to the expectations created at the outset of the initiative and
the fact that the self-organizing systems model had seeped into the politics
inside the European Commission.
The emphasis on the self-organizing features of the digital platform and the
attempt to separate the developments in different levels of a complex commu-
nication system were fostered by the claim that a ‘structural coupling’ of the
components of the system would somehow yield an environment that could
meet the needs of all the human agents involved. This was to be achieved
through advances in autonomic computing, that is, further advances in the
behind the screen intelligent machine. It was imagined that with advances in
interaction computing it would be feasible to specify environments that would
generate software services in response to any internal or external stimuli in a
constantly changing environment. This science-based aspect of the initiative
did not command a large share of the overall budget, and some claims were
directed to garnering support from the European Commission. Nevertheless,
the use of the language of self-organization served to downplay fundamental
conﬂicts in the interests of the stakeholders in this initiative.
It was acknowledged at times that if the strategy of relying on emergent self-
organization should fail to yield the results in terms of an open, distributed
platform, then recourse would have to be made to ‘brute force’ to achieve the
goals of the initiative.89 The turn to scientiﬁc theory, although apparently
contained within its own domain from a funding point of view, contributed to
a legend about the potential of the self-organizing properties of software, which
then began to inﬂuence claims about the values and properties of the software. In
the epistemology of scientiﬁc endeavour, ambitious claims for theoretical ad-
vance may be made that are neither veriﬁable nor falsiﬁable because the aim is
theoretical. However, the scientiﬁc claims did not remain segregated in the minds
of scientists, they started to inform the imaginaries of those concerned with the
evolution of this particular component of the communication system.
It was claimed that the technical design of the platform would have no
bearing on the potential users whose concerns would be with the economic
costs incurred in the adoption and implementation of the new system.
Further, even if the new open source technical infrastructure were to be
available at lower cost, its failure to take off could be attributed to its
incomplete implementation and consequent difﬁculties related to its use.
However, some of the feedback from potential user companies and organiza-
tions indicated that, in making their choices, they did not isolate the technical
142
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
from the non-technical dimensions. Research, commercial, and technical
priorities became blended in reference to ‘best practice’. For example, an
alternative to eBay in which users negotiate with one another for the sale of
artefacts rather than using an intermediary (eBay) might appear attractive
because it avoids the costs associated with an intermediary. However, such
a system requires acceptable substitutes for ‘ﬁnding’ items of interest in a
distributed network of individuals offering items for sale, negotiating a
commitment to purchase and delivery, and providing recourse in the case
of non-delivery. It is relatively easy to describe such a system, but it is much
more difﬁcult to enlist a sufﬁcient number of participant-users to make the
system a credible alternative to the incumbent form of intermediation.
CREDIBLE ALTERNATIVES AND GOALS
For the developers of the platform, the dominant social imaginary was of a
process-oriented, community-driven development consistent with commons-
based peer production principles of collaboration. The initiative was intended to
be democratic and emergent. In practice, the developers relied on best guesses
about user requirements and a high-level technological architecture that was
opaque to users. There were attempts to develop a common language in which
terms, meanings, and relationships in the development process would become
clear, but there was ongoing confusion about the meanings of terms and the
values being privileged, as exempliﬁed by the OKS development.90
One of the aspirations for the initiative was that control of the network
supporting the new platform should be distributed to enhance its transparent
and open structure. The P2P Flypeer infrastructure that was developed did
respect the local autonomy of participants. The Flypeer platform was partly
implemented to support Web-services, but it proved problematic as a platform
for porting existing services or developing new ones. The infrastructure enabled
companies and researchers to share information should they wish to. However,
the inﬂuence of the social imaginary of the beneﬁts of open collaboration meant
that the resulting system challenged the dominant social imaginary of protecting
information, that is, securing its relative scarcity. This was dismissed as a non-
technical issue and separated as far as possible from design considerations. Some
aspects of the conﬂict of interests in an open versus a proprietary platform were
addressed, but the user companies’ evaluation of the prototype suggested that
their expectations had not been satisﬁed and that solutions to their needs were
available on the commercial market.91 Following trials of the platform, it was
suggested that the development process had succeeded in reproducing the ‘basic
regulatory problems and issues that are typical of the Internet in general’.92
A problem for the initiative was to deﬁne a platform that would be
attractive to users, as the immediate appeal of the P2P approach (expressed
EMERGENCE AND COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
143

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
in the potentially daunting term ‘Digital Business Ecosystem’) was not strong.
Despite recourse to the social imaginary of a complex system’s self-organizing
potential, the initiative did not depart very far from the functions on offer
from proprietary software producers. In the absence of a threshold-sized
community, the initiative was faced with the difﬁculties of establishing a
‘brand’ and achieving a large enough group of participants to create a viable
community. These difﬁculties became a major stumbling block and the
initiative ended with a collection of ‘proof of concept’ results and an unfund-
ed community interested in their further development.
This interdisciplinary project aimed at reconciling the economic interests in
the scarcity of information achieved through proprietary platform implemen-
tations, and those of the research community in equality and social justice
associated with the values of an open commons. Efforts were made to achieve
theoretical integration (not harmonization or uniﬁcation) among disparate
approaches,93 but the community of developers remained fragmented around
its areas of specialism. The technologists focused on the enabling architecture
and infrastructure, and the social scientists focused on issues of trust, identity,
and information security. Similar to the experience of other application-
oriented software projects, the recruitment of user companies based in differ-
ent regions of Europe, and engagement to use the system for ‘productive
purposes’, proved difﬁcult. After its nearly seven-year span, the technical
description of the initiative no longer referred to the potential of an emergent
self-organizing system. Systems concepts, such as structural coupling and self-
organization, remained in the theoretical description of the initiative and are
expected to guide some future scientiﬁc endeavours.94 However, the values of
the dominant social imaginary of the information society privileging infor-
mation scarcity had been injected into a project that had sought to bypass or to
modify them, in part or in whole. These values gave precedence to the market
and competition (versus sharing), to private information ownership, com-
mercial secrecy, and conﬁdentiality.95 These values did not emerge, they were
imposed from above and reﬂected the prevailing power relationships in the
wider system of which this initiative was only a part.
The initial aim was to enable the dynamics of autopoietic computing to
foster a sustainable innovation in the communication system—moving from
the realm of the social imaginary into the realms of architecture, organization,
and norms for the behaviour of companies and researchers. In practice, the
key components of this imaginary proved largely unachievable organization-
ally (and possibly also mathematically). There was a call for further research
on the mathematical nature of interaction computing in the interests of
achieving the original goals,96 reminiscent of the dreams of machines which
can ‘think’ on behalf of human beings.
Care was taken to ensure that the potential for advances in self-organizing
software was conﬁned to that element of the system and treated only as a means
144
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
of improving its functional characteristics. It was acknowledged repeatedly that
the epistemologies of the technical and social were different. Nevertheless, there
was slippage in the discourses employed in this initiative, as indicated by a
reading of its outputs. The claims about the separation of these systems receded
and, overall, the initiative served to foster the dream of an open system for the
production, processing, distribution, and storage of information that would
emerge ‘naturally’. However, the interests of those in protecting information to
secure its scarcity tended to prevail. The values of openness and democracy
proved subservient to the power relationships embedded in the wider hierarchi-
cal system within which the new digital platform had to operate.
Even a cheaper system from a technical point of view was not compatible
with the perceived interests of some of the small- and medium-sized business
users or, at the time, with the perceived needs of the research user community.
Retrospectively, it might be claimed, perhaps, that the companies did not
adopt the open platform largely for functional or technical reasons and that
the OSS research community did not grow because insufﬁcient resources were
devoted to building it. However, my reading is that the reasons lie in the
failure to acknowledge the paradox of complexity in addition to the failure to
realize that the paradox of information scarcity was also a problem.
A complex autopoietic system was imagined as being consistent with non-
market values and to emerge throughadvances in interaction computing research.
The digital business ecosystem initiative did generate unforeseen, interesting
research directions in the natural/physical sciences. But the developers encoun-
tered interventions from actors reﬂecting values instantiated in regulations and
laws intended to foster the market-led development of platforms for electronic
commerce. The imaginary of the elite class of knowledge workers was superseded
by that of another elite class with preferences for the dominant proprietary world
market-led online applications. Some of these actors resisted imposition of the
values of collaboration and openness when they were seen as interfering with their
economic interests. They participated initially as members of a consortium
dedicated to an ‘open’ agenda, requesting modiﬁcations, but later, when their
concerns were not fully accommodated, they adopted an exit strategy.97 The
premise that the power relations in an open digital platform could be conﬁned
to one level in a complex system was apparently unworkable in practice.
Conclusion
This chapter has illustrated many of the ways in which clashes between the
competing social imaginaries of the information society are visible in conﬂicts
over the development of the communication system behind the screen. When
EMERGENCE AND COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
145

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the analysis was punctuated from the perspective of the interests of the creative
industry companies in market-led innovation, these were shown to conﬂict
with the interests of Internet users in the development of the ‘thinking’
machines that are making it easier for them to imagine that they, rather than
system developers, are in control of the communication system. Efforts to
enforce private rights of ownership in information are consistent with reward-
ing information creators, but they suppress the incentives for innovative
developments and practices for people who mainly experience the mediated
environment in front of the screen. The more forcefully the corporate owners of
intellectual property assert their information ownership rights by creating
‘choke points’ on the Internet and acting as digital information gatekeepers,
the more they are called to account for infringements to people’s rights to access
information or compromises to the public interest in the open circulation of
digital information. This is illustrative of the paradox of information scarcity.
The creative industry companies, in some cases, are beginning to reﬂect the
interests of information users in their business strategies, suggesting that there
are ways of addressing the paradox of information scarcity. However, propo-
nents of moves to liberate all music downloading sites, for instance, are
depicted by representatives of the creative industry as being reckless, while
their own interventions in the market to achieve stronger enforcement of
copyright are seen as being entirely reasonable. In contrast, making online
participants legally liable for copyright infringement detected by the creative
industry companies is presented by open information advocacy groups as
being equally reckless in stimulating the surveillance of online activity and
foreclosing on the open space for the production of digital information. In
both of these social imaginaries, there is a strong belief that the self-organizing
properties of the communication system are compatible with the good
society—this is the paradox of complexity.
In the case of the digital business ecosystem initiative, the social imaginaries
of the information society embracing the idea of a generative, self-organizing
system behind the screen, played a role in shaping the outcomes insofar as the
hope was that the emergence of a new digital platform would be consistent
with the values of information sharing, creativity, and democracy. Once
incorporated in the technical components, it was expected that these features
would be taken up by a broad community of users, eager to be free of the
proprietary, externally controlled systems available on the market. In practice,
the system developers made choices about the platform in an attempt to
reconcile the commercial interests of the user companies in maintaining the
scarcity of business-related information with the interests of the research
community in sharing information in an open information commons.
When the analysis was punctuated through the eyes of computer scientists
and engineers, the evolution of the digital ecosystem system technologies was
understood as being neutral with respect to human values, in line with the
146
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
framing of people (and institutions) as information processors. In this re-
spect, the paradox of complexity was interpreted as benign for human beings.
The system was seen as comprising co-evolving sub-systems that give rise to a
‘multiplication of possibilities’,98 and power was seen as residing within the
system, rather than in the hands of human beings. Despite their belief in a
system predicated on openness and the horizontal distribution of power and
control, the technical features that were introduced in the digital business
ecosystem initiative and the pre-existing experience of user companies with
less democratic, but more immediately functional systems, were strong dis-
incentives for the adoption of the digital platform. The solution to the
resulting conundrum might have been to intervene to pre-specify user choices
to reduce complexity, and to increase their familiarity with the new approach.
However, such a move would have contradicted the democratic premise of the
initiative. Agency was exercised through the capabilities of the system devel-
opers not only from below but also from above through the requirements for
the governance of digital information in line with market values.
In the face of major changes in the ease with which everyone can produce,
copy, and consume digital information, the proponents of social imaginaries
that privilege either private ownership of information or the common own-
ership of information, devote their efforts to discrediting the arguments of
their opponents. The alternative is to consider the possibility that progress
towards an information society, consistent with the good society, requires a
different reading of the paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity.
In the case of the digital system ecosystem initiative, there were contradictions
in the social imaginaries of the various participants in the innovation process.
For the developers of the technical system, there was no perceived contradiction
in their decisions about the design of the system and their aspirations for the
construction of a democratic model for the system and, indeed, they were able to
design an open decentralized P2P infrastructure. But there also was very little
evidence of their awareness of the contradictions entailed in advocacy of a self-
organizing system along information commons principles when it is to be
employed by users that are subject to the hierarchical rules and norms of the
marketplace. In this case these norms took the form of conventional corporate
practices for managing information and governance rules put in place by the
state to ensure conﬁdentiality and security of electronic commerce.
In the next chapter (Chapter 7), I examine how the conﬂicting social
imaginaries of the information society are playing out in debates about the
goals for public policy and governance, especially in relation to the Internet.
EMERGENCE AND COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
147

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
7
Political Firestorms in
Communication Policy
Introduction
‘Internet regulation proposal sets off political ﬁrestorm’.1 This CNN headline
captures the outcry that met a new round of proposals for Internet regulation
in the United States. And when President Sarkozy broached the subject of
tougher Internet regulation at a French government-hosted ‘e-G8’ summit,
there was considerable protest, especially from those keen to defend an open
Internet. Sarkozy was calling for internationally coordinated regulation to
defend the Internet (and the Web) against monopoly control, copyright
breaches, child pornography, intrusions into personal privacy, and security
threats associated with malware. Addressing an audience of representatives of
companies, including Google, Facebook, Amazon, and eBay, he says, ‘the
universe you represent is not a parallel universe. Nobody should forget that
governments are the only legitimate representatives of the will of the people in
our democracies. To forget this is to risk democratic chaos and anarchy’.2 The
United Kingdom government, among others, resisted the French govern-
ment’s initiative.
A communique´ issued later by the OECD, following a high level meeting in
South Korea, endorsed ‘consensus-based policies’ for the Internet devised by
diverse groups of government, private sector, and civil society stakeholders.
OECD countries were against a move towards an Internet regulatory regime
that might dampen incentives for technological innovation and economic
growth.3 Civil society organizations participating in this OECD meeting
refused to sign up to the principles in the communique´ because it supported
the creative industries’ bid to achieve greater protection for copyrighted
digital content. The OECD communique´ suggests that many of the require-
ments for effective Internet governance are in place. Nevertheless, develop-
ments in next-generation networks, the shift from personal computer-based
to mobile handheld devices, the expansion of sensor-based networks, and the
increasing ubiquity of digital content in the virtual world, were all ﬂagged as
being likely to present new issues for policy makers.4
Developments in these and other areas prompt persistent calls for Internet
regulation aimed at curtailing, for instance, online pornography, potential
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
harm to children, or identity theft, all of which are enabled by developments
in the hardware and software of the communication system. There are
accompanying demands for strong defences against censorship and surveil-
lance in the name of freedom and democracy. Debates about whether and
how (much) the Internet should be regulated provoke support both for and
against interventions through policy, and formal or informal regulation. Little
account is taken of the implications of the paradoxes of information scarcity
or complexity in these conﬂicts about governance issues, but the conﬂicting
positions taken by the stakeholders in these debates often align with the
prevailing social imaginaries of the information society.
The stakeholders with an interest in the commodity value of digital infor-
mation align with the dominant social imaginary insofar as they encourage
governance solutions that privilege the market exchange of information. They
assume that Internet users will express their preferences in the marketplace
and that the role of government is to ensure that governance from above
secures the intellectual property rights of rights holders. They also presume
that it is the role of government to exercise control over information in the
interests of security, surveillance, and privacy. Nevertheless, the extent of
governance in the public interest generally is seen as being limited by the
complexity of the communication system.
Stakeholders favouring an information commons, in contrast, turn to the
generative dynamics of the evolution of the communication system in line
with the alternative social imaginary of the information society to secure the
interests of the public. They turn to governance from below to empower
Internet users, arguing that the sheer complexity of the technological system
means that government policy should aim at creating a legislative environ-
ment in which information is ‘allowed to be free’. In this imaginary there is a
strong emphasis on the idea that the dynamics of the innovation process itself
will give rise to an emergent, self-organizing, complex system and that it will
privilege democratic values, freedom of speech, and content diversity. Thus,
while there is convergence in these social imaginaries with regard to the
notion that a complex adaptive system will look after its own ‘needs’, there
are marked differences in way the power relationships among the different
stakeholders inform their positions on questions of the problems created by
the paradox of information scarcity. The colliding social imaginaries are
illustrated by some of their metacommunications on the role of policy and
regulation with respect to the older and newer components of the communi-
cation system in the Internet Age.
This chapter begins by outlining traditional communication policy con-
cerns and goals related to the media and communication sector, showing how
interpretations of the public interest in the communication system have
changed as the contested social imaginaries of the information society have
become prominent. I brieﬂy consider some of the institutions involved in the
POLITICAL FIRESTORMS IN COMMUNICATION POLICY
149

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
governance of the modern communication system and the extent to which it
is inclusive of a broad range of stakeholder interests. Debates about what has
come to be known as ‘network neutrality’ are then used to exemplify the way
stakeholders position themselves in efforts to advance their respective inter-
ests in the information society and to marginalize or discredit those of others.
Governing in the Public Interest
Whether regulation by the state is ‘ﬁt for purpose’ for the media and for the
communication networks of the Internet era is a question that is discussed under
the rubric of Internet governance. Denis McQuail, media scholar and policy
analyst in the media and communication ﬁeld, deﬁnes governance as all the
means by which the actors involved are ‘limited, directed, encouraged, managed,
or called into account, ranging from the most binding laws to the most resistible
of pressures and self-chosen disciplines’.5 Governance, therefore, refers to the
institutions and practices that guide the development of the technological and
human relationships involved in the innovation process, including the interests
of the state, private sector, and civil society and it is generally understood to be a
broader concept than regulation. This is because the authority to govern can be
derived from laws, regulations, treaties and conventions, business codes of
practice, and standards, as well as informal agreements. It is also necessary to
bear in mind that governance choices may not lead to action or change in the
structure or organization of an industry sector or in the practices of governments
because, for many different reasons, decisions often are not implemented for a
host of cultural, social, political, or economic reasons.6
An important governance question is who is authorized to make deci-
sions? Is it the state through top-down intervention or the private sector
through its own self-governance? Should civil society representatives
be empowered to make crucial governance decisions? Whether one or the
other, or some combination of these, the answers are inﬂuenced by
the prevailing social imaginaries of the information society. The approaches
to governance in the Internet Age are ﬂashpoints for disputes because of the
conﬂicts over the emphasis that should be given to market-led development
of the information society and the challenges of governing a complex
communication system. Shifts in the scope of media and communication
policy, including the Internet, and understanding of the public interest in
the evolution of the communication system are accompanied by changes in
governance institutions and practices.7
The disruptive nature of rapid technological innovation resulting in the
convergence of ICTs has promoted increasing emphasis on the participation
150
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
of representatives of civil society in the governance process. This is attribut-
able partly to the fact that the new technological platforms have made feasible
their entry into decision-making forums and partly because of the ease with
which they can coordinate their participation using online tools and websites.
Some claim that the opening up of participation is consistent with outcomes
that are more likely to favour governance in line with the social imaginary of
an open information commons. Others argue that it attracts attention
to developments in only one layer—the Internet Protocol layer—of a complex
multi-level
system
and
takes
insufﬁcient
account
of
the
economic
incentives that are needed to drive investment in next-generation networks
and applications.
HISTORY OF THE PUBLIC INTEREST IN COMMUNICATION
The idea that there is a public interest in the communication system, under-
stood as the means of communication and the content circulating within
networks, is deeply embedded in institutions of public policy and regulation
in the Western industrialized countries. The notion of the ‘public interest’ in
communication has strong economic connotations. The concept originated
in the legal treatment of ‘businesses affected with a public interest’ in the
seventeenth century in English common law. By the late 1870s, the idea
provided a basis for rulings by the United States judiciary on the public
interest in transport, an important activity in the conduct of business.
A court in the State of Illinois ruled that it was entitled to regulate the prices
charged for rail transport by the private owners of grain elevators, whose
monopoly over the transport system was enabling them to set very high prices
for use of the system. The court, borrowing from British common law,
concluded that certain private property:
does come clothed with a public interest when used in a manner to make it of public
consequence, and affect the community at large. When, therefore, one devotes his
property to a use in which the public has an interest, he, in effect, grants to the public
an interest in that use, and must submit to be controlled by the public for the
common good, to the extent of the interest he has thus created.8
It was a short step to move from transport as a mode of communication, to
the idea that communication networks are also ‘businesses affected with a
public interest’. This reasoning was applied to justify regulation of the tele-
communication industry when services in the United States were provided
by the private sector, with the aim of encouraging reasonable prices and
better access to services in a market characterized by strong tendencies
towards monopoly. Legislation for the communication sector would come
to embrace the concept of the public interest through references to the need
for policy favouring the ‘diversity of media voices, vigorous economic
POLITICAL FIRESTORMS IN COMMUNICATION POLICY
151

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
competition, technological advancement, and promotion of the public inter-
est, convenience, and necessity’.9
It was argued that concepts, such as the public interest, should not be
treated as universal principles that are transparent and applicable in every
context, acknowledging that there would be conﬂicts over the interests of
different parties with a stake in the development of any industrial sector,
subject to public interest legislation. For instance, in the 1930s, Walton
Hamilton, an institutional economist at Yale University, argued that legal
concepts evolve in speciﬁc historical and social contexts. He regards legal texts
as the ‘henchmen who do valiant service for the overlords of public policy’,10
suggesting that such texts should be subject to interpretative latitude in the
wake of changing circumstances. The concept of public interest was employed
also in legislation providing for policy and regulation for the media and
telecommunication industries in the United Kingdom and other national
jurisdictions where private suppliers had entered the market—usually after
a period of government ownership.11
Hamilton warns that the market within which industries ‘affected with
a public interest’ operate should not be regarded ‘as an automatic, self-
regulating mechanism; like any other human institution it may work poorly,
indifferently, or well’.12 This was prescient in the light of the neoliberal
prescriptions for regulation that would privilege self-regulating markets
over policy intervention in later decades. As the communication system has
developed, and with ICT convergence, governments and private providers of
media content and communication networks have argued that faith should
be placed in the self-regulating properties of markets or, alternatively, in
the self-regulating properties of the technological system as a means of safe-
guarding the public interest.
CONTESTED PUBLIC INTEREST CRITERIA
Interpretation of the public interest in the telecommunication industry
traditionally emphasizes economic criteria in line with the early history of
the concept. Judgements about the governance of networks and services are
made in the light of assessments of the impact of the industry’s capacity to
exploit its monopolistic position in the market by exercising economic
power through pricing strategies. The application of economic criteria
results in a relatively narrow construct of the public interest compared to
that based on criteria such as diversity, fairness, and social justice which are
applied to regulation of the media content industries. For instance, tele-
communication is treated as an essential facility or critical economic re-
source, whereas broadcasting is linked to cultural values, and rights
and responsibilities relating to freedom of speech.13 The norm for
152
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
telecommunication regulation is a focus on investment in infrastructure and
(affordable) services for the public. The norm for broadcasting is a focus on
the quality of content, freedom of expression, diversity, and plurality, or the
role of the state in controlling the content of the media. Thus, the concept of
the public interest is broad in the context of media content regulation, and
encompasses media plurality and media ownership issues.14 As markets
have been opened to commercial providers of content-related services, the
broadcasting industry and increasingly the online entertainment and news
content companies are driven by interests in proﬁts, presenting difﬁcult
problems for the criteria that should govern the regulation of the public
service broadcasting sector.15
It is difﬁcult to deﬁne what the Internet is for governance purposes. Is it the
technical architecture built on the Internet Protocol?16 Or is it the services that
are provided over networks employing this protocol? Where does Internet
regulation intersect with the traditional ways in which telecommunication and
broadcasting services have been regulated? These are all questions that require
answers when the issue of Internet governance is raised and when public
interest considerations are discussed. The Internet and what have come to be
known as ‘new media’ services accessed using the Internet do not come under
the same regime of governance as the older media and communication net-
works because of the Internet’s origins as an innovative technology at the edge
or fringe of what was regarded as the communication infrastructure. Thus, in
democratic jurisdictions it is frequently claimed that any attempts to regulate
the Internet will infringe civil liberties and human rights or, alternatively, that
state control is essential in the name of security. In the discussion on network
neutrality later in this chapter, we will ﬁnd that these claims echo the con-
tending social imaginaries of the information society in the Internet Age.
The public interest might be served, for example, by governance arrange-
ments that allow any actor to pursue his or her conception of public good as
long as it does not interfere negatively with the interests of anyone else. Such
an understanding of the public interest clearly would go well beyond a
market-led social imaginary of the public interest in the information socie-
ty.17 If the governance framework were to be aimed at protecting the public
interest in a way that is responsive to this broad standard, account would need
to be taken of the conﬂicts and power relationships and their interactions
within this multi-level system and the way these give rise to chronic patterns
of paradox. There is remarkably little evidence at present of a governance
framework that is responsive to a broad standard such as this, as the rest of
this chapter shows.
The focus instead in assessing the public interest and appropriate gover-
nance measures is normally on the diffusion of technology and, typically, on
‘curative’ policies supported by instrumental research on communication
system developments in front of the screen such as, for instance, voluntary
POLITICAL FIRESTORMS IN COMMUNICATION POLICY
153

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
industry codes of practice for consumer protection from online fraud. Little
attention is given to evaluating what a particular conﬁguration of market and
voluntary activity in the media and communication sector is likely to enable
people to accomplish in their lives, and even less to the economic resources
and other capabilities they need in order to beneﬁt from access to ICTs and
digital information. The emphasis on technology gaps and market-led invest-
ment is consistent with the dominant social imaginary of the information
society.
When the public interest in the information society is addressed from a
critical perspective, issues of equality and social justice are more likely to be
privileged. Emphasis is more likely to be given to governance measures aimed
at encouraging the diversity of digital content and cultural diversity, the
provision of a broad range of cultural, social, and economic information
resources that will beneﬁt Internet users, the protection of human rights, and
the ways of fostering social equality. This broader approach, compared to the
social imaginary of governance for a market-led information society, makes it
possible to envisage ‘different alternatives for the future, albeit recognizing
certain essential traits that characterize our time, underlining the strategic
role of information and knowledge’.18 However, acknowledging diversity in
the governance framework for the communication system is especially chal-
lenging because of the global reach of the system. This means that the states
involved will have different economic and political interests and these, in
turn, will be informed by their afﬁnity to the dominant social imaginary of
the information society. For the most part, states are less attracted to the
alternative imaginary of an open information commons even though it might
encourage variety and diversity in the local environments within which
information is produced and consumed.19
Historically, policies for the media and communication sector were intro-
duced at the international level expressing the interests of the United States
and other wealthy Western countries, with some expectation that they would
be taken up by the non-Western states (eventually) and in response to various
forms of political and economic pressure.20 In the Internet Age, many states
are exercising their autonomy thereby contributing to diversity of the gover-
nance arrangements in the information society, but not always favouring
democratic values or the ethos of the open information commons. For
example, the Egyptian government required the Egyptian division of the
mobile communication company, Vodafone, to send text messages on its
behalf, and to suspend its services during the political protests in 2011.21
These and other instances of the exercise of state power are reminders that
governance always serves particular interests. There is no homogeneous or
universal conception of the public interest in the communication system or, as
Arturo Escobar puts it, policy ‘narratives are always immersed in history and
never innocent’.22 Policy makers representing countries from the global
154
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
south, from China to Brazil, are becoming more inﬂuential as their economies
grow stronger. However, it does not follow that challenges to the dominant
market-led social imaginary of the information society will be effective in
guiding governance outcomes in the direction of the values of the good
society. It is also unclear what combinations of governance from below and
from above would be consistent with aspirations for the good society.
In summary, some observers seem content to wait for empowerment of
their citizens to take advantage of the potential of convergent ICT platforms
to challenge the dominant market-led social imaginary without specifying
what should take its place. Others are encouraging new forms of Internet
governance which have the potential to challenge this imaginary. As discussed
in the next sections of this chapter, however, when they become embroiled in
debates, especially concerning the governance of the Internet, they mispunc-
tuate the analysis of conﬂicting interests with the result that measures that
might reconcile the concerns of interested parties are not considered. Given
the asymmetries in power relationships, the interests of those in the market-
led development of the information society generally are prevailing insofar as
developments in front of and behind the computer screen are concerned,
while policy makers debate means of balancing the conﬂicting interests of
stakeholders. As suggested earlier, this effort to achieve balance misreads the
fundamental contradictions created by the paradoxes of information scarcity
and complexity. The next section outlines some of the institutional arrange-
ments that are in place for governing the Internet.
Governing the Internet
Turning now to the issues raised speciﬁcally about the governance of the
Internet since it began to spread beyond the scientiﬁc community in the mid-
1990s, the focal point for discussions about governance often is characterized
as being about whether the Internet is ‘ungovernable’ because of its global
reach. This ungainly term is used frequently by policy makers to suggest that
‘in the long run, the endless spiral of connectivity is more powerful than any
government edict’.23 In the prevailing social imaginary of the information
society, the suggestion is that the state should not be involved in Internet
governance because this will discourage innovation and the creativity needed
to sustain a ﬂourishing Internet system.
John Perry Barlow’s Declaration for the Independence of Cyberspace ar-
ticulates a variation of this claim with the assertion that ‘you do not know our
culture, our ethics, or the unwritten codes that already provide our society
more order than could be obtained by any of your impositions’.24 He refers to
POLITICAL FIRESTORMS IN COMMUNICATION POLICY
155

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
those advocating external control over the Internet who either do not share
his anarcho-syndicalist or libertarian beliefs or are from a generation that
cannot comprehend all the beneﬁts of the cyberworld. For those who see the
communication system as a complex adaptive system, its self-organization
results in an emergent process in which state intervention is unlikely to
beneﬁt anyone who believes in freedom and democracy.
GOVERNANCE ARRANGEMENTS IN PRACTICE
In contrast to this vision of an emergent outcome based on the generative
characteristics of the technological system, states do of course attempt in
various ways to govern the Internet as part of their broader efforts to control
the communication system. In some cases, governance initiatives may be
taken to promote investment in broadband infrastructure or to coordinate
the technical architecture and operation of the Internet Protocol; in others,
initiatives may be taken in the name of security, the protection of children, or,
in some states, explicitly in the name of censorship.
The private sector becomes involved in Internet governance through its moni-
toring and tracking of patterns of Internet use, for reasons that range from efforts
to manage trafﬁc efﬁciently, enforce intellectual property rights, or provide
personalized services for Internet users, as we have seen in earlier chapters.
Thus, the issue of governance in the Internet Age provokes questions about the
moral, political, economic, and social interests of the stakeholders in the informa-
tion society. Despite the claims about its ‘ungovernability’, and despite the fact that
the Internet is part of a highly complex technological system, it is governed in
numerous ways and these are associated with uncertain outcomes.
The Internet is the product of state and corporate governance choices, not
solely the result of the choices made by the scientists and engineers who
designed it.25 In one way or another, all states—including democratic and
authoritarian ones—are involved in the construction of the Internet whether
they privilege the goals of freedom of speech and democracy, of economic
growth, or of security. Thus, as Saskia Sassen puts it using the language of
sociology, ‘power, contestation, inequality, in brief, hierarchy’ always inscribe
electronic space.26
Contestations emerge increasingly as civil societyorganizations achieve greater
prominence in forums hosted by the institutions involved in Internet gover-
nance. The political alignment of civil society advocates can range from
concerted efforts to push back interventions by the state and private sector, to
efforts to achieve a balancing of the interests of all the stakeholders, and in some
cases, to support for the continuation of governance from above by the state or
the corporate sector.27 It cannot be assumed, therefore, that multistakeholder
approaches to Internet governance (or to policy for the communication sector
156
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
generally) will be aligned with a social imaginary of an information society that
privileges the information commons over the commercial market.
This means that multistakeholder approaches to Internet governance are
no more likely, simply as a result of their structure or their decision-making
procedures, to be able to repair the problems that emerge as a result of the
conditions created by the genesis of the paradoxes of information scarcity and
complexity than their predecessors. Changes in the ICT techno-economic
paradigm and the growing dependence of economies on digital information
have brought Internet governance matters to the attention of a complex
matrix of state and private sector institutions, most of which have little or
no previous experience of multistakeholder dialogue or decision-making. The
actors involved include governments, ISPs, telecommunication network and
service suppliers, broadcasters, software companies, hardware manufacturers,
trade organizations, the banking sector, and representatives of civil society.
The issues, especially at the international level, fall within the remits of a large
number of intergovernmental and regional organizations, as indicated by the
medley of organizations represented in Table 7.1. For the most part, as the
composition of these institutions is state or private sector dominated, their
deliberations are well-aligned with the dominant social imaginary of a mar-
ket-led information society.28
Internet governance issues entered the world stage after a lengthy gestation
during which efforts were made to give prominence to a broad conception of the
public interest in the communication system as discussed earlier. In the 1970s, the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) began promoting a New World Information
and Communication Order (NWICO), arguing that this was needed to address
asymmetries between rich and poor.29 The Many Voices, One World report drew
attention to persistent inequalities in the capacity for media production and the
need to promote freedom of speech through approaches to governing the
communication system.30 The United States and the United Kingdom responded
by withdrawing from UNESCO in protest against NAM criticisms of their lack of
reciprocity in trade in services and of their Western-backed approach to media
freedom. The positions taken by those from the wealthy countries were seen by
representatives of the Non-Aligned countries as promoting a ‘one way’ ﬂow of
information from the wealthy to the poor countries, resulting in suppression of
their capacities for developing distinctive information societies.31
By the end of the 1990s, the World Bank and several United Nations
agencies were promoting a vision of development supported by digital tech-
nologies, aimed at addressing knowledge gaps and the digital divide, in order
to stimulate market-led growth. States were being encouraged to devise digital
technology policies to help them ‘leapfrog’ the industrialized countries by
investing in digital networks and services.32 Investment was to be encou-
raged by favouring market-led competition and a governance regime for the
POLITICAL FIRESTORMS IN COMMUNICATION POLICY
157

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Table 7.1. Institutions with Interests in Internet Governance
Intellectual property rights:
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN)
United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)
World Trade Organization (WTO)
Security issues:
Council of Europe (COE)
Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
Group on Earth Observations (GEO)
ICANN
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
Infrastructure issues:
European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN)
GEO
ICANN
International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
OECD
UNESCO
World Bank
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)
WTO
Jurisdiction and sovereignty:
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS)
COE
FATF
Hague Conference on Private International Law
ICANN
International Monetary Fund (IMF)
Monetary Authority:
OECD
UNESCO
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL)
WTO
Relations between private transacting parties:
Foreign Commercial Relations Committee
GEO
Hague Conference
ITU
OECD
UNCITRAL
WTO
Relations between persons and the state:
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
GEO
ITU
OECD
WTO
Source: Author, collated from various sources.
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Internet (and the media and communication sector generally) borrowed
largely from the models developed in the wealthy countries. The then United
Nations Secretary-General, KoﬁAnnan, announced that investment in ICTs
should be harnessed to reduce poverty.33 By 2000, the political momentum
driving the prevailing social imaginary of the information society based on
the market-led diffusion of digital technologies was attracting high-level
diplomatic interest. A World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS)
was held in two parts in Geneva in 2003 and in Tunis in 2005 under the
auspices
of
the
United
Nations
General
Assembly,
organized
by
the International Telecommunication Union (ITU)34 with support from
UNESCO. This summit provided a novel forum for accredited civil society
organizations to highlight the persistent failures to address the relationships
between technologies, poverty, and human rights.
The WSIS outcomes advocated some degree of movement away from
technology-centred and market-led social imaginary of the information soci-
ety. Discussion about policy measures and governance arrangements more
consistent with the social imaginary of an open information commons were
largely dismissed, however, from the mainstream of the WSIS deliberations
through careful management of the participation of civil society spokesper-
sons by the Summit’s host institution, the ITU. The outcomes of these
deliberations contained strong resonances with the dominant imaginary in
which ‘knowledge is like light’35—knowledge in support of development can
be delivered through access to digital information. The policy priority was to
meet targets for the diffusion of ICTs,36 and it was argued that a universally
applicable information society strategy would beneﬁt all. This strong empha-
sis on technology and the governance arrangements that will best enable its
rapid diffusion is present in most contemporary national jurisdictions. It
continues to be in evidence, for example, in the United Nations’ Millennium
Development Goals Report 2010. ICT policy goals for the information society
are expressed in terms of progression towards targets for the diffusion of
technology using benchmarking indicators measuring Internet connections
and mobile telephone subscriptions.37
INSTITUTIONAL INNOVATIONS FOR GOVERNANCE
In the shadows of the WSIS and a variety of other forums, however, civil
society representatives proposed alternatives to government and corporate-
sponsored agendas for the information society. Their voices were reﬂected in
some of the texts that came out the Summit and in some of the actions with
respect to governance arrangements that followed.38 One outcome of the
WSIS deliberations was the creation of a new forum within which public
interest issues raised by the Internet can be debated. The Internet Governance
POLITICAL FIRESTORMS IN COMMUNICATION POLICY
159

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Forum (IGF) was established under the auspices of the United Nations
General Assembly. It has no formal policy making powers and its mandate
is to discuss issues relating to Internet governance in an inclusive and ﬂexible
way. It has brought together thousands of representatives of government,
business, and civil society.39
The IGF is seen by some as being in a good position to address controversial
governance issues in such areas as privacy, security, and information diversity,
and it has deliberated on issues of freedom from surveillance and censorship. It
was sufﬁciently effective in disturbing metacommunications that were consis-
tent with the dominant social imaginary of the information society that the
renewal of its mandate after its ﬁrst ﬁve years was controversial. The govern-
ments of both China and the United States expressed concern during the period
leading up to the renewal of its initial mandate. Some argue that it is feasible to
effectively champion governance outcomes consistent with the alternative social
imaginary of an open information commons in this forum. Others argue that it
is the interests of companies and states that prevail in the IGF as they do in other
formal institutions whose remits bear on issues of Internet governance, but
which have fewer possibilities for the voices of civil society to be represented.40
Some close observers of debates in this forum argue that the goal of
participants representing a broad spectrum of interests in the evolution of
the Internet is to adopt governance procedures that enable decision-making
through the ‘application of shared principles, norms, rules, decision-making
procedures, and programs intended to shape actors’ expectations and prac-
tices and to enhance their collective management capacities’.41 However,
statements like this one about ‘collective management capacities’ have a
strong instrumentalist tone. This is reminiscent of governance approaches
where power asymmetries are ignored in the interest of achieving ‘shared
principles or norms’, notwithstanding the underlying conﬂicts. This is unlike-
ly to foster outcomes aligned with values of the good society. Just how
effective this forum for informal multistakeholder governance will prove to
be in reconciling conﬂicting interests is an empirical question.42 The answer
depends partly on whether the stakeholders are able to grapple with the
implications of the underlying paradoxes of information scarcity and com-
plexity, and on the degree to which the outcomes of their debates are
inﬂuential in other formal governance institutions at all levels.
There are other institutions with speciﬁc formal mandates for governing
the Internet which also attempt to include a range of voices in a multi-
stakeholder environment that should, in principle, create opportunities for
tackling the challenges created by the paradoxes of information scarcity and
complexity. For example, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
Numbers (ICANN), founded in California in 1998 as a non-proﬁt, private
sector, public beneﬁt corporation, has a decision-making board that is ad-
vised by a Governmental Advisory Committee (GAC).43 ICANN makes
160
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
decisions about matters of Internet governance that have direct implications
for the way the Internet Protocol layer of the multi-level communication
system actually operates and in whose interests it operates. Over the years,
ICANN has experimented with different procedural models in the attempt to
embrace multiple stakeholder interests.
The GAC includes representatives of governments, other public authorities,
and some intergovernmental organizations. Despite its advisory status, GAC
members try to exert inﬂuence, for example, on questions concerning ostensibly
technical issues such as whether new top-level domain names in addition
to .com, .org, etc., should be permitted. The signiﬁcance here is that adding
new names has implications for companies seeking to boost their brands and,
therefore, affects their prospects in the digital economy. ICANN provides a
forum for decision-making on contested ‘technical’ issues, but these issues are
also imbued with political and economic connotations. There are polarized
views about whether it achieves the democratic goals it espouses in relation to
aspirations for the governance of the Internet in line with the alternative social
imaginary of the information society.44 Milton Mueller, political scientist and
observer of Internet governance developments, argues that even when it seems
to have succeeded in being fully inclusive, ‘participation and representation can
give people the feeling that they have a stake in the policy making process, even
when they are in fact relatively powerless’.45 Without adequate public account-
ability for its decisions, ICANN is as likely as any other institution to favour the
positions of corporate and government actors in conﬂicts with civil society
representatives. More importantly, debates in this forum are also framed as
being aboutﬁnding ways to reach consensus about shared principles and ways of
implementing them. The deeper conﬂicts between proponents of the dominant
and alternative social imaginaries of the information society are presented
mainly in terms of oppositions in which the ‘winner takes all’.
In the IGF and in other Internet governance-related institutions such as
ICANN, the prevailing social imaginaries of the information society in which
there is a persistent struggle between those favouring market-led develop-
ments and those favouring a wider space for an open information commons is
fostered by the framing of many of the issues in instrumental, managerial, or
technical terms. The IGF appears to be providing a space for the broadening
of the range of perspectives that can be debated. However, without decision-
making authority, it seems unlikely to provide networked (multistakeholder)
governance that can be effective in reducing the incentives of companies or
states to promote innovations in the communication system that result in
increasing monitoring and surveillance of Internet user. It has the potential to
provide a forum for reﬂection on the emergence of ‘machines of loving grace’
that may remove many facets of decision-making from the control of human
beings. So far, however, it has shown few signs that it is an institution where
the paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity can be confronted.
POLITICAL FIRESTORMS IN COMMUNICATION POLICY
161

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Finally, even if we were to assume that the presence of civil society advo-
cates within the forums for debate about Internet governance creates a greater
likelihood that conﬂicting interests among governments, the private sector,
and civil society might be reconciled, these developments raise additional
challenging issues about the authority to govern. In principle, civil society
organizations should exist to unite otherwise disparate constituencies to
constitute a majority and, thus, should have a powerful inﬂuence in the
Internet governance process assuming they gain access to multistakeholder
forums on reasonable terms. However, these organizations may represent
vocal minorities whose interests conﬂict with the mainstream and the posi-
tions of democratically elected governments. They may reﬂect a ‘tyranny of
the majority’ that systematically excludes dissenting voices. Of course, gov-
ernments and their representatives may be captives of corporate interests, may
have been elected undemocratically, or may be unresponsive to the views of
their electorates or other social movement organizations.46 Simply involving
representatives of civil society in multistakeholder forums provides only the
hope that key problems and controversies might be addressed in ways that are
consistent with aspirations for the good society.
The experience of Internet governance in international forums suggests that
civil society organizations are more likely to champion positions consistent with
a social imaginaryof anopeninformation commons in contrast to advocates of a
social imaginary of a market-led information society. However, it is not feasible
to repair the harms associated with paradox unless their genesis is recognized. If
we take the contemporary discussions about the ‘neutrality’ of the Internet as an
illustration of how the interests of the stakeholders are represented in their
metacommunications, there is virtually no sign of adaptive action (as discussed
in Chapter 4). Such action might go some way to address asymmetrical power
relations and succeed in guiding the development of the information society in a
direction that is more consistent with the values of the good society. In the next
section, deliberations about network neutrality in national and international
governance forums are examined to assess the extent to which they show signs of
acknowledging the paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity.47
Network Neutrality
Newspaper articles carry alarming claims that there is ‘no room at the Internet’,
that the website addresses we are familiar with are about to ‘run out’.48 The
implication is a closing down of opportunities for websites with objectives as
diverse as commerce and the promotion of free speech and democracy. The
press presents this as a technical issue in need of urgent resolution. However, the
162
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
scarcity (or not) of addresses and, indeed, whether it is a technical problem or a
highly charged political issue driven by economic interests, are not apparent to
most Web surfers and there are conﬂicting views also among those with the
technical expertise to make assessments.49 Conﬂicts over this and many other
similar and ostensibly technical issues concerning the future of the Internet are
being discussed in governance proceedings focusing on network neutrality.
Many of these discussions are conducted within conventional state governance
institutions, for example, regulatory agencies or ministries charged with media
and communication policy responsibilities. In democratic states, the voices of
civil society may be acknowledged in these institutional settings, as interveners
or commentators, but this does not mean that the outcomes of debates neces-
sarily favour the values espoused by civil society actors.
MANAGING THE INTERNET BEHIND THE SCREEN
Network neutrality is broadly understood to refer to the design of the Internet as
an end-to-end public network which does not discriminate among the types of
data that ﬂow through it. Network neutrality is a technologically constituted
ideal of the Internet as enabling the indiscriminate ﬂow of all digital information
through the communication network. Assuming sufﬁcient capacity, the Inter-
net’s technical design—its architecture—makes it possible for every digital bit
to be treated equally regardless of its originator’s wealth, socio-economic status,
or other features. However, these other features can provide clear signals about
the nature of the content or bits. Currently, ISPs employ trafﬁc management
techniques tobalance demand for limited network capacity, arguingthat theydo
so independently of the payments they receive for their services.
ISPs have the technical capability to manage Internet trafﬁc, for instance,
by limiting the use of encrypted virtual private networks, restricting the
operations of those providing certain kinds of information, and excluding
high-bandwidth applications such as Voice-over-Internet-Protocol (VoIP)
telephony or P2P ﬁle-sharing.50 ISPs, in principle, have the capability also
to monitor third-party content and to suppress copyright-infringing or other
‘unwanted’ content. These trafﬁc management or trafﬁc shaping methods
mean that ISPs are cognisant of the content that ﬂows through the Internet.
From an ISP subscriber’s perspective, it is difﬁcult to discern whether a
reduced ISP service is due to congestion (i.e. measures to manage trafﬁc
volumes) or techniques that are responding to corporate or state interests,
applied often without public scrutiny.51
ISPs claim that without some trafﬁc management, the Internet would be
harmed by network congestion. The management of trafﬁc ﬂows involves
methods for trafﬁc inspection, such as deep packet inspection (DPI) techni-
ques that are used in ordinary trafﬁc control to manage information ﬂows.52
POLITICAL FIRESTORMS IN COMMUNICATION POLICY
163

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
However, DPI techniques have implications for civil liberties, especially when
they are used in connection with the detection of copyright-infringing ﬁle-
sharing or for surveillance.53 DPI techniques also enable ISPs to give priority
to certain content and speed up data transfers for those willing to pay more.54
The challenge for policy makers, regulators, and the courts is to decide
whether the technical interventions of ISPs run counter to the ideal of
network neutrality and whether they are in the public interest.
In addition, something more than DPI as presently employed is needed to
identify pornography, viruses, and spam, and this is where various techniques for
ﬁltering content come into play. The intelligent software agents that are being
developed behind the screen (discussed in Chapter 5) increasingly are able to
provide the technical means for online ‘intelligent’ ﬁltering to accomplish the
goals which are valued by society and other goals that may be seen as encroaching
on human rights. These intelligent software agents can be used to undertake fairly
mechanical trafﬁc shaping, governed by the need to, or the possibility of:
1. rationing ‘bursty’ demand and intense baseload demand periods on the
network;
2. choosing priorities among types of trafﬁc, but based on ‘level’ criteria, for
example, constraining all VoIP trafﬁc as opposed to just trafﬁc generated
by Skype;
3. introducing more ‘intelligent agent’ type ﬁltering to produce, perhaps
internationally agreed beneﬁts, for example, anti-spam and virus protec-
tion, or beneﬁts that are speciﬁc to certain national contexts (e.g. anti-
pornography or suppression of certain forms of political expression);
4. allowing the extension of ‘intelligent agents’ to discriminate directly
among the trafﬁc on the Internet that gives rise to various forms of ‘side
payments’ (non-transparent business arrangements) to enable some ori-
ginators of trafﬁc to avoid the actions of the intelligent agents; and
5. establishing full-blown auctioning of priority to be accorded to the trafﬁc
generated by both suppliers and customers, by introducing a market.
Which conﬁguration of these possibilities is adopted is what will set a new
standard for the practices and social imaginaries of what constitutes network
neutrality, such that each step towards the ﬁfth possibility becomes a further
one in progress along the road to ‘non-neutrality’.
NETWORK NEUTRALITY, PARADOX, AND SOCIAL IMAGINARIES
A strong supporter of the preservation of network neutrality, understood
simply as the end-to-end architecture of the Internet ensuring that all
content receives the same priority and is treated fairly, is Tim Berners-Lee,
164
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
credited with co-invention of the World Wide Web, and head of the World
Wide Web Consortium (W3C) which promotes standards for the Web. He
argues that companies hosting social networking sites are walling off infor-
mation and that some ISPs are slowing trafﬁc, practices that are inimical to
democracy and the principles of universality, decentralization, and open
standards that have enabled the Internet to ﬂourish. Distinguishing between
‘good’ and ‘bad’ ISPs, he suggests that ‘a good ISP will often manage trafﬁc so
that when bandwidth is short, less crucial trafﬁc is dropped in a transparent
way, so users are aware of it. . . . the goal of the web is to serve humanity. We
build it now so that those who come to it later will be able to create things that
we cannot ourselves imagine’.55 His approach relies upon incentives for ISPs
to ‘behave well’ and to ensure that the Internet remains ‘neutral’ in the sense
that its design and operation are consistent with the alternative social imagi-
nary of an open information commons, or at least of ‘technological democ-
racy’. As Sandra Braman points out in her analysis of the discourse employed
by the designers of the early Internet protocols, however, the aspiration to
design a neutral network that could be used with any kind of equipment
provided a strong motivation in the early years between 1969 and 1979, but
this was one of many, sometimes conﬂicting aspirations.56
In the early days of the Internet in 1990s, service providing companies such
as CompuServe, Prodigy, and America Online adopted restrictive policies for
accessing digital content, mimicking closed or proprietary network environ-
ments for digital information which had provided some means of maintain-
ing control over information, that is, ensuring its apparent scarcity. In the
wake of the convergence of ICTs, and as the capacity of broadband networks
increased and became more ubiquitously available, these restrictions were
lifted. So-called ‘walled gardens’ became less popular. The interests of some
online providers shifted away from models of direct sale of information or of
subscription, to revenue generation based on advertising supported models
(e.g. Google’s ‘click through’ model). However, advances in technology and
the end-to-end design of the Internet, in particular, have meant that the
inability to discriminate between different kinds of Internet trafﬁc is encour-
aging online consumption of both legal and illegal content. This is indicative
of the paradox of information scarcity.
Although content delivery networks, such as Akamai, are being used to
aggregate content and to contribute to network capacity management and
cost reduction,57 this does not beneﬁt the ISPs because network neutrality
principles do not allow them to charge for the large amounts of bandwidth
needed to deliver digital content to Internet users. Large content providers are
ﬁnding ways to avoid having to increase data transmission costs, and using
server farms connected by private (high-capacity ﬁbre) networks. This en-
ables them to bypass the public Internet for some of their network require-
ments. Companies such as Google, Yahoo!, and Microsoft are reported to be
POLITICAL FIRESTORMS IN COMMUNICATION POLICY
165

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
adopting this strategy for increasing amounts of trafﬁc, to avoid potential
charges levied by the ISPs. These are likely to take the form of metered data
transmission charges and caps on bandwidth use. These are being introduced
by some ISPs, especially mobile operators, under the guise of requirements for
‘efﬁcient network management’. In the face of these developments, retention
or not, of the end-to-end technical feature of the Internet architecture is an
economically and politically charged issue. ISPs already are involved in inter-
ventions in the network related to the third form of trafﬁc management
described above. Debates on network neutrality often make it seem as if the
technical architecture and operation of the Internet is now, and could remain,
free from all forms of intervention.
Network neutrality controversies highlight the complexity of the behind
the screen communication system. Stakeholders are confronted with ratio-
nales for in front of the screen interventions that are discomﬁting to those
whose goal is to beneﬁt from the commercial potential of the system. It is
unsettling also to those who want to employ it for state security, as well as to
those who view the design of the system as best sequestered to secure its
emergence, unhindered by politically or economically inspired interventions.
The network neutrality debate is actually about whether public policy should
sanction a move to the fourth of the elements listed earlier. That is, it is about
whether the extension of software agent-based computing should be used to
discriminate directly among trafﬁc on the Internet, allowing some originators
of trafﬁc to avoid the actions of these agents (whether they are working on
behalf of their commercial ‘owners’ or on behalf of governments).
The social imaginaries of the computer scientists and software engineers
suggest that the complexity of the system is such that its evolution is based on
its emergent, albeit unpredictable, properties; that the Internet should not be
regulated. Companies argue for or against regulation depending on their
prospects for generating revenues as either producers of online content, or
as carriers of information or, and increasingly, both. ISP strategies aimed at
limiting video streaming, putting restrictions on the caching of content, or
introducing differential access prices based on the type of trafﬁc, are ways of
limiting the network resource by charging customers for the information they
transmit, enforcing a condition of market scarcity. This may generate reven-
ues that can be used to construct higher-capacity networks in the future, but it
also ‘unfairly’ discriminates and, therefore, is regarded by proponents of
network neutrality to be counter to the public interest in fair access to the
Internet.
Issues of the technical or engineering features of trafﬁc management
become muddled in these debates with proposals to charge for preferential
access to the Internet. The former amounts to a form of technological
rationing with the possibility for price discrimination (creating incentives
to bypass some aspects of the trafﬁc shaping). The latter involves efforts to
166
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
create a condition of market scarcity, such that both suppliers and customers
must indicate their willingness to pay for preferential access based on price.
Eli Noam, analyst of the economics of communication, argues that policy
discussion is difﬁcult because:
the rivals in the debate over the treatment of communications networks at times
exhibit a messianic fervor and are quick to slay messengers of unwanted news. One
side invokes a danger to either the survival of competition, democracy, and the
internet; while the other side predicts a grave damage to technology, national com-
petitiveness, and the economy.58
The debates about network neutrality are complicated further by the fact
that some of the companies have an interest in enforcing their intellectual
property rights over digital information in the digital environment. As dis-
cussed in Chapter 6, they want ISPs to act as gatekeepers on the Internet to
work with them to suppress copyright-infringing practices either by blocking
trafﬁc on the Internet or by providing the creative industry companies with
the identities of those detected by behind the screen intelligent agents that are
used for copyright infringement detection purposes. Other companies that
are less directly involved in generating their revenues from the sale of digital
information ﬁnd themselves arguing against network neutrality, but with
different revenue models driving their interest.
As the Internet develops, some argue that the preservation of network
neutrality (however deﬁned) will require it to be treated, for regulatory
purposes, as a ‘critical resource’,59 similar to some other components of the
telecommunication network as discussed at the beginning of this chapter. The
positions of stakeholders also vary with the speciﬁc policy and governance
arrangements in place in different countries and regions and with differences
in the structure of the markets for Internet services. It is interesting, therefore,
to look at some of the differences in the way network neutrality is being
addressed in the United States and Europe.
Network Neutrality in the United States
Network neutrality has come to serve as an all-embracing term for policy
matters relating to Internet regulation. Policy debates in this area became
especially prominent in the United States when it became clear that telecom-
munication network operators and ISPs had incentives that might lead them
to block Internet trafﬁc from their competitors, or charge certain service
providers to terminate their trafﬁc on their networks while offering preferen-
tial treatment to others.60 If ISPs are permitted to introduce these manage-
ment practices, the concern is that the Internet, as we presently experience it
in democratic countries, might begin to fragment into networks operated by a
few dominant companies, with implications for the future use of this open
POLITICAL FIRESTORMS IN COMMUNICATION POLICY
167

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
platform for innovation and for the costs of public services. Lawrence Lessig,
a legal scholar on intellectual property rights (see Chapter 6), and Robert
McChesney, a political economy analyst, in the United States argue that:
Without net neutrality, the Internet would start to look like cable TV. A handful of
massive companies would control access and distribution of content, deciding what
you get to see and how much it costs. Major industries such as health care, ﬁnance,
retailing and gambling would face huge tariffs for fast, secure Internet use—all subject
to discriminatory and exclusive deal making with telephone and cable giants.61
The Federal Communication Commission (FCC) regulates the communi-
cation system in the United States. The Internet is treated as an unregulated
‘information service’, rather than as a ‘common carriage’ service, subject to
regulation to avoid unfair or discriminatory practices, a designation that pre-
dates the Internet. As a result, there are disputes about whether the FCC has
jurisdiction over the Internet.62 The FCC’s Internet policy statement in 2005
called upon network operators to provide Internet access services in a ‘neu-
tral’ manner. This statement was seen as creating incentives for industry to
invest in broadband networks, but it created no requirement to differentiate
the quality of service, something that might have been expected if ISP services
had been treated as ‘common carriage’. This policy, therefore, may inadver-
tently have created momentum towards a preference for market prices to
discriminate among different types of Internet trafﬁc.
Subsequent FCC deliberations in 2010 concluded also that the end-to-end
architecture of the Internet should be preserved and that ﬁxed broadband
network providers should not be permitted to discriminate ‘unreasonably’
among their customers. Claims that the open, public Internet is being
threatened are ‘not speculative or merely theoretical’, the FCC said.63 This
policy did not prevent differential pricing for ISP services based on scale of
use of the Internet, but ISPs were not permitted to impose restrictions on the
type of use or to discriminate ‘unreasonably’ among Internet users.
Some of the FCC Commissioners insist that this policy involves the impo-
sition of ‘the heavy hand of government into how broadband networks will be
managed and operated’.64 Opponents of the 2010 policy statement say that
FCC intervention should require evidence that network operators have been
unfairly disadvantaging some Internet trafﬁc by degrading connections, lim-
iting bandwidth, or blocking access to certain services. Without a quality of
service measure, however, the operators are at an advantage in disputes over
whether their management practices fall within the deﬁnition of ‘reasonable
practice’. In addition, there are other ways to ‘buy into’ preferential access to
the Internet, including acquiring shares in the network operator, afﬁliating
with the content operations of network operators where cross-ownership
is permitted, and so forth. At the time of writing, the FCC policy was
being contested in the courts where, in addition to the battle between the
168
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
companies providing Internet access and those producing digital content,
public interest advocates are insisting that an open Internet must be preserved
in the name of democracy and freedom of expression.65 Some claim that the
policy is a capitulation to ISP interests and that it is not sufﬁcient to guard
against discrimination among different kinds of Internet trafﬁc. A ‘constitutional’
solution proposed by Timothy Wu, a leading legal analyst and public interest
advocate, calls for structural separation between the producers of information and
the owners of network infrastructure to protect the public interest in an open
(neutral) Internet.66
Network Neutrality in Europe
Differences in ISP industry structure and governance in Europe compared to
the United States mean that the network neutrality contest in Europe is
discussed somewhat differently, although its outcomes are similar in many
ways since there is a progression towards more overt forms of discrimination
among trafﬁc on the Internet in the name of trafﬁc management.67 As in the
United States, in Europe the principle of network neutrality was being upheld
at the time of writing. ‘Reasonable’ network management is permitted to
create incentives for investing in a broadband infrastructure (as in the United
States),68 and with a view to protecting civil liberties (in the United States the
emphasis is on constitutional speech rights). ISP subscribers must be in-
formed about any trafﬁc management techniques and their impact on service
quality, and about other limitations (such as bandwidth caps or available
connection speed) applied to their service.69 Network management, intended
to enhance the quality of service, promote the development of new services,
secure network stability and resilience, or combat crime, is not regarded as a
departure from the principle of network neutrality: ‘Exceptions to this prin-
ciple should be considered with great circumspection and need to be justiﬁed
by overriding public interests’.70 But because national regulators in Europe
have been slow to take up this issue as a high priority public interest
consideration, there is a question about who will grant exceptions.
Europe’s Digital Agenda Commissioner, Neelie Kroes, emphasizes the
principles of freedom of expression and transparency in network neutrality
policy,71 but the relationship between the issues discussed in network neu-
trality debates and the paradoxes of scarcity and complexity is barely ac-
knowledged. For instance, a European consultation on network neutrality
appears to have yielded ‘near consensus’ among network operators, ISPs, and
manufacturers despite their conﬂicting interests, and very few respondents
expressed any concern about potential threats from network management
techniques, or how these might affect freedom of expression, media plural-
ism, or cultural diversity.72 However, companies (including ISPs, equipment
manufacturers, and pay television operators) are lobbying the European
POLITICAL FIRESTORMS IN COMMUNICATION POLICY
169

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Commission for the right to self-regulation in this area, arguing that measures
that limit their proﬁts will dampen their incentives to build the next genera-
tion of high-capacity networks.73
Although existing prescriptions for resolving network neutrality contro-
versies offer an inadequate shield against non-neutrality for the reasons out-
lined above, the controversy may be less intense in Europe than in the United
States because the network operators’ market dominance (within countries
and throughout the European Single Market) is less advanced. They need to
court all those who would use their networks to support the distribution of
content generated by companies that are American controlled, or that is
American in origin, for instance, Google’s ownership of YouTube, and Face-
book and Twitter-generated trafﬁc.
The issue of whether the market-led or information commons vision of the
future of the information society should prevail in debates about network
neutrality is likely to re-emerge and promote more overt conﬂict in Europe.
This is likely to happen in due course if a more diverse set of actors recognizes
that the freedoms that permit a ‘re-shaping’ of the Internet are being used
opportunistically by companies with a stake in the economic beneﬁts of the
Internet. It was many years before the European Commission took action to
address opportunistic behaviour in the mobile industry for example. After
very lengthy debate, it ruled eventually that call termination rates charged by
mobile operators across Europe should be based on costs, requiring the
elimination of indirect subsidies to mobile operators. These had persisted
despite changes in technology and network usage, while national regulators
resisted change and conﬂicts were played out largely behind closed doors.74 In
this, and in other areas of communication policy, monitoring of potential
abuses, should ISPs attempt to ‘shape’ the ﬂow of trafﬁc on the Internet
unreasonably, is welcomed as long as it is not coupled with intervention that
is regarded as being either too early or too much. Interventions aimed at
suppressing these developments are seen as threatening the self-organizing
dynamics of the communication system or as threatening civil liberties and
rights of access to the Internet. In the latter instance, this claim is based on
assumptions about the theoretical non-discriminatory technical architecture
of the Internet Protocol, not on the actual practices of companies and
governments.
In the United Kingdom, co-regulation, self-regulation, or ‘net neutrality
lite’75 are called for to produce voluntary codes of good practice aimed at
preserving network neutrality. Because it is difﬁcult to assess actual threats to
the Internet’s neutrality, it is claimed that non-intervention in this layer of the
communication system is the optimal policy.76 The terminology is slightly
different in the United States, but the approach is similar. In the United States,
there is a stronger inclination towards litigation among the companies affect-
ed by policy pronouncements on network neutrality, but the ‘machines of
170
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
loving grace’ are being developed with biases towards the interests of some
companies and governments without much scrutiny by any governance
authority of the actual practices that are occurring behind the screen.
Conclusion
Skirmishes over network neutrality exemplify features of the paradoxes of
information scarcity and complexity. In the dominant social imaginary of the
information society, these skirmishes are seen as contests among large corpo-
rate stakeholders for dominance in the commercial market, and governments,
and civil society representatives, each promoting Internet developments they
claim to be in the public interest. Because of the complexity of the communi-
cation system, the decision by those who might act to reconcile conﬂicting
interests from within formal governance institutions invariably is to wait to
see what happens. Even when conﬂicts are depicted as a symptom of a broader
struggle for power between governments and companies, and individual
members of society, a ‘light touch’ approach to intervention aimed at guiding
the evolution of the communication system is seen as the optimal way of
ensuring that the outcome is in the public interest.
What has been described as ‘networked liberalism’—negotiations among
all the stakeholders in their ‘ﬂexible and shifting social aggregations’—is
expected to yield solutions aligned with the values of the good society.77
This approach is justiﬁed by claiming either that the technological system is
simply too complex to govern, or that attempts to do so by the state come
with the severe risk that governments will become gatekeepers of the Internet,
threatening values such as freedom of speech.78 Of course, in some countries
where interventions to monitor content are commonplace and an explicit
part of government policy, governments already are threatening these values.
These approaches result in denial of the implications of the paradoxes of
information scarcity and complexity in mediated environments serving sta-
keholders in the information society. The likely outcome of contemporary
statements on network neutrality is the emergence of a multi-tier network.
A multi-tier network would be comprised of a mix of public networks where
trafﬁc is subject to scrutiny for state or corporate monitoring purposes, on the
one hand, and private (or bypass) networks that privilege certain Internet
trafﬁc and enable it to ﬂow securely for those who can pay, on the other.
These illustrations of information society governance issues raise questions
about who has the authority and ability to govern, and in response to what
goals. Governance controversies, especially with respect to the Internet, centre
on the appropriateness of institutional procedures and structures. Debates
POLITICAL FIRESTORMS IN COMMUNICATION POLICY
171

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
about multistakeholder forums and procedures provide a focal point for
considering whether the outcomes of deliberations are consistent with
the dominant or alternative social imaginaries of the information society,
but they downplay the incentives that are favouring an increasingly non-
transparent mediated environment. There are few signs that the problems
associated with the paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity are
being addressed, notwithstanding deliberation within relatively open forums.
If, on occasion, the problems generated by these paradoxes are acknowledged,
they are met with inaction on the part of policy makers and by the opposi-
tional positions of advocates of network neutrality or departures from it (even
when quite different things are meant when this term is used). At the same
time, policy assertions by governing authorities are having little inﬂuence on
the practices of network operators and companies in the creative industries.
The ISPs are moving towards market mechanisms for allocating the use of
bandwidth, with countermoves from the content producers to minimize the
charges for distributing their content. Policy statements about network neu-
trality are achieving less and less traction as we move incrementally towards a
non-neutral Internet era.
When these disputes about the public interest in the Internet Age are
punctuated from an instrumental perspective, the governance challenges are
perceived to involve a deliberative process of negotiation among stakeholders
about what is most likely to beneﬁt Internet users in front of the screen. From a
critical systems perspective, however, the challenges for governance involve
asymmetrical power relationships among stakeholders located within different
levels of a multi-level system, only one part of which is related to the existing
features of the Internet Protocol. In the former case, the struggle seems to pit
the interests of network operators against those of the large content providers,
over measures that will enable them to succeed in the market as they work out
how to ensure that information scarcity provides them with opportunities for
proﬁting from the online activities of the users of the communication system.
Alternatively, it would seem to pit civil society stakeholders against the state
over measures to control the Internet for surveillance and security purposes.
However, in both cases, the risks associated with the spread of automated
software agents that are being deployed for monitoring and tracking user
behaviour and the implications of the use of these agents both for commercial
market development and for the rights of everyday users of the Internet are
largely ignored. In the prevailing social imaginaries of the information society,
the paradox of complexity makes it seem as if it is the communication system
that has an ‘interest’ in its self-organized emergence and survival, an interest
that is, or ultimately will become, aligned with the values of the good society.
Internet users are becoming locked into bundles of services offered by
companies that are asserting control over the communication system includ-
ing the parts of the system we have come to designate as ‘the Internet’. In the
172
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
dominant social imaginary, governance issues are depicted as being princi-
pally about technical aspects such as trafﬁc ﬂows and routing, domain names,
or search engine algorithms. This aligns well with corporate interests in
minimizing governance from above by the state, and with civil society inter-
ests in minimizing state interference for reasons of surveillance. The denial of
asymmetrical power among the stakeholders with respect to the transparency
of the behind the screen technologies is facilitated also by the social imaginary
of the information commons. This is because these developments are seen as
being empowering for them because of the wide range of choices citizens are
being enabled to make about how the communication system can best be
used to augment their everyday lives.
In these debates about governance of the Internet (and media and the
communication system generally), it seems that one group of stakeholders
must lose in order for another to win in the battle over network neutrality.
The pattern of communication is locked into a chronic opposition of either/
or policy alternatives, with the system’s very complexity being invoked to
prevent measures being taken that would start to address the deeper issues
associated with the paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity. The
outcome is a communication system that is, in practice, largely ungoverned
with respect to the behind the screen developments from the perspective of
citizen interests and transparency, notwithstanding the wealth of discussion
in governance institutions at all levels and the persistent political ﬁrestorms
over whether and how the Internet’s architecture should be retained, with
respect to the Internet Protocol. As the system continues to evolve, increas-
ingly intrusive ‘machines of loving grace’ are coming to be taken for granted
by all the participants in the information society.
All technologies are transformed in their journey from invention to wide-
spread use. They are neither completely preﬁgured to the preferences of
stakeholders nor are they fully malleable. Encouraging each actor to pursue
his, her, or ‘its’ own conception of the ‘good’ in the absence of a wider range of
policy alternatives in the Internet Age may seem initially to be consistent with
empowering people because of the wealth of new opportunities in front of the
screen. However, the contemporary social imaginaries of the information
society are instrumental in denying the capacities of the state and dominant
private sector companies to decide through their practices which technologi-
cal innovations should be encouraged and which should be discouraged.
In the next and ﬁnal chapter, I argue that these persistent patterns in the
debates about the evolution of the communication system are the result of a
mispunctuation of the conﬂicts around the power relationships within a
multi-level system in which both hierarchical and heterarchical dynamics
are in play. The result is that potential policy measures that could guide the
system along a different pathway are sequestered. I suggest also that the public
POLITICAL FIRESTORMS IN COMMUNICATION POLICY
173

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
interest in the information society is such that it is crucially important to
work towards the development of a new social imaginary of the information
society, one that is consistent with policy interventions that guide the evolu-
tion of the system in a way that is better aligned with the values of the good
society.
174
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8
Conclusion
We were born for something better!
And what the inner voice speaks
will not mislead the soul that hopes.
(von Schiller, 1797)*
Introduction
I began this book with questions about how and why people imagine the
changes to the ‘machines of loving grace’ in the ways that they do. How are
choices about the evolution of the communication system inﬂuencing the
way people live their lives in the mediated environment of the Internet Age?
The new cyberspace ecology is mediating people’s lives in ways that extend the
range of their choices, but is also reinforcing unequal power relationships in
society. If, as Roger Silverstone insists, the communication system constitutes
our ‘very capacity to be in the world’, then clearly this matters.1 Few would
wish to return to a time before the Internet and the software and hardware
tools that are providing opportunities for young and old. My critical assess-
ment of the social imaginaries of the information society is not inspired by
neo-Luddite yearnings, but by the hope that the communication system can
be integrated into people’s lives in a way that maximizes beneﬁts and mini-
mizes harms.
In Media and Morality, Silverstone argues that the dynamics of mediation
are taken for granted in most media and communication policy and regu-
latory discussions. His concern was with ethics and the values that should
guide the professionalization of media producers in a period of rapid techno-
logical change. My analysis, although it gives greater emphasis to changes in
the technological system, is addressed similarly to the values that should guide
those who inﬂuence the way the communication system is mediating people’s
lives. Contemporary approaches to the governance of the media and the
communication system are characterized by persistent clashes among stake-
holders whose visions of the information society are inﬂuenced by very
different social imaginaries. In this book I have shown why governance
measures aimed at reconciling their disparate interests are often blind to the
implications of the paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity as they

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
present themselves in the Internet Age. This form of blindness is not a new
phenomenon as Rosalind Williams, historian of technological change, sug-
gests, ‘the role of subterranean technologies is commonly neglected because
the artefacts themselves are hidden from view’.2 This has serious consequences
because it leaves the direction of communication system evolution to the
preferences of stakeholders whose interests are not necessarily well-aligned
with the values of the good society.
In this chapter I suggest how it might be possible to begin to foster a new
social imaginary of the information society, one that ampliﬁes the chances
that our ‘machines of loving grace’ operate in a way that contributes to a
mediated environment in which people can achieve greater empowerment,
freedom, and responsibility. My analysis of the implications of the paradoxes
of information scarcity and complexity should be seen as a beginning, as
setting the stage for further development through research that seeks a better
understanding of what these paradoxes mean for communication system
governance, and how we think about the public interest in information
society developments.
Social Imaginaries and Paradox in the Internet Age
Social imaginaries are what enable people to make sense of the practices of a
given society. The practices of many different stakeholders in the information
society with respect to the development of ICTs and their governance consti-
tute the social imaginaries of the information society. Two social imaginaries
are prominent in the Internet Age: one is principally about the relationship
between economic growth and technological change and the other is princi-
pally about the relationship between technological change and human agency.
In each of these relationships, there are dominant and alternative imaginaries,
which are assumed by their proponents to be consistent with the values of the
good society. I have suggested that these imaginaries are the products of false
learning in the sense that they do not acknowledge the implications of the
paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity in the Internet Age. Schol-
arly work, aimed at modelling the process of technological change in society,
although by no means the only source of learning, plays an important role in
constituting these social imaginaries. One branch of this work favours an
exogenous model of change, the other favours a variety of endogenous models
of change, as discussed in Chapter 3.
In the exogenous model, technological change is treated as an exogenous
shock to the cultural, social, political, or economic system. Change is depicted
by employing mechanistic models, and questions are asked about adjustment
176
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
to these shocks. The assessment of outcomes involves measurements to
calibrate the impacts or effects of shocks on economic growth, productivity,
or stocks of knowledge in the case of economic analysis, and other measurable
changes in perception or behaviour in the case of other branches of the social
sciences that adhere to the premises of this model. In the Internet Age,
technological shocks come from massive changes in the capacities to produce,
process, distribute, and store digital information. The exogenous model is
strongly inﬂuenced by the cybernetics information processing model with its
emphasis on the way innovations in technology augment the speed and
complexity of human information processing.
In this model, advances in technology are regarded as autonomous of the
social system. The policy response is to rely on efﬁcient markets and individ-
ual choice to guide the evolution of the communication system. Market
demand for ICTs and digital information is believed to maximize individual
choice in the information society and to spur technological innovation that
will lead to intelligent machines that will be responsive to human needs.
However, the need to adapt to these changes constitutes the only choice in
many cases. The exogenous model is a deterministic model, and it leaves
unexplained many factors that contribute to technological change; these
become the unexplained residual, which progressive improvements in tech-
nology ultimately, it is assumed, will provide solutions to economic or social
problems.
In endogenous models, however, it is acknowledged that social transforma-
tion is only partly about tools and machines. In endogenous models, efforts
are made to take account of the complex interfaces between the material and
symbolic worlds. Lewis Mumford, an American philosopher and science and
technology historian, preferred the term technics to technology, to express
this. For Mumford, technics encompass people’s wishes, ideas, goals, and
habits, as well as the tools and machines.3 He argues that ‘to understand the
dominating role played by technics in modern civilization, . . . one must
explain the culture that was ready to use them and proﬁt by them so
extensively’.4 He was convinced that ‘the problem of integrating the machine
in society is not merely a matter. . . of making social institutions keep in step
with the machine: the problem is equally one of altering the nature and the
rhythm of the machine to ﬁt the actual needs of the community’,5 a view echoed
in Sherry Turkle’s comment that ‘we become the objects we look upon but
they become what we make of them’.6
My examination of the social imaginaries of the information society shows
that what we make of our communication machines differs depending on the
assumptions we make about human agency. In the case of endogenous models,
the boundary to the components of the system that gives rise to technological
change is often fuzzy, allowing it to encompass the technological and the social
systems. Instead of exogenous shocks, the main interest is in the interactions
CONCLUSION
177

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
within a complex system. In the social sciences, the concept of mediation, and
theories of political and economic power and changes in techno-economic
paradigms, for instance, are employed to explain aspects of these relationships.
These relationships are described empirically and are understood as involving
human agency and dynamically changing power relationships. In the physical
and natural sciences, these relationships are depicted increasingly more fre-
quently as comprising a complex adaptive system. The couplings within this
system are understood metaphorically to be the result of adaptive learning
whose outcomes produce stability or instability within the system. Analysis of
the system is framed by the information processing model which ignores the
meaning of information and human agency. These distinctive interpretations
of the dynamics of technological change make their presence felt in conﬂicts
between the two predominant social imaginaries of the information society.
Interpreted within the dominant social imaginary of the information society,
technological change is understood as an emergent and unpredictable process
within a complex adaptive system. It follows that nothing should be done to
intervene in the evolution of the system because it would heighten the risk of
unpredictable outcomes and produce greater instability within the system. It
would seem to follow that an unfettered or unregulated market system would
create optimal incentives for the production of ICTs and digital information,
assuming private intellectual property ownership rights are in place and are
enforced. An alternative social imaginary interprets the endogenous model of
system complexitydifferently. In this imaginary it isassumed also that the process
of technological change is emergent, but that a complex system gives rise to
innovations and incentives for the production of ICTs and digital information
when human agency is deployed to create the best conditions for the decentra-
lized sharing of information within a commons-based peer production model.
Proponents of these two imaginaries are pitted against each other in policy
and regulatory debates; one group advocating reliance on the emergent
properties of a complex system underpinned by intellectual property rights,
the other, reliance on the emergent properties of a complex system under-
pinned by the generative activities of communities of online participants. In
these social imaginaries, individual choice is valued differently, although in
both it is claimed that outcomes are consistent with democracy and the values
of the good society. In the dominant social imaginary, the good society is
achievable if individual choice is maximized, for example, when improved
access to digital technologies or information is shown to empower indivi-
duals. In the alternative social imaginary, empowering individuals to make
choices is valued, but is achieved through decentralized collective action.
Throughout this book, I have demonstrated how, in both of these social
imaginaries, the implications of the paradoxes of information scarcity and
complexity are ignored. A paradox occurs when two correct statements are
contradictory. When the nature of paradox is not acknowledged, this creates
178
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
discomfort and efforts to cope with unacknowledged paradox can be harmful
for the actors involved. The paradox of information scarcity in the Internet
Age can be stated as follows:
 information is initially costly to produce and intellectual property rights
create the optimal incentives for creativity, diversity, and growth;
 information is virtually costless to reproduce and the optimal incentives for
creativity, diversity, and growth occur when it is freely distributed.
In the face of the information scarcity paradox, the challenge is how to
create incentives for the production of diverse information. For cultural,
political, social, and economic reasons, diversity is highly valued in the
information society, along with the freedom of individuals and responsibility.
The conﬂicts among stakeholders in the light of the social imaginaries lead to
several possible outcomes. The ﬁrst is continuation of the frictions between
and resistance to the views of the opposing group. The second is emergence of
new ways to legitimize the free circulation of digital information. The third is
new ways to garner the economic returns from digital information. Some
combination of these outcomes is likely, with the relative strengths of each
inﬂuencing the way contested values are combined.
A statement of the paradox of complexity in the Internet Age is that:
 there are intrinsic beneﬁts from the emergent complexity in the technolog-
ical system behind the screen, which are leading to loss of control;
 there are intrinsic beneﬁts from the emergent complexity in the technolog-
ical system behind the screen, which are leading to greater control achieved
through programming within a decentralized system.
Again, the conﬂicts between proponents of the conﬂicting social imaginaries
can produce a number of possible outcomes. The ﬁrst is friction between those
who advocate withdrawal of the attempts to regulate the communication system
because of the risks of intervening in a complex adaptive system, and those who
argue that intervention is needed, in the name of the public interest. The second
is an increasingly complex technological system that maximizes the interests
of companies proﬁting from digital information. The third is an increasingly
complex technological system that maximizes the interests of the state in
surveillance. A fourth is an increasingly complex technological system that
favours the interests of decentralized online communities, whatever their values.
All these outcomes are likely, the issue being how they are combined. In this
paradox, there is presently no answer to the question of how various stake-
holders can be held accountable for their actions.
In contemporary debates about governance in the information society, the
conditions that give rise to the paradoxes of information scarcity and com-
plexity are imagined as opposing claims, and the argument is polarized around
CONCLUSION
179

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the efforts of those privileging one set of claims to discredit the efforts of those
privileging another set of claims. Paradox, however, cannot be resolved simply
by rebalancing the outcomes within a complex adaptive system so that stake-
holder interests are accommodated in the light of a solution to these compet-
ing claims. When the paradoxical nature of these claims is recognized, it is clear
that conﬂict among stakeholders with different interests is inevitable and that
the asymmetric power relations among contending groups will persist. The
challenge, therefore, is how to reconcile stakeholder interests in the face of
paradox. This is a problem that requires a different approach to those being
pursued in contemporary governance debates.
In the prevailing social imaginaries of the information society, there is a
particularly problematic feature which complicates the search for reconcilia-
tion. Despite insisting that emergence within a complex adaptive system
should be the optimal guide for the evolution of the communication system,
in practice, there is signiﬁcant intervention by human actors. In the dominant
social imaginary, this intervention takes the form of intellectual property
rights legislation, the effect of which is to suppress the potential for the
circulation of information that is virtually costless to reproduce. In the
alternative social imaginary, intervention is constituted by the actions of
hardware developers and software programmers, whose ostensibly neutral
actions, in reality, variously favour the interests of companies in proﬁting
from digital information, of the state in surveillance, or of virtual community
participants. Both proponents of strong intellectual property rights and the
developers behind the screen are assumed to be acting in ways that are
consistent with general social welfare. Within the frameworks of these social
imaginaries these kinds of interventions in the communication system’s evolu-
tion are not presumed to be problematic and the proponents of the practices
pertaining to these conﬂicting social imaginaries are not accountable. In the
case of proponents of the dominant social imaginary, it is assumed that, at
the time it was enacted, intellectual property rights legislation achieved the
‘correct’ balance between conﬂicting stakeholder interests and that there is
nothing to suggest that social welfare would beneﬁt from a re-examination of
that assumption. In the case of the proponents of reliance on the generative
activities of hardware developers and software programmers, it is assumed that
their values will be aligned with those of society. The result is an unaccountable
information society based on a bias favouring the commodity production of
information and the progressive ‘augmentation of the mind’ through greater
complexity of the communication system behind the screen.
Harold A. Innis warned that progressive ‘mechanization of knowledge’ is
associated with increasing complexity and that major changes in the mediated
environment historically have led to confusion especially about how commu-
nication technologies should be governed.7 He claimed that new generations
of technology (such as the automation of information production, processing,
180
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
circulation, and consumption) are often associated with knowledge mono-
polies as discussed in Chapter 2. As he puts it, ‘use of a medium of communi-
cation over a long period will to some extent determine the character of
knowledge to be communicated, and suggest that its pervasive inﬂuence will
eventually create a civilization in which life and ﬂexibility will become exceed-
ingly difﬁcult to maintain’.8 In the dominant social imaginary, it is claimed that
the state has decided on the optimal balance between the interests of informa-
tion creators and general social welfare. In the alternative information society
social imaginary, the claim is that we should rely on the ‘wisdom’ of an elite
community of hardware developers and software programmers. As William
Melody, scholar of the political economy of the information society, suggests,
‘electronic monks’ are being charged with establishing the values that guide
people through the digital world and they are constituting a new knowledge
monopoly.9
To assist in focusing attention on the implications of paradoxes that lead to
the conﬂicts between the proponents of the different social imaginaries, the
critical systems framework presented in Chapter 4 integrates analysis of the
factors giving rise to these paradoxes in the Internet Age with analysis of
changing power relations among the stakeholders in the information society.
This framework facilitates a re-reading of these paradoxes which is neither
utopian nor dystopian, but is aimed at understanding whether there is a
better pathway for society and whether adaptive action can serve to repair
outcomes associated with conﬂict that is generated by paradox.
In the contemporary social imaginaries of the information society, techno-
logical progress is taken for granted as something to be welcomed and the idea
that it may be either benign or harmful is ‘too obvious to mention’ in debates
over how best to govern the communication system.10 The policy interven-
tions that are introduced are curative measures intended to cope with those
results of technological progress ﬂagged as being inconsistent with the values
of the good society. At the same time, they constitute tinkering within the
constraints of a self-organizing complex adaptive system in which the equi-
librium state or basic trajectory of change and any power asymmetries are
assumed to be unalterable at least insofar as development of the communica-
tion system is concerned. Curative policies include, for instance, efforts to
develop ways to support children deemed vulnerable to risks associated with
the Internet. These policies are often formulated without examining the
power relationships that give rise to potential harms, the variability in chil-
dren’s resources to cope with the threat of harm, or the broad range of
interventions that would be needed to address this complex issue.11
In these social imaginaries of the information society, the evolutionary
process is seen as being either wholly or largely beyond human control; it is
ungovernable by authoritative government measures from above because the
system is emergent and indeterminate. This message eschews normative
CONCLUSION
181

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
judgements about inequality and social injustice and how they are inﬂuenced
by choices about the evolution of the communication system. The self-
organizing complex communication system may absorb information from
its environment, but is itself agnostic about value preferences. For optimists,
the emergence of ‘machines of loving grace’ heralds the dawning of the
Singularity. For pessimists, network contagion effects and increasing returns
signal the risk that the system will spin out of control with dark implications.
Policy and regulatory interventions to guide the system are deemed irre-
sponsible in the face of complexity and an unknowable future. The optimal
pathway is withdrawal of the state. This serves some companies well because it
frees them to pursue their interests in monetizing digital information, em-
ploying the complex communication system to achieve their goals. State
withdrawal also resonates positively with the interests of those advocating
an open commons decentralized approach since this appears to be a way of
curtailing state surveillance and fostering democratic values.
Re-reading Paradox
The critical systems framework encourages a re-reading of the implications of
the paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity. In this framework, the
idea of mediation emphasizes the fact that the communication system is
‘doubly articulated’ in the economy and in culture. Changes in power rela-
tionships are coupled with the material characteristics of hardware and
software and with the symbolic meaning of tools, machines, and digital
content. Whatever the power relationships and their outcomes, they are
related to changes at different levels within a complex adaptive system.
Understanding developments at the interfaces between these levels helps to
explain the paradoxes of the Internet Age.
As discussed in Chapter 4, tackling the problem of paradox requires an
understanding that the evolution of the communication system is subject to
the dynamics of power relationships in a multi-level complex adaptive system
comprised of hierarchical and heterarchical relationships. For instance, the
architecture of the Internet on one level in the system may suggest heterarchy,
but this does not eliminate hierarchical relationships among other compo-
nents of the communication system. As a result, the problems for stakeholders
with different interests are not about whether competition in a hierarchical
information marketplace should be privileged or whether cooperation in a
heterarchical open commons should be encouraged. Instead, they are about
how to facilitate reconciliation between both kinds of relationships. Similarly,
the issue is not whether the dynamics of technological change behind the
182
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
screen should be ungoverned or whether elite programmers should make
choices about which technologies to deploy. Instead, it is about how the
evolution of the system can be governed in ways that respect the emergent
characteristics of the system and acknowledge that, in practice, interest-driven
interventions are occurring all the time, with outcomes that are inconsistent
with the values of the good society some of the time. These either/or ways of
seeing the challenges of the Internet Age are examples of persistent patterns of
double-binding communication which need to be disrupted by a both/and
perspective. This is more likely when the nature of paradox is acknowledged
and efforts are made to disturb persistent patterns of thought that reinforce
denial of the implications of paradox.
Paradox, as Bateson’s work suggests, is generated by self-referential commu-
nication ‘circuits’. These circuits can be disturbed by metacommunications—
information that makes a difference—enabling the insight that conﬂict arises in
paradoxical situations as a result of efforts to secure survival (e.g. companies
pursuing strategies to maintain their dominance in the marketplace, or citizens
resisting surveillance by automated software agents to secure their autonomy).
Adaptive action aims at destabilizing patterns of dysfunctional either/or com-
munications—metacommunications about the ‘way things are’—potentially
generating a new social imaginary that acknowledges the reality of paradox and
the harms that it creates, and seeks repairs to alleviate those harms.
Disturbing patterns of communication that deny paradox makes it possible
to accept the validity of respective stakeholder visions for the information
society, in the light of their respective positions within a complex adaptive
system, and to encourage a transition that relocates and redirects debate
on another gradient allowing paradoxes to be addressed through adaptive
action.12 Repunctuating the analysis of paradoxical conﬂict in the context
of this new way of seeing could enable governance interventions responding
to the harms created by paradox to be debated and adopted as appropriate.
There are many examples of victims of paradox in the information society
involved in chronic battles to secure their survival. These include conﬂicts over
the enforcement of traditional rights of information ownership and over the
regulation of the Internet, as in the case of network neutrality debates.
The analysis in the preceding chapters shows that it is possible to consider
the implications of the paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity in a
new light if dysfunctional patterns of communication are disturbed by new
information about the way paradoxical relationships of power are implicated
in the dynamics of the mediation process in the Internet Age.
One step towards interrupting dysfunctional patterns of communication is to
disrupt the habit of thought that insists there is something natural about the
‘braking functions of social diffusion’ to quote Clay Shirky. It is human beings,
not a self-organizing system, who need to make corrections to reconcile stake-
holder interests within a complex adaptive system characterized by paradoxical
CONCLUSION
183

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
phenomena. This requires more than critical reﬂexivity to acknowledge that
stakeholders in the information society have partisan interests. I have suggested
that it requires adaptive action aimed ultimately at empowering all those with
partisan interests to give birth to a new social imaginary of the information
society. This approach differs substantially from the ‘adaptations’ and curative
policies envisaged when the genesis and implications of paradox are denied.
Oppositional ways of seeing can be maintained only when the hierarchical
and heterarchical relationships within the complex multi-level communica-
tion system are ignored. When there is no effort to repunctuate the analysis to
account for the way paradox is experienced on these different levels, it is
impossible for stakeholders to gain insights into why their actions yield
outcomes that result in chronic conﬂict and harm. A line in a poem by
W. B. Yeats asks ‘how can we know the dancer from the dance?’13 In similar
vein, Bateson asked ‘how can you hear the music if you are one of the notes?’14
Both refer indirectly to the way paradox is generated when those involved are
caught within two mutually contradictory realities, both of which may be
valid reﬂections of their experience of those realities. Harmful outcomes are
likely to result from their strategies to secure their respective positions—
enforcement of intellectual property rights or augmentation of the human
mind behind the screen in unaccountable ways. Without a repunctuation of
the relationships that are generating the paradoxes of information scarcity
and complexity, it is impossible for the stakeholders to imagine how their
respective interests might be reconciled because their patterns of debate do
not enable them to distinguish their parochial interests from those of society.
Following Charles Taylor, a re-reading of paradox is possible when the
dichotomous either/or ways of thinking are substituted by both/and ways of
seeing which are responsive to the experience of paradox.
Adaptive actions that respond to the experience of paradox differ from the
adaptations evoked by the contemporary social imaginaries. Adaptive action
aims to rupture persistent habits of thought by bringing the conﬂicts engen-
dered by the paradoxes of scarcity and complexity to the foreground. Adap-
tive action can foster opportunities for liberation from the false learning that
occurs when paradox is denied. It creates the means of encouraging a new
social imaginary with more diverse choices involving neither the excesses of
hegemonic governance from above with its neoliberal ideology of the market
nor naive trust in the generative power of dispersed online communities as a
means of governance from below.
Adaptive actions cannot resolve or eliminate the experience of paradox, nor
can they achieve a better equilibrium or balance among stakeholders with
conﬂicting interests. However, they can suggest ways in which reconciliation
leading to new pathways can begin to be imagined and ultimately acted upon.
I have provided some of the conceptual tools for thinking about this. The next
section outlines several crucial actions that would encourage corrections in
184
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the presently circular debates about governance of the communication system
in the information society.
Adaptive Action and Policy Corrections
Several opportunities for adaptive action emerge from my re-rereading of the
paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity. These suggest policy correc-
tions aimed at fostering a new social imaginary of the information society that
would guide the evolution of the communication system in a way that resists the
excesses of the market and encourages experimentation with less risk to human
beings. This was the goal I set at the beginning of this work. Three areas of
adaptive action that would be desirable and can be considered urgent are: (a)
action to diffuse monopolies of knowledge; (b) action to foster online creativity;
and (c) action to govern decisions about augmenting the human mind.
MONOPOLIES OF KNOWLEDGE
A crucial arena for adaptive action is related to the intrinsic value of the
emergent properties of a complex adaptive system. This is leading to the
increasing complexity of the communication system and to reduced human
control over the system. In the dominant social imaginary the response is to
forbear from governance that interferes with the emergent process. In the
alternative social imaginary, efforts to guide the evolution of the system rely
on an elite group of programmers introducing local adjustments through
their decentralized activities in the information commons.
Harold Innis’s work is often read as a deterministic account of the impact of
communication technology on society. Such a reading might suggest that it is
the Internet—however deﬁned—that establishes the conditions for the pro-
duction, circulation, and use of knowledge. However, the history of change in
the use of ICTs of all kinds conﬁrms that there is nothing straightforward
about the relationship between advances in technology and social transforma-
tion. From the end of World War II to the 1970s, the model of social and
economic growth relied heavily upon capital-intensive, physical technologies.
After that, there was a substantial move towards reliance on immaterial goods
and digital information, but little acknowledgement of the implications of
the paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity. In the dominant social
imaginary, developments in technology, information, and knowledge are
conﬂated. Strengthening consumer demand for digital information is the
greatest priority, together with curative policies to meet the needs of the
‘deserving’ information poor by ﬁlling gaps in access to information or
CONCLUSION
185

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
technology. In the alternative social imaginary, the approach is similar, but the
priority is to strengthen the conditions for experimentation in an open
information commons.
Adaptive action is needed to encourage correction such that investment in
hardware and software is not treated as a proxy for the capacities of people to
make sense of their mediated environment. The notion that there is a global
knowledge base that can be employed to alleviate social and economic disad-
vantage and is accessible through ICTs, but without capacities to evaluate digital
information critically in the light of other sources of knowledge, would come to
be seen as a profound misunderstanding of the mediated world. A shift towards
emphasizing multiple forms of digital information and the importance of tacit
knowledge would take precedence over measures of stocks of information and
points of network access in the digital world. The belief that investment in
hardware and software is the highest priority for stimulating economic growth
and for supporting democratic values would be challenged by distinguishing
among tools, information, and knowledge. Public and private investment in
ICTs would be scrutinized in the light of competing claims over scarce resources.
For example, policies and private sector initiatives aimed at broadband expan-
sion, a home computer for every child, or a rural kiosk in every village would be
evaluated in the light of other urgent social goals.
The idea that the automation of the communication system always is
consistent with productivity improvements and the growth of the economy
would be critically evaluated, acknowledging that there may be limits to the
extent to which ‘intelligent machines’ can or should be tasked with making
choices. Greater attention would be given to the relationship between codiﬁed
information and tacit knowledge, to unequal power relationships that inﬂu-
ence who has the knowledge necessary to decode algorithms of codiﬁed
information, and to what people need to do in order to acquire knowledge
that is meaningful to them. This would encourage attention to the meaning of
information and to the importance of its variety. Valuing information diver-
sity outside the framework of the commercial market would start to encour-
age a new social imaginary of the information society in which information is
understood, not as a ‘thing’, but as a component of the multiple knowledges
that are essential for learning.
FACILITATING ONLINE CREATIVITY
A further adaptive action would encourage a correction in the direction of the
evolution of the communication system so that the values of the good society
would be served by both the market exchange model for digital information
and the information commons model. The priority in the dominant social
imaginary of the knowledge economy is to secure the scarcity of digital
186
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
information by enforcing intellectual property rights to foster economic
growth. In the alternative social imaginary, ‘information wants to be free’ to
be ‘mashed-up’ in creative ways in a commons-based peer production envi-
ronment. The conﬂict between copyright holders and everyday online parti-
cipants would be addressed initially by recognizing that attempts to control
digital information through the imposition of rights of ownership and the
suppression of creative online activity have lost credibility in the Internet
Age. This would weaken the argument that online methods to detect copy-
right infringers, such as methods of deep packet inspection, are justiﬁed. This,
in turn, would provide an opportunity for a debate about the other interests
these methods serve, including those of the state and the science and engi-
neering communities, and whether they are consistent with standards of
social justice.
In a new social imaginary the acceptability of targeting individuals engaged
in online ﬁle-sharing and other means of sharing information would begin to
wane, shifting debate towards ways of broadening the scope for a ﬂourishing
collaborative and sharing culture. The impasse between those claiming that a
radical curtailment of creative output would result from lowering existing
legislative barriers to information exchange and those claiming that an infor-
mation commons would stimulate improvisation and creativity would be
broken. Stakeholders would begin to debate the arrangements that would
create market incentives for the production of digital information and in-
centives for the sharing of information.
This correction is needed to encourage means of empowering citizens
through their participation in online environments, while remaining consis-
tent with the values of economic growth, the security of the state, and the
protection of individuals from potential harms. Few would support measures
that favour the empowerment of people to watch hours of pornography,
which might provoke them into acting out what is portrayed. Any such
measures must be concerned with value choices about economic opportunity
and ethics. The outcomes of the debate could inﬂuence education campaigns
explaining the full range of possibilities available to digital information
producers, consumers, and citizens. Other changes that might be considered
include modiﬁcations to the way digital information producers, including
artists, are compensated for their efforts such as a tax applied to the use of the
Internet or an allocation from general taxation accompanied by mechanisms
to distribute the resulting pool of resources to information creators.15 As a
new social imaginary begins to take hold, consideration could be given to
rolling back expansionist intellectual property rights legislation so as to
minimize the creation of new monopolies of knowledge and to facilitate the
opening of the digital commons to creativity.
CONCLUSION
187

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
AUGMENTING THE HUMAN MIND
Adaptive action is needed to address the question of whether investment in
the communication system should be guided by human beings or by the
choices of our ‘machines of loving grace’ and how the human beings should
be held accountable. The fascination with intelligent machines aimed at
augmenting the human mind in immersive environments is deeply embedded
in the prevailing social imaginaries of the information society. Claims by
computer scientists and online marketing specialists, that software agent-
based computer systems should set (or should be designed to set) their own
priorities, must be challenged if the public interest in minimizing unwanted
intrusions is to be protected. The volumes of data that need to be searched to
ﬁnd information of interest to law enforcement agencies, to companies, and
to other social groups are growing exponentially. However, what software
agents can or cannot do in terms of auditing information and tracing its
origins is not easily visible on the governance agenda.
Measures are needed to protect citizens from unwanted intrusions into the
virtual spaces they deem to be private and to ensure that the state’s interests in
security are met, but these must be handled in a transparent way and be
subjected to ethical scrutiny. The absence of public debate about such mea-
sures is due partly to the claim that the communication system is too complex
to govern and that it responds to its own ‘needs’. Adaptive action would
encourage attention to the progressive automation of the communication
system that is allowing choices about people’s lives to be delegated to software
agents. Instead of seeing the boundary between public and private informa-
tion as the outcome of a given trajectory of technological innovation, ques-
tions would be raised about whether the companies claiming to depend on
intrusive software agents really need this information to support advertising-
based online commerce models and about what alternative models are
available.
Questions would also be raised about the extent to which governments
depend on the use of these agents for monitoring to generate information
about illegal activity. Legislation designed to provide privacy safeguards is
coming to be seen by the state as shielding those engaged in activities that
are disapproved of or condemned, and by companies as limiting their com-
mercial prospects. In a new social imaginary, consideration of the way these
developments infringe human rights would increase and the refrain would no
longer be simply that little if anything can be done to curtail the excesses
of monitoring practice because the communication system is global and
complex.
Self-regulatory codes of practice offer some safeguards, but cannot prevent
the processing of data that have been rendered ‘non-personal’. These codes of
188
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
practice would come to be regarded as curative policies that ignore the fact
that digital platform owners have incentives to exceed commonly accepted
norms of behaviour, as do governments. In a new social imaginary it would be
acknowledged that the processes leading to the automation of everyday life
are cumulative and adaptive (in the evolutionary sense), and surveillance,
privacy intrusions, agent misbehaviour, and lack of transparency are predo-
minating. What is possible today may become excessive in the future. The
right to be free from surveillance would not be seen as an unaffordable luxury
in the face of an emergent complex adaptive system. Questions would be
asked about whether the market is likely to curtail excesses and whether
hacker and other online communities should be presumed always to be acting
in the interests of citizens.
In a new social imaginary there would be reasons to question whether
surveillance by the ‘machines of loving grace’ should be the taken-for-granted
as the norm in the information society. It could be that software agents should
be used to perform ever more revelatory and comprehensive surveillance if
justiﬁed by commercial, policing, or security reasons. They could also be
tasked to facilitate surveillance by charities seeking donors, or cults seeking
new recruits. It would be a choice to extend the limits to surveillance using
intelligent software agents. However, the response instead might be to limit
such developments inasmuch as they are motivated by opportunities for
commercial gain and by state interests in security more than by beneﬁts to
consumers and citizens. Were a new social imaginary to begin to take hold, it
might be possible to consider measures that would limit the excesses of
surveillance while allowing the beneﬁts of a communication system that
augments the human mind. In a new social imaginary, it might become
reasonable to ask questions about the interests guiding the choices of the
‘electronic monks’ and their authority to decide about the technologies
behind the screen.
In the contemporary alternative social imaginary, it is assumed that we
should rely on a new knowledge elite—the software programmers and hard-
ware developers—to decide the features of the communication system behind
the screen, and on self-organizing civil society groups to galvanize change in
support of a more equitable and just world in front of the screen. For
example, political philosophers, Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, acknowl-
edge that ‘control over linguistic sense and meaning and the networks of
communication’ is a core issue in political struggle.16 However, they look to
the impact of the tools of the Internet Age to create the conditions where ‘self-
organization’ reaches a threshold that provokes fundamental societal change
that they assume will be aligned with the values of the good society.17 This
model is reminiscent of the shocks envisaged by technology on society in the
exogenous model and it is assumed that the meaning of information is
consistent with values of the good society. Manuel Castells suggests that
CONCLUSION
189

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
‘networks . . . process the goals they are programmed to perform’,18 appearing
to assume that self-organizing social movements will programme the goals for
the tools and machines for mass self-communication19 in a way that is
consistent with the values of the good society. The questions are why we
should assume that these groups represent the majority and whether some
form of accountability for the new leaders is necessary. The evidence from
empirical studies of self-organizing online communities is that they create new
norms and hierarchies that are not always based on the values of meritocracy.
The false oppositions resulting from the denial of the paradoxes of infor-
mation scarcity and complexity are visible in formal settings for governance
of the communication system. The persistent contest over the Internet’s
architecture in disputes about network neutrality is indicative of this. These
debates are around whether the end-to-end architecture of the Internet
Protocol is sustainable in the face of interests in controlling digital informa-
tion for economic gain and interests in liberating digital information for
creative purposes. However, when the paradoxes are acknowledged, it is
possible to see that state and corporate practices are already well down the
path to a non-neutral network. In a new social imaginary, debate would focus
on the reality of the mediated world behind the screen, whether there is a need
to restrain intelligent software agents, and on whose authority such restraint
should be considered.
A Final Reading
Adaptive action is a response to the paradoxes of information scarcity and
complexity in the Internet Age. Adaptive action differs substantially from the
idea of adapting to the shocks of technological change. It differs also from
the idea that these technologies are malleable in the hands of their unspeciﬁed
designers, users, or audiences. This is because such action becomes feasible
only with effort to repunctuate debates that are otherwise locked into opposi-
tions between the contemporary social imaginaries of the information society.
Responses to paradox have an ethical dimension which can be debated only
when the potential harms associated with a failure to respond to paradox are
acknowledged. Opening up governance forums with a remit to address the
conﬂicts that occur in the course of constructing the information society (e.g.,
regulatory proceedings, intergovernmental organizations, etc.), to a wide
range of stakeholders, may help to disrupt dysfunctional patterns of commu-
nication that are sustaining the prevailing social imaginaries. However, a
procedural response alone is unlikely to empower those who could give
birth to a new social imaginary of the information society.20
190
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
What is needed is improved knowledge of the interactions within a multi-
level communication system which lead to the genesis of the paradoxes of
information scarcity and complexity. We must hope that unexpected devel-
opments within the complex adaptive system will reveal discrepancies in
presently taken-for-granted ways of seeing and that this recognition will
spawn new patterns of communication that will produce a new understand-
ing of these paradoxes. Unexpected developments are more likely to emerge
from the scholarly community and become part of a new social imaginary
when researchers cross conventional academic boundaries that serve to se-
quester discussion of these paradoxes. Interdisciplinary research is helpful in
creating opportunities for critical assessment of the paradoxes of the Internet
Age because it encourages the development of critical systems frameworks
such as the one I employed in my analysis. Researchers are enabled to practise
reﬂexive research, but also to be open to surprises that disturb their conven-
tional ways of seeing the dynamics of the evolution of the communication
system—that is, they are more likely to be cognizant of news of difference.
Mumford observes that ‘the instrument only in part determines the char-
acter of the symphony or the response of the audience: the composer and
the musicians and the audience have also to be considered . . . we will have to
re-write the music in the act of playing it’.21 It is not possible to stand apart
from the evolution of the communication system to evaluate its impacts
because for most of our lives we are immersed in the mediated world. The
music can be re-written in the act of playing it in the hope of creating a new
social imaginary of the information society. A new social imaginary would be
alert to paradox and stakeholders might start seeking to reconcile their
conﬂicting interests in a way that acknowledges the harms that otherwise
would occur—that is, the excesses of the market, of unrestrained experimen-
tation, and unaccountable developments in front of and behind the screen.
My analysis of the contemporary social imaginaries reveals how the expe-
rience of paradox in the information society is being systematically denied.
The results illustrate the value of an interdisciplinary approach, suggesting
what further interdisciplinary studies that cross the boundaries of disciplinary
enquiry might accomplish.22 This kind of approach is met with scepticism in
some quarters. For instance, Paul Streeten, an economist closely associated
with the human development agenda, argues that ‘the only forum where
interdisciplinary studies in depth can be conducted successfully is under one
skull’.23 My aim is not to sacriﬁce in-depth analysis on the altar of a transdis-
ciplinary research agenda: it is for this reason that I restrict my analysis to
two important paradoxes of the Internet Age and do not offer detailed
recommendations for policy. It could be argued that this is an idealist
approach because I have not said to whom those making the choices about
the evolution of the communication system should be accountable. One
response to this is that this will depend on the particular conﬁguration of
CONCLUSION
191

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
institutions and power relations in speciﬁc places, which it does. Another is
that in the twenty-ﬁrst century mediated environment, this is an open
question which needs urgently to be addressed through future research and
by society as a whole. Research provides at least a starting point.
An interdisciplinary framework facilitates engagement among scholars
who work within their respective specialisms and with those engaged in
debates in governance forums who are proponents of the prevailing social
imaginaries of the information society. The analysis of paradox, and proposals
for adaptive action, create the possibility for dialogue about a new social
imaginary. It is essential, however, to acknowledge that incommensurable
epistemologies and languages, for example in the ways that terms such as
change, evolution, and self-organization are used, make such debate a daunt-
ing prospect. Accounts of complex adaptive systems do not embrace a theory
of human agency and so clashes occur when this theory is juxtaposed with
theories from the humanities and social sciences.24 In addition, the so-called
‘laws’ that seem ‘deep’ enough in the natural and physical sciences cannot be
imported to the social sciences without artiﬁcially replanting them. As a
consequence, there is a lack of reciprocal understanding among those working
in the humanities, social, and natural sciences about the evolutionary process
that is giving rise to a complex communication system.25
My response has been to highlight differences in the visions of the infor-
mation society and the broader social imaginaries that embrace them. These
can be traced to different ways of seeing. I have sought to illustrate why they
matter, not to smooth over the differences. Encounters with the ‘other’ can be
evocative. In this book, such encounters have yielded the beginnings of a
social imaginary of the information society in which the virtual world would
not be enclosed to the degree that the rights holders to digital information
advocate, and people would not experience their mediated lives as being
scrutinized by unknown others. Plato said that ‘just as the eye was unable
to turn from darkness to light without the whole body, so too the instrument
of knowledge can only by the movement of the whole soul be turned from the
world of becoming into that of being’.26 Being in the world of the information
society requires that we ﬁnd ways to cope with the paradoxes of the Internet
Age. My analysis of the paradoxes of information scarcity and complexity
demonstrates that it is in no-one’s interest to preserve the status quo. If
Charles Taylor is correct, a new social imaginary will start to inﬂuence
practice and to generate movement to a new gradient of power relationships
in the information society.
Evaluations of progress towards the information society in the instrumen-
tal research tradition often do not offer normative conclusions or, when
they do, these are disconnected from the theories that ostensibly underpin
them. Critical evaluations are more likely to consider the implications of
power relationships for individual agency or for the exercise of institutional
192
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
authority. Critical researchers, however, are not willing necessarily to become
involved in policy advocacy. Some argue that disengagement is the only way
to avoid co-option by those with political or economic power and collusion
with them in sustaining unequal power relations. In my experience, never-
theless, scholarly engagement with policy reform from within, and resistance
to governance from the ‘outside’, tend to comingle, albeit at different times in
the career of a researcher. The analysis of Internet Age visions and power
relations in this book is disengaged insofar as it is not about details of
decision-making in particular institutions or countries or about tactics for
mobilizing resistance to inequality and social injustice using the tools of social
media. It is normative, nevertheless, because I advocate a novel way of seeing
the evolution of the communication system and adaptive actions aimed at
coping with the harms associated with the paradoxes of information scarcity
and complexity in the Internet Age.
My re-reading of these paradoxes brings a broader range of options for
action into play. People are entitled to a world in which the beneﬁts of both
digital technologies and commercial and freely circulated information are not
outweighed by the harms of intrusive and non-disclosed incursions into their
virtual and ‘real’ lives. There is a high risk that the latter will outweigh the
former if nothing is done to cope with the paradoxes of information scarcity
and complexity in the Internet Age. The soul may hope for an empowering
communication system, but my analysis shows that there is a need to guide
the evolution of the system along a pathway that is not ‘indifferent to the
lives that people can actually live’.27 It is very difﬁcult to distinguish between
the dancer and the dance in policy debates that deny or ignore the implica-
tions of these paradoxes. This makes it hard to confront asymmetrical power
relations among stakeholders, and values that are being accorded high priori-
ty in the governance process, when they are inconsistent with those of the
good society. The critical systems framework focuses attention on the causes
and consequences of paradox, increasing the possibilities for governance
aimed at reconciling diverse interests and guiding the evolution of the com-
munication system in a direction that is aligned with aspirations for the good
society.
Governance should not entail a choice between an emergent self-organizing
system where ‘learning’ machines take precedence over human values, and an
information commons in which a new elite makes our choices for us. The
judgement of a self-organizing multitude may prove in the long run to be
vindicated as the optimal way of organizing society. But in the near- and
medium-term, analysis of the ‘whole body’ makes a useful contribution
because it provokes questions about accountability for the choices being
made. Leaving outcomes in the information society to the emergent self-
organization of any unaccountable group means adapting to ‘machines of
loving grace’, benign or otherwise. Re-writing the music in the act of playing it
CONCLUSION
193

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
requires evaluation of dreams of ‘machines of loving grace’ and deeper and
continuing critical investigation of the values and actions of stakeholders in
order to make a difference in the trajectory of change in the communication
system. It requires governance measures from below and above to secure the
public interest in a communication system that is ﬁt for economic growth and
for limiting unwanted intrusions into people’s lives.
194
IMAGINING THE INTERNET
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
n NOTES
Chapter 1
1. Paradoxical features of innovation also are investigated in the management ﬁeld (e.g.
Handy, 1994) and by some economists (e.g. Layard, 2005; Stiglitz et al., 2010).
2. See Chroust (1946) on the ‘origin and meaning of the social compact doctrine’. Democritus
argued in favour of private ownership as the means to deliver the goals of the social
compact, a concept developed by Locke, Hobbes, Rousseau, and others.
3. Galbraith (1996: 4).
4. Sen (2009: 18) in The Idea of Justice.
5. Nussbaum (2006: 415, 414) in Frontiers of Justice. See also Nussbaum’s (2000) Woman and
Human Development, Sen’s (1985) ‘Rights and Goals’, and Etzioni’s (2002) ‘The Good
Society’.
6. Berger et al. (1972: 7). In sociology, the social construction of reality is frequently taken-for-
granted (Berger and Luckmann, 1966). In the management ﬁeld, ‘strategy’ may be under-
stood as the ‘collective mind’ (e.g. Mintzberg, 1989; Weick, 2001). Charles Taylor’s (2002a)
concept of the social imaginary is more open to embracing different ways of seeing and
refers not only to speciﬁc actors but also to a moral order of society that embraces the
market economy and the public sphere, however deﬁned. As Taylor (2004: 4) puts it, ‘the
underlying idea of moral order stresses the rights and obligations we have as individuals in
regard to each other, even prior to or outside of the political bond’. He borrows directly
from Thompson (1971) and acknowledges the work of Anderson (1983), Habermas (1962/
1989), and Warner (2002).
7. Taylor (2007: 171) in A Secular Age.
8. Taylor (2002a: 91, emphasis added). Scientists may ﬁnd the social imaginary easier to
understand as a socially constructed ontology.
9. Taylor (2007: 624).
10. Taylor (2007: 286).
11. Silverstone (2007: 26).
12. OECD (1988: 11).
13. Melody (1999: 376).
14. Theories of evolution are often implicated in discussions of changes in technology and in
the social system, see Beinhocker (2007), Dawkins (1982, 1989), Trivers (1985), and Wilson
(2008).
15. A common bowdlerization of Darwinian evolution is to employ the term ‘survival of the
ﬁttest’ to mean that one can state unequivocally what constitutes ﬁtness or conclude that
evolution produces generalized improvement. In the biological world, evolutionary change
can and does result in ‘dead ends’ or other results that are ultimately inimical to viability
(Gould, 2007).
16. See Stirling (2008).

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
17. Rose (1999: 154) in Governing the Soul.
18. Giddens and Piersin (1998: 77) in ‘conversations’.
19. Carey (1989/1992: 32). Carey was developing Raymond Williams’s (1966: 19–20) observa-
tion: ‘Communication begins in the struggle to learn and to describe. . . . many of our
communication models become, in themselves, social institutions. . . . arguable assumptions
are often embodied in solid, practical institutions which then teach the models from which
they start’.
20. OECD (1988: 11, emphasis added). This text comes from a report that drew on the works of
Norman Clark, Giovani Dosi, Chris Freeman, Richard Nelson, Luc Soete, Sydney Winter,
and others, all of whom have been inﬂuential contributors to research in the ﬁelds of the
economics of technological innovation and science and technology policy research. They are
economists. However, most, if not all of them, would have been aware of research on the
‘social shaping of technology’ which was becoming increasingly prominent at the time, see
Mackenzie and Wajcman (1985), Bijker et al. (1987), and Latour and Woolgar (1986).
21. Silverstone (2007: 26).
Chapter 2
1. This was a persistent claim during the anti-trust dispute between Western Electric and
American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T), see US (1958: 3986–7).
2. See Cusumano and Yofﬁe (1998) who used this term in reference to competitive battles to
achieve market dominance.
3. See BBC (2009), Giusto et al. (2010), and Lyon (2009) on electronic tagging.
4. Vinge (1993: np) in ‘Technological Singularity’.
5. Bear’s (1985) science ﬁction work, Blood Music, imagines a ‘noo¨sphere’ which frees itself
from Earth.
6. See Pearson’s (2010) website for examples of futuristic visions.
7. Haraway (1991: 150) in A Cyborg Manifesto.
8. See Graham (1999), a moral philosopher, for a critique of the neo-Luddite perspective on
the Internet where he acknowledges that an ‘ideology of technology’ has been implicated in
large historical errors and that technology is not neutral for the social order. His argument
addresses the question, ‘how new is the Internet?’
9. The Guardian (2010: 35).
10. This assumption persists notwithstanding works on the politics of technology which have
been reasonably widely discussed beyond the academic world, see, for example, Ellul (1990)
and Winner (1977).
11. See ITU (2006). Santucci is said to have ﬁrst used the term ‘Internet of Things’ in 1999. The
European Commission has a Head of Unit for the ‘Internet of Things’, aimed at under-
standing the Internet as ‘thing-centric’ rather than ‘people-centric’ (Santucci, 2011).
12. Ducatel et al. (2001: 15–16).
13. See Mansell (2011) on the implications of neoliberalism for ICT policy and regulation of the
media and communication sector, and Stiglitz’s (2010) discussion of neoliberalism. The
‘Washington Consensus’ was the term coined by Williamson (1990) to describe the cluster
of policy prescriptions for poor countries promoted by the World Bank and the Interna-
tional Monetary Fund in areas including the treatment of ﬁscal deﬁcits, public expenditure,
196
NOTES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
tax reform, interest and exchange rates, trade policy and foreign direct investment, priva-
tization, deregulation, and property rights. The phrase is closely associated with ‘market
fundamentalism’ or ‘neoliberalism’, that is, the withdrawal of the state from governance and
the ascendency of the market.
14. Zittrain (2008: 35, 246) in The Future of the Internet.
15. See Maxwell and Miller (2011) on ICTs and the environment, and Toure´’s (2008) position
on climate change and ICTs for the ITU. This view is found in many reports on the
contribution of digital information and ICTs to economic growth (OECD, 2010).
16. Arthur (2009: 207) in The Nature of Technology.
17. The Economist (2011).
18. Howard’s (2010) work is an example where the cause and effect relationship between social
media and social impacts is examined critically, noting that theories of social change should
not be linked to speciﬁc ICT applications.
19. Measures of disparity in income show that among the world’s wealthy countries, the gap
between rich and poor is widest in the United States, despite it being one of the countries
with the deepest ICT penetration. In the United States, the Gini index of household income
inequality rose from 0.458 to 0.468 from 1999 to 2009 according to the US Census Bureau,
far in excess of countries like Denmark and Norway, and ahead of the United Kingdom
and New Zealand, see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_income_equality,
accessed 28/07/2011.
20. Lahlou (2008) discusses the importance of cognitive technologies in enabling organization-
al change.
21. Webster (2006) and Winston (1998) both argue that the idea of disruptive technologies in
the information society underplays the importance of continuity.
22. Davidow and Malone (1992: 5) in The Virtual Corporation.
23. Davidow (2011: 213) in Overconnected.
24. See Shapiro (1999) on individual empowerment and Beniger (1986) and Winner (1977) on
the idea that technology is, or may become, ‘out of control’.
25. Meier’s (1962) work is an early discussion of the importance of the types of media
that are used in urban environments for the intensity of communication, using a
‘sender–receiver’ model. As a regional planning systems scholar, he warned of poten-
tial social problems arising with the saturation of communication in urban areas, but
little note was taken.
26. Hassan’s (2008) argument is a critical and pessimistic view of the information society.
27. See Mansell (2011) for an analysis based on a ten-year survey of UN agency and World Bank
reports.
28. Juneau (1980: 4–5), the then Deputy Minister of Communications in Canada, making a
relatively early statement on the right to communicate. The growth rates for the diffusion of
ICTs and especially the Internet are not in question. In the period between 2000 and 2011,
world Internet use grew by 480.4 per cent (2,527.4% in Africa and 151.7% in North
America) (Internet World Stats, 2011), but there are major differences in the rates of
diffusion as documented in UNCTAD (2010b).
29. Negroponte (1995: 183) in Being Digital and OLPC//News (2010). One account of this
initiative in Peru reports the low-cost laptops being returned to their boxes because the
NOTES
197

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Ministry of Education had provided no support for teachers or children to use them
(OLPC//News, 2011).
30. World Bank (1999: 1). In the uncited original by Thomas Jefferson (1813: 1291): ‘He who
receives ideas from me, receives instruction himself without lessening mine; as he who lights
his taper at mine receives light without darkening me. That ideas should freely spread over
the globe, for the moral and mutual instruction of man, and improvement of his condition,
seems to have been peculiarly and benevolently designed by nature, when she made them
like ﬁre, expansible over all space, without lessening their density in any points and like the
air in which we breathe, move, and have our physical being, incapable of reﬁnement or
exclusive appropriation. Inventions then cannot, in nature, be a subject of property’.
31. Agre (1998: 3), citing Noble (1998) on the religion of technology.
32. UNDP (1990: 1). ‘Human development is the process of enlarging people’s choices—not
just choices among different detergents, television channels or car models but the choices
that are created by expanding human capabilities and functionings—what people do and
can do in their lives’ (UNDP, 1999: 16). See also Sen (1999) and Streeten (1982) who were
contributors to this report.
33. The ‘end of history’ is a central theme in Fukuyama’s (1992) work.
34. In the academic literature there are many critical perspectives on this approach: Couldry
(2003), Golding and Murdock (2001), Gunkel (2003), Hargittai (2003, 2004), Murdock and
Golding (2004), Norris (2001), van Dijk (2006a), Wade (2002), and Warschauer (2003). For
an economic analysis, see Antonelli (2003). UNESCO’s (2005b) report on Knowledge
Societies is much more closely aligned with the critical scholarly literature than other reports
on this topic produced by UN agencies.
35. Agre (1998: 4) in ‘yesterday’s tomorrow’. Karl Polanyi (1944/2001) argued in The Great
Transformation that people (or nature) should not be treated as objects whose price is
calculable in the market.
36. In The End of Ideology, Bell (1962) discusses the need to unmask ideologies. Unmasking
claims about the beneﬁts of globalization and the overemphasis on the market-led devel-
opment of networks is discussed in Mansell (1994).
37. See Bell’s (1973) The Coming of Post-Industrial Society.
38. Castells (2009: 4) in Communication Power.
39. Amin (1994) and Coriat et al. (2006) provide critical appraisals of these developments.
40. See Cusumano and Yofﬁe’s (1998) Competing on Internet Time and Shapiro and Varian’s
(1998) Information Rules.
41. UNDP (1999: 16).
42. Innis (1951/1991: 190) in The Bias of Communication.
43. Elinor Ostrom (2005) makes an argument in support of ‘both-and’ frameworks, for
example, preservation of an open commons and private property ownership, or bottom-
up local and top-down state governance, and see Andersson and Ostrom (2008).
44. Turkle (2011: np e-book edition) in Alone Together.
Chapter 3
1. Berger et al. (1972: 7) in Ways of Seeing.
2. Silverstone (1999: 16) in Why Study the Media?
198
NOTES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
3. Calhoun (2002: 170) on ‘imagining solidarity’.
4. Mills (1959/2000: 1, 4).
5. Chouliaraki (2006) discusses the analysis of media discourses as a way of understanding
mediation processes, taking account of the embeddedness of media texts in technological
artefacts and in social relationships.
6. Thompson (1982: 664) on ‘ideology and the social imaginary’.
7. Castoriadis (1987: 3 emphasis in original) in The Imaginary Institution of Society. The quote
continues, ‘. . . of ﬁgures/forms/images, on the basis of which alone there can ever be a
question of “something”. What we call “reality” and “rationality” are its works’. The social
imaginary is not the gaze of the ‘other’ or an image in a mirror reﬂecting material
conditions. Gaonkar (2002) argues that Castoriadis’s understanding of the social imaginary
does not address how change emerges locally. Theoretical debates about the scope for
autonomy from hegemonic ideologies and the way historical practice inﬂects the present
raise important issues that are not addressed here. I assume that ideologies are pervasive,
but changeable, and that they are not determining of outcomes in the classical Marxian
interpretation of class relations. See also Patrice Flichy (2007) on The Internet Imaginaire.
8. Mouffe (2005: 18) in On the Political.
9. Laclau (1990: 64) in New Reﬂections on the Revolution of Our Time.
10. Carpentier (2011a, 2011b: 116) invokes Lacan (1994) in his discussion of fantasy.
11. Taylor (2007: 171). For a favourable critical appraisal of Taylor’s work, see Abbey (2004).
For a critique of the concept, see Fraser (2007), especially Chapter 6.
12. Taylor (2002a: 106).
13. Taylor (2002a: 111).
14. Taylor (2002a: 107).
15. Taylor (2007: 176). Taylor follows Hans-Joerg Gadamer, insisting that his argument is not a
relativist one, but that understanding varies with the object studied and with the student of
the object (Taylor, 2002b), see also Modern Social Imaginaries (Taylor, 2004). Taylor
differentiates his argument from Marxist conceptions of ideology, arguing that there are
multiple modern social imaginaries in contestation with one another.
16. This is the ‘double hermeneutic’ in the social sciences (Giddens, 1993: 8).
17. Taylor (2002a).
18. Taylor (2007: 624) differentiates between paradox and contradiction.
19. This terminology has been used in the ﬁeld of media and communication studies, see
Journal of Communication 1983, 33(3), 1993, 43(3), and 2008, 58(4). A similar term in other
areas of the social sciences is ‘instrumental’.
20. Lazarsfeld (1941/2004: 169).
21. Melody and Mansell (1983) on administrative and critical research.
22. For instance, as Nico Carpentier (2011a: 357) puts it in Media and Participation, ‘media
technologies are not neutral, in the sense that they are embedded within a series of material
and discursive practices that structure the use of technology’.
23. Lasswell (1951: 1, emphasis added) on practitioners as social scientists.
24. Lasswell (1972: 307) on communication research and public policy.
25. Schiller (1974: 18, emphasis added) in Waiting for Orders.
NOTES
199

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
26. Garnham’s (1979) ‘Contribution to a Political Economy of Mass Communication’ is a
comprehensive statement of this tradition. Graham (2007) argues for the inclusion of a
cultural perspective. See also Mosco’s (2009) The Political Economy of Communication.
27. Kuhn (1962: 64). His The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions explained how dramatic shifts in
scientiﬁc explanation come about after lengthy periods of consensus, resulting in incommensu-
rability. Fuller (2000) argued that Kuhn neglected disputes within paradigms, but Kuhn (2000)
replied that incommensurability does not make comparison between theories impossible.
28. See Beniger’s (1986) The Control Revolution.
29. See Mirowski’s (2002) Machine Dreams for an historical account of the emergence of
‘cyborg’ science.
30. Bush’s (1945) ‘As We May Think’ proposed an electro-mechanical hypertext system for
storing, accessing, and editing information, and linking it together.
31. Wright (2003: np). Otlet envisaged ‘a moving desk-shaped like wheel, powered by a network
of hinged spokes beneath a series of moving surfaces. The machine would let users search,
read and write their way through a vast mechanical database stored on millions of 3x5 index
cards’ (Rayward, 1990: 1, citing Otlet) and see Otlet’s (1934) Traite de documentation.
32. Le´vy (1997) is among those who associate digital networks with collective intelligence. John
Lilly began working on biocomputing in the 1940s focusing on meta-programming
(learning to learn, symbols, metaphors, and models), developing models for ‘the enhance-
ment of the very human depths of communication with other minds’ (Lilly, 1972: xviii).
33. This is the process of remediation (Bolter and Grusin, 1999) and pre-mediation (Grusin,
2010). For an account of these processes in the mobile telecommunication industry from
the systems perspective, see Ibrus (2010).
34. See Wiener’s (1948/1961) Cybernetics.
35. See Wiener’s (1950: 17–18) The Human Use of Human Beings.
36. See Shannon and Weaver’s (1949) Mathematical Theory of Communication.
37. The stimulus-response model is still taught to social scientists, see Heath and Bryant (2000)
for the communication ﬁeld. It is pervasive also in marketing and management research
(Mo¨ller and Wilson, 1995), despite recent shifts to relational and network approaches, see
Johansen (2009).
38. Leghorn (2011) contributed funding for the establishment of research and teaching pro-
grammes in the management of technological innovation at MIT’s Sloan School of
Management.
39. Stigler (1961: 213). The assertion that ‘knowledge is power’ may be attributed to Bacon’s
(1597/1924) statement ‘Nam et ipsa scientia potentia est’, but the idea originates in the Old
Testament—‘A man of knowledge increaseth strength’, Proverbs 24:5, King James Version
(Titelman, 1996).
40. For works on the economics of information, see Arrow (1984), Jussawalla and Edenﬁeld
(1984), Lamberton (1971), and Macdonald (1998).
41. See Drucker (1969), Machlup (1962), and Masuda (1980).
42. See McLuhan’s (1964) Understanding Media which drew on Innis’s earlier work, albeit with
different emphases and interpretations.
43. Time Magazine (1993).
200
NOTES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
44. See Brand’s (1987) ‘The Media Lab: Inventing the Future at MIT’. For an edited collection of
republished works on the information society covering most of the period discussed here,
see Mansell (2009).
45. See European Commission (1994), Gore (1993), and Ministry of International Trade and
Industry (MITI) (1994). Later ‘A Green Knowledge Society: An ICT Policy Agenda to 2015
for Europe’s Future Knowledge Society’ (Forge et al., 2009) linked innovations in ICTs to
the sustainability of the economy. More recently, the European Commission stated that ‘the
overall aim of the Digital Agenda is to deliver sustainable economic and social beneﬁts from
a digital single market based on fast and ultra fast internet and interoperable applications’
(European Commission, 2010b: 1, 2010c).
46. See Tapscott’s (1995) The Digital Economy: Promise and Peril in the Age of Networked
Intelligence.
47. See Castells’s (1996, 1997, 1998) The Information Age and van Dijk’s (2006b) The Network
Society.
48. See Solow’s (1956) ‘a contribution to the theory of economic growth’.
49. Braman (1995) reviews the use of the term ‘information economy’. Some focused on the
share of information activities in the economy (Bell, 1973; Ito, 1991; Machlup, 1962; Porat
and Rubin, 1977), on information in its commodity form (Mosco, 1996; Schiller, 1981), and
on information and the coordination of the economy (Bressand et al., 1989, David and
Bunn, 1988; Lundgren, 1995).
50. See Drucker (1959) on a ‘post-modern world’.
51. See Mansell (2011) on ‘power and interests’ in ICTs.
52. The Oxford English Dictionary deﬁnes knowledge as ‘the fact or condition of being in-
structed, or of having information acquired by study or research; acquaintance with
ascertained truths, facts, or principles; information acquired by study; learning; erudition’.
53. See Tapscott’s (2010) blog ‘ClimateSpark’.
54. Carr (2010: 10) in The Shallows. de Kerckhove’s (2010) work on the Augmented Mind would
be an exception in this regard.
55. These Stanford University researchers do not claim that being online is the cause of these
effects, only that it is associated with a distinct approach to information processing (Ophir
et al., 2009).
56. Pierce (1956: 306) in Electrons, Waves and Messages.
57. Turing (1950) proposed an imitation test such that a human interrogator would be able
to detect whether answers were being provided by a human or a machine. He also said that
‘I believe that at the end of the century the use of words and public opinion will have altered
so much that one will be able to speak of machines thinking without expecting to be
contradicted’. Oppy and Dowe (2011) discuss the issues and objections related to Turing’s
arguments. See Roszak (1994) and Boden (1996: xvii) on the progress of Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence—as Boden observes, this is an interdisciplinary ﬁeld of study drawing on science
(biology, ethnology, psychology, neuroscience, physics, and computer science) and on the
humanities (philosophy, linguistics, and the history of art and science). Russell and Norvig
(2010) highlight the progress of research in this area.
58. See Cusumano’s (2010) Staying Power. Another important feature is the progressive minia-
turization and modularity of ICT system components, especially semiconductors. This
inﬂuences the organization and management of digital information and has implications
for whether ICTapplications are interoperable and whether they are open or closed to their
NOTES
201

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
users, see Arthur (2009). Beinhocker (2007: 175) argues that modularity leads to webs of
technology and emergent patterns of technological, social, and economic organization.
Research on modularity focuses on the success or failure of ﬁrms in adapting to innovations
in the components of technology, see Gawer and Henderson (2007), Henderson and Clark
(1990), and Steinmueller (2006), and on ICTsystems integration, see Brusoni and Prencipe
(2001), Hobday (1998), and Langlois (2002).
59. The reader’s basic familiarity with the scale of the ICT industry in terms of its signiﬁcance in
the economy is assumed. For reference, see IDATE (2010) and UNCTAD (2010a).
60. See Rheingold’s (1993/2000, 2002) The Virtual Community and Smart Mobs.
61. For example, the European Commission’s Competition Commission found that Microsoft
had abused its dominant position in the personal computer operating system market by
refusing to disclose interoperability information that would have enabled competitors to
fully interoperate with Windows PCs and servers and by tying Windows Media Player with
its dominant Windows PC operating system (European Commission, 2007). The Commis-
sion is investigating allegations that Google Inc. is abusing its dominant position in online
search, focusing on whether Google lowers the ranking of unpaid search results of compet-
ing services that specialize in providing online content. Microsoft claims that Google gives
preferential treatment to its own search products (Couts, 2011, European Commission,
2010a).
62. See Albarran (2002), Brock (1994), Doyle (2002), Maniadaki (2011), and Picard (1996) for
analysis of the economics of the media and communication industries. Melody (1973)
discusses how technological determinism is linked to the institutional structure of the
media industries. In the EU, Title VII of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
Union (TFEU) deals with rules on competition, and Articles 101 and 102 speciﬁcally refer
to restriction or distortion of competition and dominant position (European Commission,
2008). A multi-sided ICT platform ‘serves two or more distinct types of customers who
depend on each other in some important way, and whose joint participation makes the
platform valuable to each’ (Evans et al., 2005: 190). See also Economides and Katsamakas
(2006) and Hagiu and Yofﬁe (2009).
63. Ciborra (2004), Orlikowski (1992), Star and Ruhleder (1994), and Swanson and Ramiller
(1997) discuss why the relationship between technological innovation and societal goals are
always uncertain without recourse to analogies to non-human systems.
64. See Melody (1985) on the information society.
65. See Braudel (1979/1992), DuBoff (1983), Innis (1950), and Mattelart (1996/2000).
66. Innis (1951: 191) in The Bias of Communication.
67. Braudel (1979/1992: 85) in Civilization and Capitalism.
68. Castells (2009: 139) cites those who argue that the cells in the brain do not hold meaning,
but that it is feasible to understand relationships between ‘what we see and what we do’
(Damasio, 2003; Damasio and Meyer, 2008: 168).
69. See Osborne’s (1979) Running Wild: The Next Industrial Revolution.
70. Prencipe et al. (2003) discuss the coordination of complex product systems; the role of
standardization is discussed in Mansell’s (1995) ‘Standards, Industrial Policy and
Innovation’.
71. In statistics, an endogenous relationship exists if an independent variable is correlated with
an error term in a regression model, for instance.
202
NOTES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
72. There are many other endogenous perspectives on the innovation process. One of these is
Actor Network Theory (ANT) which provides a framework and methodology for tracing
relationships among actors (and ‘actants’ or technologies). Negotiations over the design
and application of technologies are traced indicating periods of disruption, followed by
stability and subsequent closure, revealing why some pathways are adhered to and others,
which may be favourable for some groups, are abandoned. See Callon (2001), Latour
(2005), and Law (1999) in Four Models for the Dynamics of Science, Reassembling the Social,
and ‘After ANT’, respectively. Research in the ﬁeld of information systems is concerned with
innovation and socio-technical systems employing terminology such as translation, enact-
ment, and congealing, see, for example, Avgerou (2002b), Bijker and Law (1992), Katz and
Aakhus (2002), Latour (1994), and Whitley (1997). In the case of ICT use in higher
education, for example, the challenge may be to discover why certain online learning
conﬁgurations are privileged by developers and adopters for reasons that may be cultural,
political, or economic (Darking, 2004). Or the focus may be on contestation over the
development of electronic identity cards, tracing actor interests through ﬁne-grained,
micro-level analysis (Whitley and Hosein, 2009). Relatively little attention is given to the
actors’ economic, political, social, or cultural interests as they are embedded in institutions
(Avgerou, 2002a). Avgerou explains that socio-technical theories of information systems
drawing on Bloomﬁeld et al. (1997), Hirschheim et al. (1996), Introna (1997), Orlikowski
(1992), and Walsham (1993) grew out of action research at the Tavistock Institute of
Human Relations, following the work of Mumford (2000) and challenging the engineering
view of systems through the development of interpretivism in the analysis of social systems
(Checkland, 1981).
73. See Arrow (1962), Romer (1990), and Rosenberg (1982a). Perhaps more tellingly, Abra-
movitz (1956: 11) called the residual ‘a measure of our ignorance’ about the causes of
productivity increases, and see Griliches (1996) for a brief history of this issue in economics.
74. Endogenous theories of technological innovation are common in the management of
technological innovation and the economics literatures, see Rooney and Schneider (2005)
and Zack (1999).
75. See Aghion et al. (2009), Foray (2004, 2009), Mowery (2009), and Universities-National
Bureau Staff (1962).
76. David and Foray (2003: 27) in ‘economic fundamentals of the knowledge society’.
77. Metcalfe and Ramlogan (2005: 670) in ‘limits to the economy of knowledge and knowledge
of the economy’, and see Bowles (1998: 75), an American economist, who examines
endogenous preferences reﬂecting experience acquired through individual learning which
inﬂuences framing and situational construal, intrinsic and extrinsic motivations, norms,
task performance, and cultural ‘transmission’. As Bowles says, ‘markets and other economic
institutions do more than allocate goods and services . . . economists have long assumed
otherwise’.
78. See Rosenberg’s (1982a, 1994) Inside the Black Box and Exploring the Black Box.
79. Polanyi (1966: 4) in The Tacit Dimension. For discussions of tacit knowledge, see Leonard-
Barton (1992), Nelson and Winter (1977), Papert (1980), and Wagner and Sternberg
(1985).
80. See Cowan and Foray (1997: 596), Johnson et al. (2002), Lundvall and Johnson (1994), and
Steinmueller (2000) for debates on this issue.
81. See Foray and Steinmueller (2003) on the ‘economics of knowledge inscription’. Kinect is
the interface for the Xbox 360, introduced by Microsoft in 2010, which uses a sensor device
NOTES
203

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
to detect motion and face and voice recognition. Similar to Nintendo’s Wii, people use their
bodies to react to games, but they do not have to use a wireless handheld controller.
82. See Kahin (2004) on the privileging of some knowledge communities over others which
raises questions about power.
83. See Brown and Duguid (1998, 2000) and Wenger (1998) on communities of practice.
84. For GPTs, see Bresnahan and Trajtenberg (1995) and for work on the history of technologi-
cal systems, see David (1975, 1990), Nelson and Winter (1982), Nelson (1994), and
Rosenberg (1976, 1982a, 1994).
85. Freeman (1988: 1) and Perez (1983). See also Freeman and Louc¸a’s (2001) As Time Goes By.
Their work contributed to a diverse tradition in historical studies inﬂuenced by a systems
perspective which includes the works of Beniger (1986), Davies (1996), Hughes (1987),
Klang (2006), Mayntz and Hughes (1988), Nightingale et al. (2003), and Summerton
(1994). There is, in addition, in the tradition of science and technology studies with its
root in sociology, a strong tradition of research on large technical systems, see Bowker
(1996), Ellul (1990), Gras (1993), MacKenzie (1996), and Williams (1990).
86. Freeman and Perez (1988: 38). Joseph Schumpeter (1934/1961) argued that periodically
certain enabling technologies emerge that challenge older modes of social and economic
organization.
87. See Freeman’s (2007) short discussion on the ICT paradigm. Freeman (1995), Lundvall
(1992), and Nelson (1993) review the history of ICT innovation and Dosi’s (1982) work
focuses on technological trajectories.
88. See Perez’s (2002) Technological Revolution and Financial Capital.
89. Political economy emerged out of moral philosophy in the eighteenth century as the study
of the economies of states and markets in the works of Adam Smith, David Ricardo, and
Karl Marx. In 1615, Antoine de Montchre´tien published Traite´ de l’economie politique in
France.
90. Mill (1829/1874/2000: 114) in ‘Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy’.
91. There are traditions of institutional and Marxist political economy, see Comor (1994),
Henten et al. (2003), and Melody (2003) for the former and Bettig and Schiller (1997),
Calabrese and Sparks (2004), Garnham (1990), McChesney (2008), Mosco (2009), Smythe
(1981), Wasko et al. (2011) for the latter.
92. Halloran (1974: 5) said ‘. . . we are interested in the factors that govern or inﬂuence what the
media make available, as well as the factors that govern or inﬂuence what use is made of
what is made available . . . We must ask questions about organization and structure, and
about ownership, control, resources and technology. . .’.
93. In the administrative research tradition, existing distributions of power are assumed to be
given or they are assumed to be unalterable (Melody, 1985).
94. Garnham (1986: 23, emphasis added) in ‘contribution to a political economy of mass-
communication’. Breen (2011) makes a similar point when he argues that the relationships
between innovations in Internet-related technology, content, representation, and power in
society are never closed.
95. Clark (1961: 21) in Competition as a Dynamic Process, see also Bauer (2005) and Melody
(1985) on market power.
96. See Mansell (1996) on controls on the ‘information highway’ and Anderson (2010) for a
debate in Wired Magazine on this issue.
204
NOTES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
97. See Mansell and Steinmueller’s (2000) Mobilizing the Information Society.
98. Microsoft’s history begins in 1975 with the development of BASIC language software for the
ALTAIR 8800 computer by Bill Gates and Paul Allen. Google’s history ofﬁcially begins in
1997 when Larry Page and Sergey Brin ﬁled for incorporation of the company. Oracle was
founded by Larry Ellison and others in the United States in 1977 as Software Development
Laboratories to commercialize relational database software. Founded in 1972, SAP AG
(Systems, Applications, and Products in Data Processing) is based in Germany.
99. See Cusumano and Yofﬁe (1998) on the battle between Netscape and Microsoft.
100. See McKercher and Mosco’s (2008) Knowledge Workers in the Information Society and
Mosco’s (2008) ‘Knowledge workers of the world! Unite?’ and Cote´ and Pybus (2007) who
build on Lazzarato (1996) referring to the imaginary and arguing that labour in the virtual
world must include ‘cultural and artistic norms, fashions, tastes, consumer standards and,
more strategically, public opinion’ (Lazzarato, 2004: np). Hardt and Negri (2001) argue
that labour is cerebral, affective, and computerized.
101. See Smythe (1977, 1981: 8) on the ‘blindspot of Western Marxism’ and Dependency Road.
This argument led to an extended debate on a ‘blind-spot’ in Western Marxism (Murdock,
1978).
102. Cohen (2008) and see Gershuny (1978) on ‘self-servicing’ in earlier ICT innovation phases.
103. The link between democratization and technology is attributed to the distributed P2P
architecture of the Internet. The network protocol enables all types of data, applications,
and services to be transported, which explains its designation as an end-to-end network.
The World Wide Web is the result of efforts to deﬁne a standard for accessing and
retrieving the information hosted on computers that access the Internet. A proposal by
Tim Berners-Lee was launched in 1991 (Berners-Lee and with Fischetti, 1999). After the
Mosaic Web browser was deployed in the market in 1993, a global information network
began to spread. See Benkler (2006), Feenberg (1999, 2010a), Lessig (1999, 2006, 2008),
and Surowiecki (2004) for discussions of the values embedded in ICT architectures and
networks.
104. See Stallman (2009) who pioneered the idea of copyleft and is a main author of the
GNU Public License, a widely used free software licence. He began working on the GNU
Operating System in 1983, a UNIX like operating system, and launched the Free Software
Foundation in 1985.
105. See Rosen (2004) for differences between open and free software and their licensing
regimes.
106. The gift economy concept is derived from the anthropologist, Marcel Mauss’s (1954/1969)
work on the implicit obligation to ‘repay’ a gift in some cultures. On ‘commons-based peer
production’, see Benkler and Nissenbaum (2006). Berdou (2011), Bergquist and Ljungberg
(2001), Dalle et al. (2005), Kollock (1999), Raymond (1999), and Weber (2004) discuss the
attributes of the gift economy and online contributions. Empirical studies demonstrate
that a mix of volunteer and paid work and open source and proprietary approaches is
common, and that altruism which favours sharing and collaboration can coexist with
conﬂict. See Healy and Schussman (2003), Kettell (2008), Lakhani and von Hippel (2003),
Lerner and Tirole (2000), Ljundgberg (2000), Mateos-Garcia and Steinmueller (2008a),
Moon and Sproull (2002), O’Mahony and Ferraro (2003), Sadowski et al. (2008), von
Hippel (2002), and Weber (2004).
107. As of 2011, approximately 23.8 per cent of global Internet trafﬁc has been classiﬁed as
copyright infringing. BitTorrent is said to account for 11.4 per cent of this infringing
NOTES
205

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
activity. This study, undertaken for NBC Universal, estimated the amount of non-
pornographic trafﬁc associated with ﬁlms, television programme episodes, computer
games, and software, as well as cyberlocker trafﬁc (downloads from sites such as MegaUp-
load, Rapidshare, or HotFile) and video-streaming. In the United States, 17.5 per cent of
trafﬁc is estimated to be infringing (excluding pornography). A reasonably detailed
account of the methodology is provided with reviews of other studies, with the usual
caveats about the quality and accuracy of the results (Price, 2011).
108. See Beckett and Mansell (2008), Bennett (2003), and Van de Donk et al. (2004), for
instance.
109. Hassan (2008: 223) in The Information Society.
110. Many researchers in the critical tradition question these values, see Braman (2006),
McKercher and Mosco (2008), Mosco (2008), Robins and Webster (1999), Schiller
(2007), and Webster (1999).
111. Silverstone (2007: 26). Other terms for mediation are mediality, mediatization, mediazation,
and remediation, premediation, and transmediation. Livingstone (2009: 5, 13) says that ‘we
need media and communication research to understand how the media mediate, for the same
reason that we need linguistics to understand how language mediates, economics to under-
stand how money mediates, literature to understand how narratives and myths mediate, and
consumption studies to understand how material goods mediate’, arguing that the breadth of
application of the concept can result in references to the ‘mediation of everything’. Krotz
(2007) prefers ‘mediatization’ which he uses in arguing that long-term processes of change in
the media of communication and socio-cultural developments need to be examined com-
paratively in Western and non-Western cultures. See also Bolter and Grusin (1999), Grusin
(2010), Lievrouw (2009), Martin-Barbero (1993), Meyrowitz (1985), Silverstone (1999), and
Thompson (1995) for variations in usage of terms with a common reference to ‘mediation’.
‘Mediation’ is understood across scholarly boundaries and it is helpful in this regard. Further,
while the term seems to refer to ‘everything’, when it is applied in speciﬁc contexts where
research questions serve to bound the meaning of mediation, it is helpful when it is used in a
complementary way with other concepts.
112. See Silverstone’s Television and Everyday Life (1994), Why Study the Media (1999), and
Media and Morality (2007) and Silverstone and Hirsch (1992).
113. Turkle (2011: np e-book edition) in Alone Together.
114. Neogi and Cordell (2010) discuss these opposing perspectives.
115. See Garnham (1979).
116. Sennett (2006: 188) in The Culture of the New Capitalism.
117. Feenberg (2010a: 194) in Between Reason and Experience, citing Heidegger’s (1993: 107,
105) last interview conducted in 1966, published posthumously in 1976. Heidegger was
asked whether the individual can inﬂuence technology development. He responded:
‘technology is in its essence something which man cannot master by himself’.
118. Feenberg (2010b: 10) in ‘Ten Paradoxes of Technology’, but there are few treatments of the
way paradox emerges in the information society. See also Feenberg (2000, 1992).
119. DiMaggio et al. (2001) suggest the integration of sociological and political economy and a
similar suggestion was made by Mansell (2004).
120. Castells (2009: 431–2) in Communication Power.
121. See Silverstone (2002) in ‘Complicity and Collusion’.
206
NOTES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Chapter 4
1. See Goergen et al.’s (2010) work supported by the UK Economic and Social Research
Council, the former Department for Trade and Industry, and the Advanced Institute of
Management Research. See also Antonelli (2011), Delorme (2010), Frenken (2006), and
Rosser (2009).
2. Unﬁnished also is debate about the role of agency and the determinants of techno-social
pathways, diversity, and agency, see Geels and Schot (2007). Geels’s (2002) work on
technological transitions employs a multi-level perspective to focus on these processes
drawing from economics, sociology, and cultural theory. Although it addresses complexity,
it does not tackle the genesis of paradox in hierarchical and heterarchical systems.
3. See Schiller’s (1996) Theorizing Communication.
4. See Barry and Slater’s (2005) introduction to The Technological Economy.
5. Discursive practices constitute subjective meaning for human beings and discursive mean-
ings, following Foucault, depend on historically developed rules that render statements
discursively meaningful or not. Jessop (2005) takes this approach in ‘Cultural Political
Economy’.
6. See Star and Griesemer (1989) for the more general sociological approach to boundary
objects which refer to abstract or concrete objects that are ascribed meaning by different
communities of actors, see also Bowker and Star (1999).
7. Jaeger and Burnett (2010: 31) refer to these as ‘a boundary object, lifeworld information
exists both apart from individual small worlds and also within individual worlds, where it is
instantiated and experienced according to the constraints, expectations, and norms of the
localized worlds themselves’.
8. Ku¨ng et al.’s (2008) The Internet and the Mass Media refers to these concepts without
discussing the implications of their emergent systems framework.
9. See Mattelart and Mattelart (1998).
10. The term Cybernetics was selected by Weiner from the Greek word ˚ıæÅ (kybernetes)
meaning ‘steersman’ or ‘governor’ (Rogers, 1994/1997: 396; Shannon, 1948; Shannon and
Weaver, 1949).
11. The ﬁrst conference was called ‘Feedback Mechanisms and Circular Causal Systems in
Biological and Social Systems’; the conferences were seen as experiments in multidisciplin-
ary science. Some of the participants and their themes are documented at http://www.asc-
cybernetics.org/foundations/history/MacySummary.htm accessed 28/07/2011.
12. Beer (1959/1964: 7) in Cybernetics and Management.
13. Beer (1966: 208) in Decision and Control.
14. See Ashby (1956: v), Mirowski (2002), and Steier (2005).
15. This is not to suggest that modern physics, for example, particle physics is any less
reductionist. Research on biological systems as discussed by Rosen (1991) distinguishes
between ‘relational biology’ (interacting with live organisms) and reductionist analysis of
organisms (killing an organism to discover what its components are made of).
16. Beer (1959/1964: 458).
17. Wiener (1948/1961: 24).
18. Wiener (1948/1961: 159).
19. Wiener (1950: 162).
NOTES
207

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
20. See Heylighen and Joslyn’s (2001) Cybernetics and Second-Order Cybernetics.
21. See von Bertalanffy’s (1950, 1956, 1968) work on General System Theory.
22. See Maturana and Varela’s (1987) Tree of Knowledge.
23. Maturana (1997: np) on ‘metadesign’.
24. These ideas were developed in the Cybersyn project organized partly by Beer which aimed
to establish a real-time computer-controlled and planned economy in Chile in the early
1970s, before the military coup (Medina, 2005), see also Beer (1994).
25. Mingers (1995: 110) in Self-producing Systems.
26. Parsons (1951/1991: 3) in The Social System.
27. See Luhmann’s (1995) Social Systems.
28. Vanderstraeten (2000: 587) following Luhmann.
29. See Luhmann (1995), Mingers (1995), and Zeleny and Hufford (1992) for criticisms of this
argument.
30. Luhmann (1992: 252) on autopoiesis.
31. Luhmann (1996/2000: 92) in The Reality of the Mass Media.
32. Luhmann (1996/2000: 120–1).
33. See Luhmann (1985, 1992) A Sociological Theory of Law and on autopoiesis.
34. Network analysis built on work by members of the International Network for Social Network
Analysis (INSNA) founded in 1977, see http://www.insna.org/ accessed 28/07/2011.
35. See Moreno’s (1934) and Simmel’s (1946) Who Shall Survive? and The Web of Group-
Afﬁliations, respectively.
36. Rogers (1987: 291) in ‘progress, problems and prospects for network research’.
37. Rogers (1987: 285).
38. Rogers (1994/1997: 386, 405) in A History of Communication Study.
39. Rogers (1994/1997: 406).
40. Wellman (1983: 156) in ‘network analysis’.
41. See Monge and Contractor’s (2003) Theories of Communication Networks.
42. Byrne (1998: 71) in Complexity Theory and the Social Sciences. See also Marion’s (1999) The
Edge of Organization.
43. Allen and Torrens (2005: 583, emphasis added) in ‘knowledge and complexity’.
44. Vanderstraeten (2000: 581) in ‘autopoiesis and socialization’ draws on Walter Buckley’s
(1967, 1968) work on society as a complex adaptive system which emphasizes feedback
loops.
45. Metcalfe and Foster (2004: xi) in Evolution and Economic Complexity.
46. Dopfer and Potts (2004: 5) on ‘evolutionary foundations of economics’.
47. Arthur (2009: 168, emphasis added) in The Nature of Technology. Arthur argues that it was
not until the publication of his article on ‘positive feedbacks in the economy’ in 1990 that
this approach started to be widely accepted as a way of understanding the evolution of
technological systems.
48. Arthur (2005: 28) on ‘complexity and the economy’.
49. Hodgson (2006) provides an analysis of the way evolution has been treated in the social
sciences and especially in economics.
208
NOTES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
50. See Wilden’s (1972/2001) System and Structure and Eicher-Catt and Catt’s (2010)
Communicology.
51. Bateson (1972: 282–3, emphasis added) in Steps to an Ecology of Mind.
52. See Mirowski’s (2002) Machine Dreams.
53. Ruesch and Bateson (1951: 64) in Communication, The Social Matrix of Psychiatry. Ramage
and Shipp (2009) summarize contributions to this debate. Mathur (2003: 64) notes that
they retained this argument in the preface to the 1968 edition of the book, stating that a
uniﬁed theory ‘could adequately represent the person, the group and society all within one
system’.
54. Korzybski (1933/1994: author’s preface to 1948 edition) in Science and Sanity.
55. See Bateson (1972: 480) in Steps to an Ecology of Mind.
56. McWhinney (2005: 22) on Bateson’s typology of learning. Time-binding comes from
Korzybski (1933/1994) and resonates with the later work of both Innis and McLuhan.
57. See Bateson’s (1979) Mind and Nature.
58. Bateson (1979: 37). Or as Klaus Krippendorf (1984: 25) says, ‘knowledge arises in the
alternating sequence of distinction and relation’.
59. Watzlawick et al. (1967: 141) in Pragmatics of Human Communication.
60. See Bateson (1951b) in ‘Information and Codiﬁcation’.
61. Wilden and Hammer (1987: 1). Bateson drew on Peirce’s (1931/1935) concept of abduction.
See Charlton’s (2008) Understanding Gregory Bateson.
62. See Veblen (1899/2008) in The Theory of the Leisure Class.
63. Bateson (1972: 433).
64. Bateson (1979: 354).
65. ‘All that is not information, not redundancy, not form and not restraints—is noise, the only
possible source of new patterns’ (Bateson, 1972: 416). See also Harries-Jones (2004).
66. Developed by Alfred Whitehead and Bertrand Russell (1910). This theory rules out self-
reference to prevent the emergence of antinomies and paradoxes in logic. It states that no
class can contain itself as a member. For example, the statement that propositions can be
either true or false is a proposition and should be either true or false. But because it can only
be true it is seen as a proposition about propositions, and is not to be confused with the
propositions to which it refers, see http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/ASC/THEORY_TYPES.html,
accessed 28/07/2011.
67. See Mitchell (1991). The theory seeks to rule out paradox and ﬁnds that notions informed
by self-reference are meaningless. ‘A language describes an object language and in turn is
described by a metalanguage, which is in turn described by a metametalanguage and so
forth ad inﬁnitum’ (Whitehead and Russell, 1910: 72).
68. See Bateson (1951b, 1972). Heterarchy is discussed by McCulloch (1945) in the context of
biology and neural networks and is metaphorically implied in the notion of rhizome
developed by Deleuze and Guattari (1980/1987).
69. Bateson (1951b: 209).
70. Watzlawick et al. (1967: 54).
71. See Fein (1992) for the application of these ideas at the institutional level of analysis.
72. Watzlawick et al. (1967: 49).
73. See Bateson (1972).
NOTES
209

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
74. Bateson (2005: 15).
75. See Holmes (1998).
76. See Watzlawick et al. (1967: 212, 215, emphasis added).
77. Watzlawick et al. (1967: 66–7). ‘Human beings communicate both digitally and analogi-
cally. Digital language has a highly complex and powerful logical syntax but lacks adequate
semantics in the ﬁeld of relationship, while analogic language possesses the semantics but
has no adequate syntax for the unambiguous deﬁnition of the nature of relationships’.
78. Bateson (1972: 61–71).
79. Bateson (1951a: 212) on ‘conventions and communication’.
80. Bateson (1951b: 210).
81. See Argyris and Schon (1996), Cohen (2001), and Lewis (2000) on theories of organiza-
tional change, denial, and paradox resolution.
82. Watzlawick et al. (1967: 235).
83. Harries-Jones (2004: 150).
84. See Arnett (1986) for a discussion of Buber’s concept of dialogue.
85. Wilden (1972/2001: 174, emphasis added) in System and Structure. This view is different
from that espoused by Luhmann (1992: 251–2): ‘Self-reference (or reﬂexiveness) is not a
property peculiar to thought or consciousness but instead a general principle of system
formation with special consequences for the structure of complexity and evolution . . . One
must not begin with the concept of action but with the concept of communication’.
86. See Holmes (1998: 106) on the therapeutic process.
87. Krippendorff (1984: 34) on ‘an epistemological foundation for communication’.
88. Wilden (1972/2001: xlviii) in System and Structure.
89. Krippendorff (1989: 186) who also warned that this tradition was responsible for holding
back productive lines of research in the ﬁeld of human cognition.
90. Krippendorff (1989: 180, emphasis in original) on ‘the power of communication’.
91. Watzlawick et al. (1967: 96–7).
92. See Krippendorff (1995) in ‘Undoing Power’.
93. See Bateson (1972, 1979).
94. Foucault (1978: 92, emphasis added) in The History of Sexuality.
95. Rapport (1999: 194) in context as an act of personal externalization.
96. See Krippendorff (1995).
97. Wilden (1972/2001: xix–xx).
98. Bateson (1979: 15).
99. See Bateson (1972).
100. Bateson (1951a: 212) in ‘conventions and communication’.
101. Grant (2003: 100) on ‘destabilizing social communication theory’.
102. Rieber and Green (1989: 88, emphasis added) in The Individual, Communication and
Society. This notion is central in therapeutic intervention and may be scaled up to the
institutional level where people make their choices within the constraints of the rules and
norms of institutions, see Bailey and Burgoon (1992), Chenail and Morris (1995), Conville
and Rogers (1998), and Watts (1961) on therapeutic discourses and relational transitions.
103. Functowicz and Ravetz (1994: 570) on criticism of the concept of emergent complex systems.
210
NOTES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
104. The text of Yeats’s (1926/1989: 221) poem ‘Among School Children’ reads, ‘O chestnut
tree, great rooted blossomer, Are you the leaf, the blossom or the bole? O body swayed to
music, O brightening glance, How can we know the dancer from the dance?’
105. See Carey’s (1989/1992) ‘A Cultural Approach to Communication’. Giddens (1991: 20)
insists that ‘the susceptibility of most aspects of social activity, and material relations with
nature, to chronic revision in the light of new information or knowledge’ is the key to
reﬂexivity, a quality that system analysis does not address.
106. Urry (2004: 110) on social physics, citing complexity research by Byrne (1998), Capra
(2002), Hayles (1991), Kelly (1995), Krugman (1996), Mingers (1995), Prigogine (1997),
Rihani (2002), Rycroft and Kash (1999), White (1992), and Zohar and Marshall (1994), as
examples.
107. Poteete et al. (2010: 11) in Working Together.
108. See Cohen (1980) and Wall (2001) in Folk Devils and Moral Panics and crime and the
Internet, respectively.
109. See, for example, Livingstone (1996) on the problems of effects studies.
110. Kraut et al. (1998: 1029) in ‘Internet Paradox’.
111. See Kraut et al.’s (2002) ‘Internet Paradox Revisited’.
112. See Castells (2001) in The Internet Galaxy and Castells (2009: 3) in Communication Power.
He says, ‘why, how, and by whom power relationships are constructed and exercised
through the management of communication processes, and how these power relationships
can be altered by social actors aiming for social change by inﬂuencing the public mind’, is
an appropriate goal for research.
113. See Sinclair (2010) reporting a study of more than 1,000 young people conducted by the
University of Leeds Institute of Psychological Sciences, exploring the relation between
excessive Internet use and mental health.
114. See Morrison and Gore (2010) on excessive Internet use and depression.
115. Aboujaoude’s (2011) Virtually You provides a reasonably even-handed treatment of the
evidence for and against ‘Internet Addiction’ and considers some of the wider implications
of difﬁculties in discerning differences between the ‘real’ and the ‘virtual’. Guimo´n and Zac
de Filc (2001) assess the signiﬁcance of the virtual for psychotherapeutic theory and
intervention. Orgad (2005) examines the way the Internet facilitates storytelling.
116. See Mattelart’s (1996/2000) Networking the World.
117. Billig et al. (1990: 15, 16) in Ideological Dilemmas.
118. Taylor (2002a: 106) in ‘modern social imaginaries’.
119. Eliot (1936: 179) in ‘Choruses from the Rock’.
120. See Althusser (1971) in ‘ideology and ideological state apparatuses’.
121. Gramsci (1971: 328) in Selections From the Prison Notebooks.
122. Lukes (1974/2005: 38) on ‘Power: a radical view’.
123. Lukes (1974/2005: 38) on ‘Power: a radical view’.
124. Foucault (1978: 143), and see Rose and Miller (1992).
125. Braman (2006: 26) in Change of State.
126. See Castells’s (2009) Communication Power.
127. Mowles (2011: 257) in Rethinking Management.
NOTES
211

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
128. Mowles (2011) sets this out drawing on work in the management ﬁeld and especially
Stacey et al. (2000).
129. A complex adaptive system, ‘as modelled by a computer program, consists of a large
number of interacting entities called agents which operate according to a set of rules
guiding their interactions with other agents . . . local variations in responses between agents
can escalate into large population-wide changes which destroy some forms and create
others’ (Stacey et al., 2000: 60–1).
130. These communities may be designated as policy communities, actor networks, or episte-
mic communities, for example, Atkinson and Coleman (1992), Haas (1992), and Kenis
and Schneider (1991).
131. This is the public sphere depicted in Habermas’s (1997) approach, albeit with various
caveats with respect to the privileges of entry into this sphere. Epistemic communities in
the policy sphere are seen as ‘a network of professionals with recognized expertise and
competence in a particular domain and an authoritative claim to policy-relevant knowl-
edge within that domain or issue-area’ (Haas, 1992: 3).
132. Calhoun (1992: 2), and see Guttman (2010) and Habermas (1962/1989) on the public
sphere and the deliberative process.
133. See Cammaerts (2008b), Cammaerts and Van Audenhove (2005), and Coleman (2005) for
discussions of the limitations of online deliberation.
134. See Calhoun’s (1992) and Fraser’s (2010) Habermas and the Public Sphere and Scales of
Justice, respectively.
135. Fraser (2010: 2), see Dean (2003), Fraser (1990), Keane (1995), and Thompson (1993) for
criticisms of Habermas’s notion of the public sphere.
136. Fraser’s (2010: 3) use of misframing seems similar to my use of mispunctuation, a term
that seems to resonate more with languages employed outside the humanities and the
social sciences.
137. See Laclau and Mouffe’s (1985) Hegemony and Socialist Strategy and Mouffe’s (1999)
Deliberative Democracy or Agonistic Pluralism? There are other conceptions of the ‘public’
and public discourse and publicity, following, for example, Arendt and developing the
notion of theatricality as well as the legitimacy of forums for dialogue in the democratic
sphere (Barnett, 2003), and the role of rationality, objectivity, and subjectivity as well as
personal or private boundaries of decision-making (Ferree et al., 2002; Warner, 2002), but
these are not developed here.
138. It is also consistent with Castells’s (2009: 3) view that ‘the most fundamental form of
power lies in the ability to shape the human mind. . . . coercion alone cannot stabilize
domination’ and Silverstone’s (1999: 143) observation that communication (and media)
policy ‘is all about power’.
139. Shirky (2010: 27, 120) in Cognitive Surplus. This seems to echo Edward Bellamy’s (1887/
1960) Looking Backward (from the year 2000), written in 1887 envisaging a world that had
emerged.
140. Bateson and Bateson (1987: 178, emphasis added).
141. Wilden and Hammer’s (1987: 309) The Rules are No Game.
142. Mirowski (2002: 19) in Machine Dreams.
143. Arthur (2009: 214, emphasis added).
144. Fuchs (2009: 71, emphasis added) on the political economy of the Internet.
212
NOTES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Chapter 5
1. See Silverstone’s Television and Everyday Life (1994), Why Study the Media? (1999), Media
and Morality (2007), and Silverstone and Hirsch (1992).
2. McCaffery (2000: np emphasis added), interviewing William Gibson, author of Neuromancer
(1984).
3. Napoli (2011) reviews developments in the media audience ratings industry using compu-
terized techniques.
4. Strickland (2011: np) on ‘How Web 3.0 Will Work’.
5. The CPU or Central Processing Unit of a computer, mobile handset, etc., such as the Intel
Pentium or AMD Athlon semiconductor chip based on integrated circuitry, is the digital
device that determines how fast a computer can process information. The popular inter-
pretation of Moore’s Law describes the number of transistor components that can be placed
on an integrated circuit, a number that has been doubling every two years since the
integrated circuit was invented in 1958. What Moore (1965: np) actually said was that
‘the complexity for minimum component costs has increased at a rate of roughly a factor of
two per year’.
6. Bush (1945: various pages) in ‘As We May Think’.
7. See Rheingold’s (1993/2000) The Virtual Community.
8. Vinge (1993: 2) in ‘Technological Singularity’.
9. As in the story Blood Music (Bear, 1985).
10. Kurzweil (2006: 8) in The Singularity is Near.
11. Rheingold (1993/2000: 353).
12. von Goethe’s (1797) ‘The Sorcerer’s Apprentice’.
13. Rheingold (1993/2000: 403).
14. Castells (2001: 6, emphasis added) in The Internet Galaxy.
15. See, for example, de Kerckhove (2010), The Augmented Mind.
16. See Turkle’s (1984/2005: 287) The Second Self.
17. See Bakardjieva’s (2010) and Baym’s (2010b) discussion of research on the ‘Internet in
Everyday Life’ and on ‘Social Networks 2.0’, respectively.
18. There are exceptions to these weaknesses in research, with work on transnational
mediations and on the challenges of cross-cultural comparative research, see, for
example, Georgiou (2006), Livingstone (2003), and Madianou and Miller (2011).
19. Many studies are based on self-reports of social media use by university students, although
some focus on large enterprises and community use in relation to social capital and self-
esteem, see Bumgarner (2007), DiMicco et al. (2008), Ellison et al. (2007), Lampe et al.
(2008), Raacke and Bonds-Raacke (2008), Skeels and Grudin (2009), and Subrahmanyam
et al. (2008).
20. See Hartmann (2004), Hine (2000), Jones (1999), and Markham and Baym (2009) for
discussions of methodological challenges for Internet researchers.
21. Veblen (1899/2008: 70) in The Theory of the Leisure Class.
22. Eco (1994: 141) in ‘How not to use the mobile phone’.
23. See Wessels’s (2010: 180) Understanding the Internet.
NOTES
213

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
24. Diffusion theories build on Everett Roger’s (1962, 1995) Diffusion of Innovations, whose
central concern was to explain the rate and direction of adoption of new technologies.
25. A market analyst’s study based on fourteen countries in 2010. See http://wallblog.co.uk/
2010/05/20/average-number-of-social-networking-friends-195/, accessed 28/07/2011 and
Golbeck (2007) and Oltmann (2010).
26. See Boyd and Ellison (2008) for research on social network sites.
27. More than seven out of ten people (71%) in the United Kingdom have access to a
broadband connection at home (Ofcom, 2010: 1) and more than 77 per cent of the
American population has access to the Internet, http://www.internetworldstats.com/am/
us.htm, accessed 28/07/2011. For statistics on usage levels, see Livingstone et al. (2011)
showing that 93 per cent of 9- to 16-year olds in Europe go online at least once a week; on
mobiles, see Hoﬂich and Hartmann (2006); and Haddon (2004, 2011) on the role of ICTs in
everyday life and on digital divides.
28. The term ‘prosumer’ was coined by Alvin Tofﬂer (1980) in The Third Wave, and developed
further in Tofﬂer and Tofﬂer (2006); Bruns (2010) writes about ‘produsage’; and Benkler
(2004) and Benkler and Nissenbaum (2006) write on ‘commons based peer-production’.
These terms imply the prominence and/or co-equal status of producers and users of goods.
von Hippel (2005a, 2005b) focuses on user-led innovations in which the user is very
prominent.
29. See Leadbeater’s (2007) and Tapscott and Williams’s (2007) We-Think: Mass Innovation,
Not Mass Production and Wikinomics, respectively, and see Van Dijck and Nieborg (2009)
for a critical assessment of their arguments.
30. Manovich (2009: 321) in ‘the practice of everyday (media) life’.
31. Manovich compares the conventions of the Internet era with those of the earlier mass media
era drawing analogies with the critical theory perspective on the workings of the ideological
apparatus, see Adorno and Horkheimer’s (1944/1972) The Culture Industry.
32. Wittgenstein (1951: 149–51) in Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus.
33. Waskul (2005: 55) on liminality and computer mediated communication.
34. See Feenberg (1991, 2010a) on affordances of technology, an idea that is applied in
empirical research on social online communities (Wellman et al., 2003).
35. See Lesage (2009) on the careers of artists employing advanced networks.
36. Manovich (2009: 320) reports the lower ﬁgures based on 2007 data. Pew reports the higher
ﬁgure for adults and for teenagers (Lenhart and Madden, 2005). See Burke et al. (2009),
Daugherty et al. (2008), Huberman et al. (2009), and Manovich (2009) on contributions,
motivations, attention and productivity, and conventions in online practices.
37. See Van Der Graaf (2009) for analysis of skill levels of contributors in Second Life.
38. See Nazir et al. (2008) on ‘contributions to Facebook’.
39. See Sunstein’s (2009) Going to Extremes and Republic.com 2.0 (2001).
40. The term ‘crowdsourcing’ is attributed to Jeff Howe, writing in Wired magazine in 2006
(Letts, nd). See Organisciak (2010) for a review of motivations for crowdsourcing. The term
is also used to refer to data mining techniques without user volition.
41. These websites are www.giffgaff.com and http://mvp.support.microsoft.com/, both accessed
21/07/2011.
42. See Letts (nd: np) for a corporate promotional website.
214
NOTES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
43. One study found a median wage of USD 1.38/hour (Horton and Chilton, 2010). See also
McKercher and Mosco (2008) and Mosco (2008) on virtual labour.
44. The Extraordinaries, for example, has attracted more than 100,000 volunteers to work on
projects in the developing world, see http://www.telegraph.co.uk/science/roger-highﬁeld/
8153252/Crowdsourcing-and-open-source-knowledge-is-a-gift.html, accessed 3/12/2010.
See also Mullins (2010), Scott and Street (2001), and Van de Donk et al. (2004) on
crowdsourcing aid in crisis situations, e-protests, and cyberprotests.
45. The perception of diversity is fostered by claims about the long tail phenomenon, a term
popularized by Anderson (2006, 2009). The phenomenon of a ‘long tail’ refers to the efforts
of retailers to attract users to large numbers of unique items in small quantities. Whether or
not proﬁts are generated depends on the expansibility (sharing of ﬁxed costs) and replica-
bility (adding units at constant costs) of the value-generating mechanism that is employed.
If both apply, the companies depending on diversity in this way have a scalable model that is
likely to be proﬁtable (because unit costs decline), but this is a big ‘if’.
46. See Rabby and Walther (2003) and Walther (2007) on relationship management and self-
presentation.
47. See Danet and Herring (2003, 2007) on linguistics online.
48. See research by Baron (2008), Derks et al. (2008), Hargittai (2008), Hogan (2009), Holt
(2004), Rettie (2009), Walther et al. (2008, 2009).
49. The European Commission’s position on privacy is based on Article 8 of the Charter of
Fundamental Rights of the European Union which states that everyone has the right to the
protection of his or her own personal data (European Commission, 1995, 2000a), but the
issue here is the capacity for enforcement.
50. See Debatin et al. (2009) on online privacy.
51. See Banks and Wu (2010) and Light and McGrath (2010), respectively, for behavioural
approaches to online networking and privacy and on ethical issues raised by Facebook use.
52. For research on the implications for privacy, see Agre and Rotenberg (1997), Bennett and
Raab (2003), and Lyon (2007, 2009).
53. See Cammaerts (2008a), Chadwick (2006), Fenton (2007), Keren (2006), Mossberger et al.
(2008), and Toulouse and Luke (1998) for work on participatory potentials of the Internet.
54. For example, after the election of President Obama, an ofﬁcial report announced that ‘for
too long, the American people have experienced a culture of secrecy in Washington’, calling
for an emphasis on transparency, participation, and collaboration using online media
platforms (The White House, 2009: 1).
55. See Makau (2011) on Internet ethics.
56. For example, Facebook can be transformed into a Denial-of-Service attack platform
(Athanasopoulos et al., 2008) and Twitter accounts can be hacked, see Herwig (2009) and
Johnson (2010).
57. See Morozov (2009, 2011) on the Twitter ‘revolution’ and The Net Delusion and Downing et
al.’s (2001) Radical Media which argues that alternative media can be associated with both
democratic and anti-democratic movements.
58. See Braman’s (2006) ‘tactical memory’ advocating technological discretion. De Landa’s
(1991) War in the Age of Intelligent Machines developed the idea of the panspectron and
Hookway et al.’s (1999) Pandemonium examines techniques of control in a digital culture.
The panspectron is a situation in which it is impossible to hide physically due to sensors and
other tracking devices. This can be contrasted with the panopticon where the watched know
NOTES
215

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
that the watcher is present (Bentham, 1787/1995). See also Gandy Jr.’s (2009) Coming to
Terms with Chance.
59. Shirky (2010: 211, emphasis added) in Cognitive Surplus.
60. See Gladwell and Shirky (2011) on social media and protest movements.
61. Turkle (2011: np e-book edition) in Alone Together, and Life on the Screen (1995).
62. See Dutton and Shepherd’s (2005) analysis of conﬁdence and risk on the Internet.
63. See Brautigan’s (1970) short story ‘The Library’.
64. Mateos-Garcia and Steinmueller (2008b) note that as in ‘real world’ museums, decisions are
made by curators about what to represent, who to represent, and how identities and
collective memories will be depicted, distancing these decisions from the individual con-
tributor. In Brautigan’s story, the author chooses where to display a work in the library, but
still no-one ﬁnds it or reads it. Raymond (1999) differentiates between OSS development
(or open content production) using a bazaar model in contrast to building conventional
software following a master plan, as for building a cathedral, as earlier proposed by Brooks
(1982).
65. See Brake (2009) on the imaginary audiences of bloggers.
66. Brautigan (1970: 20).
67. Rheingold (1993/2000: 57).
68. Licklider and Taylor (1968: 38) on ‘the computer as a communication device’ and using the
term ‘mediate’.
69. See O’Hara and Shadbolt (2005) and Sakata et al. (1997) on knowledge technologies and
the Semantic Web, respectively.
70. See the Web science community, http://fuzzzy.com/, accessed 18/03/2011.
71. See Duman et al. (2009) on intelligent agents and visual information representation.
72. Park et al. (2008) and see http://www.cdc.gov/socialmedia/, accessed 15/03/2011.
73. To make sense of virtual worlds, Tim Berners-Lee et al. (2001: np) proposed the creation of
the Semantic Web, ‘to bring structure to the meaningful content of Web pages, creating an
environment where software agents roaming from page to page can readily carry out
sophisticated tasks for users’. A proﬂigately used term in this connection is ‘folksonomies’
which are less formal systems of classiﬁcation arising from collaborations that lead to the
tagging and classiﬁcation of digital content (Dotsika, 2009).
74. Pollock (2009: 1) on The Semantic Web for Dummies.
75. See Chen et al. (2009) and Kobilarov et al. (2009), and http://sig.biostr.washington.edu/
projects/fm/AboutFM.html and http://sweet.jpl.nasa.gov/, both accessed 28/04/2011.
76. Ramshurn and Jennings (2005: 167, emphasis in original) on trust and agent-based software
citing Dasgupta (1988) in ‘Trust as a Commodity’, in support of their deﬁnition.
77. Journalist and science ﬁction writer, Cory Doctorow, raises provocative issues, see blog at
http://craphound.com/, accessed 28/07/2011, and there are criticisms by those working in
the socio-technical studies ﬁeld, see Bath (2009).
78. See Lachica and Karabeg (2008) on metadata and tagging. Ontologies are used in the social
sciences and similarly involve assumptions about agency, causation, and choices, see, for
example, Geels (2010). The issue in the context of software agents is that of the relative
magnitude of dependence and the ability to challenge.
216
NOTES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
79. See van Eijk (2009) on search engines and information access. See also Van Couvering
(2010) and Vanberg (2011) for scholarly treatments of search engine industry structure,
potential biases, and dominance in the European market.
80. See Ciastellardi et al. (2011) on ontologies and folksonomies.
81. See Schmitz et al. (2009) on metadata and the importance of context.
82. See Benevenuto et al. (2009) and Thelwall (2008) on how user behaviours are characterized
and MySpace member proﬁles, respectively.
83. See Gandy Jr. (2009), Lyon (2006, 2007), and Pierson and Heyman (2011) for scholarly
treatments of surveillance issues, and Jowitt (2010), Judge (2010), and Reuters (2010) for
press coverage.
84. See Alani et al. (2003), Golbeck et al. (2003), O’Hara (2004), Piper et al. (2005), and
Richardson et al. (2003) on ontology network analysis, the dynamics of social networks,
changing conceptions of online trust, identities and authentication, and trust management
for the Semantic Web, respectively. See Bisogni et al. (2011) on private sector incentives to
invest in cybersecurity. For a discussion of differences between Europe and the United States
in the use of ﬁltering technologies, see Elser (2005).
85. A data structure stored on a user’s computer, which, if accepted, is available for query by the
organization supplying it and, in certain cases, others as well, see Pierson and Heyman
(2011).
86. See Fingar (2009) and Marinos and Briscoe (2009) on cloud computing. See also Willcocks
et al. (2011) in ‘Cloud and the Future of Business’.
87. See Dutton and Shepherd (2005) and this situation is not improving rapidly, see BBC News
(2010).
88. Get Safe Online (2010) is a collaboration between the UK government, banks, software and
telecommunication companies, payment and payment veriﬁcation services.
89. Gunkel (2010: 137) on ‘avatars and online social interaction’.
90. Zˇizˇek’s (2006: 221) The Parallax View.
91. See Couldry’s (2010) Why Voice Matters.
92. Veblen (1899/2008: 115, emphasis added) in The Theory of the Leisure Class.
93. See Ross (2011) ‘Is there an expertise of production?’ for a discussion of distinctions
between expert and layperson’s contributions to the production of new media technologies.
For a longer treatment, see Ross (2005).
Chapter 6
1. Manuel De Landa’s (2011) work in Philosophy and Simulation exempliﬁes attempts to
employ computerization to explain emergent properties of systems on different scales
including the social, integrating the works of scientists with that of Gilles Deleuze and
Fe´lix Guattari (1980/1987). He also develops the idea of self-organizing ‘meshworks’ as an
alternative to hierarchy, see De Landa’s (2000) 1,000 Years of Non-Linear History.
2. Wetware is variously deﬁned as referring to ‘minds’ or to people’s involvement in software
programming.
3. Taylor (2007: 171).
4. See Mansell and Steinmueller (2011 under review b) on the copyright paradox.
5. David (2004: 5) on ‘the end of copyright history?’
NOTES
217

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6. See Bainbridge (1994), Bettig and Schiller (1997), David (1993), HM Treasury (2006),
Liebowitz and Margolis (2005), Makeen (2000), Strategic Advisory Board for Intellectual
Property Policy (2010), and Watt (2000) for discussion of the aims of copyright from
economic, historical, cultural, and political economy perspectives.
7. The 1886 Berne Copyright Convention protects the expression of literary and artistic works
that meet standards of originality (WIPO, 1886 as amended). In Europe and the United
States, copyright on works created on or after 1 January 1978 endures for the life of the
author plus 70 years after the author’s death, which is longer than required by the Berne
Convention (European Commission, 2006; US, 2009).
8. David (2004: 5).
9. See Hadﬁeld (1992), Liebowitz (2006), and Liebowitz and Margolis (2005). Critical histori-
cal study demonstrates that the resolution of conﬂicts of interests between rights holders
and others has changed through time, with the legal balance shifting in favour of rights
holders, see Bannerman (2009, 2010), Bettig (1989), Drahos and Braithwaite (2003),
Haunss and Shadlen (2009), Litman (2001), and May (2007).
10. See European Commission (2011) and reports cited therein and legislation proposed at the
time of writing before the US Senate (US, 2011).
11. Samuelson (2007: 3) on ‘prospects for copyright reform in the United States’.
12. In the United Kingdom, for example, see Hargreaves (2011).
13. For example, in the EU in 2008 it was estimated that the creative industries contributed 6.9
per cent, or approximately €860 billion, to total Gross Domestic Product. If no new efforts
are made to curtail copyright infringement, cumulative revenue losses of some €240 billion
were estimated by 2015 (TERA Consultants, 2010). Although growing from a small base,
the value of the global market for digital music increased by 1,000 per cent between 2004
and 2010, representing some USD 4.6 billion (IFIP, 2009, 2010, 2011). See Cammaerts and
Meng (2011) for a discussion of problems in evaluating the industry data sources on
revenue losses.
14. ‘The making available of ﬁles from a user’s own computer for copying and transmission to
other users over the Internet, and the receipt of ﬁles made available this way. File sharing
thus involves uploading as well as downloading. File sharing takes place in networks of
users. Third parties have developed the ﬁle-sharing services and technologies to connect
users and enable them to carry out such transmission and copying activities in the third
party’s particular “peer-to-peer” (P2P) network’ (Dixon, 2009: 13–14).
15. See discussions of trends in social practices online and speciﬁcally in the music industry in
Baym (2010a) and Burnett (2010).
16. See, for example, Strategic Advisory Board for Intellectual Property Policy (2010).
17. See Jenkins’s (2006) and Lessig’s (2008) Convergence Culture and Remix, respectively.
18. See Burkart’s (2010) Music and Cyberliberties.
19. Lessig (2003: 763) on the creative commons and Lessig (2001, 2006) in The Future of Ideas
and Code: Version 2.0.
20. See http://creativecommons.org/, the website for this worldwide movement with afﬁliates
in more than seventy jurisdictions established in 2002 and with supporters such as Google,
and the Mozilla Foundation and Red Hat, both OSS organizations, accessed 28/07/2011.
Notwithstanding its success, there are critics (Elkin-Koren, 2006) and disagreements about
where the boundary between commercial and non-commercial use of works lies. By mid-
218
NOTES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2011, there were more than 500 million pieces of work covered by Creative Commons
licences.
21. See Benkler (2000, 2004, 2006), Benkler and Nissenbaum (2006), and Bettig and Schiller
(1997) on the case for shifting the ‘balance’ in copyright protection.
22. The Ofﬁce of Technology Assessment (OTA) report acknowledges that ‘decisions about
intellectual property law may be decisions about the distribution of wealth and social status’
(OTA, 1986: 11, 14, emphasis added).
23. Pew Internet Survey data show that in 2009, in the United States, nearly four out of ﬁve
(79%) teenagers owned an iPod or other MP3 player; three out of four adults reported
online purchasing of products such as books, music, toys, and clothing; half of teenagers
reported buying online (Lenhart et al., 2010). In the United Kingdom, the Oxford
Internet Survey shows that the practice of downloading (any) music has been growing
(54% of respondents reported downloading music in 2005; 59% in 2009) (Dutton et al.,
2009).
24. See Boyle (2008: 248) who says ‘in the middle of the most successful and exciting experi-
ment in non-proprietary, distributed creativity in the history of the species, our policy
makers can see only the threat from “piracy”’.
25. Industry associations such as RIAA, MPAA, and AACP are among those seeking to curtail
online copyright infringement. The IIPA publishes an annual ‘special 301’ list estimating
losses due to copyright infringement, and a ‘watch list’ of offending countries.
26. These include websites such as Baidu China, IsoHunt Canada, mp3ﬁesta Ukraine, RapidShare
Germany, RMX4U Luxemburg, and The Pirate Bay Sweden (RIAA, 2010).
27. Efforts to counter copyright infringement are subject to the Digital Millennium Copyright
Act (US, 1998, 2009).
28. In mid-2011, a voluntary agreement involving the ﬁve big US ISPs (AT&T, Cablevision,
Comcast, Time Warner Cable, and Verizon) was put in place whereby ISPs would send six
alerts to subscribers based on notiﬁcations received from content owners about potential
copyright infringements, but would not release subscriber names or terminate subscriber
accounts. Instead, ‘mitigation measures’ (temporary reductions in Internet speed, redirec-
tion to an educational landing page, or other measures determined by ISPs) will be used—
the process of appeal was unclear at the time of writing, see Andersen (2011), Electronic
Frontier Foundation (2011), and Lasar (2011).
29. See Mansell and Steinmueller’s (2010) submission to the Judicial Review.
30. In France, initial drafts of the HADOPI legislation (France, 2009) made punishment an
administrative decision. The ﬁnal legislation made disconnection from the Internet a
matter for the prosecutor attached to the high court, but left it to those accused to bear
the costs of appealing decisions. The procedure is handled mainly electronically and the
possibility of false positive identiﬁcations is deemed to be relatively high.
31. Fleming (2010: emphasis added).
32. The Gowers Report on Intellectual Property in the United Kingdom stated that ‘copyright
infringement through unauthorized copying and distribution of music and video across the
Internet is likened to stealing by some, and to sharing by others’ (HM Treasury, 2006:
para 1.9). The Digital Britain report indicated the then Labour Government’s alignment
with the creative industry arguments (BIS and DCMS, 2009; UK, 2010). The Secretary of
State was required to authorize actions taken by ISPs against individuals, in addition to
sending warning letters to those suspected of infringing ﬁle-sharing.
NOTES
219

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
33. High Court of Justice (2011). See also Mansell and Steinmueller (2011 under review a) for a
discussion of this case.
34. High Court of Justice (2011: para 249, emphasis added).
35. The European Data Protection Supervisor suggested that disclosure of the identity of
individual Internet users to the creative industries should be limited to those infringing
on a commercial scale (Hustinx, 2010: para 43).
36. See Cammaerts (2011) on regulatory responses to ﬁle-sharing.
37. The European Parliament’s draft Bono Report read ‘criminalising consumers so as to
combat digital piracy is not the right solution’ (European Parliament, 2007: para 9). This
was revised to read ‘criminalising consumers who are not seeking to make a proﬁt is not the
right solution to combat digital piracy’ (European Parliament, 2008: para 17).
38. See Breindl and Houghton (2010) for a discussion of ‘techno-political activism’.
39. An ‘Internet Freedom’ provision was incorporated in the Telecom Reform Package as Annex
1, Article 1(3)a which makes reference to the fundamental rights and freedoms of natural
persons, as guaranteed by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
and Fundamental Freedoms and general principles of Community law (Europa RAPID
Press Releases, 2009). See Ryan and Heinl (2010) for a view supportive of the creative
industries’ position.
40. See Hampton and Gupta (2008) and Lindner et al. (2004) on wireless use in public places
and business models for WiFi, respectively.
41. In France, prior to the controversial introduction of HADOPI, a study by Dejean et al.
(2010) found a decline in P2P infringing activity, but an increase in the use of other
technological means of accessing digital content following debate, but prior to charges
under the law. In mid-2011, the Commission charged with receiving infringing notiﬁca-
tions from rights holders was still considering whether to refer some ten people to the court,
a ﬁgure the rights holders were claiming was not sufﬁciently high (Pichevin, 2011). There
are ambiguous results on the impact of the legislation in Sweden (Lundstrom et al., 2010).
Other studies based mainly on college student respondents ﬁnd a wide range of factors
likely to inﬂuence attitudes or behavioural change in the face of a legal threat of sanctions
against infringing downloading, see Cox et al. (2010), David (2010), LaRose and Kim
(2007), Liebowitz (2006), Oberholzer-Gee and Strumpf (2010), and Plowman and Goode
(2009).
42. See Meyer and Van Audenhove (2010: 77, emphasis added) for an analysis of the graduated
response strategy in Europe.
43. See Dutton and Shepherd (2005). As cases against ISP subscribers gain media attention they
receive publicity, information is distributed across ﬁle-sharing networks, attracting the
attention of those who might otherwise not have known that possibilities for infringing
behaviour are available to them.
44. See Beebe (2008), Borgman (2007), Engle (2002), Hamelink (2002), and Klimkiewicz (2008),
and the Electronic Frontier Foundation, Creative Commons (and its worldwide afﬁliates),
Free Press and Public Knowledge in the United States, the Open Rights Group in the United
Kingdom, Science Commons in the United States, and the P2P Foundation and the
Open Knowledge Foundation in Europe, http://www.crisinfo.org/http://creativecommons.
org/, http://www.eff.org/, http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/, http://www.openrightsgroup.org/,
http://www.freepress.net/, http://www.publicknowledge.org/, http://okfn.org/, and http://
sciencecommons.org/about/, all accessed 05/02/2011.
220
NOTES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
45. See Lehdonvirta and Virtanen (2010) on game player interests in virtual goods.
46. See Heeks (2010: 11) for an analysis of gamers’ economic interests.
47. The initial offer of this service, iTunes Match, had a limit of 25,000 songs with iTunes
purchases not counting against this limit, see http://www.apple.com/icloud/features/,
accessed 24/07/2011.
48. See EBU (2010), Ernesto (2010), Quiring et al. (2008), and Regner et al. (2009). Spotify, for
example, offers a premium and basic subscription service that is advertiser-supported and a
‘free at the point of consumption’, of 20 hours of music listening per month. This
opportunity is not equivalent to downloading music from infringing sites: it is not replayed,
but simply stored on a music enthusiast’s computer, an example of overconsumption. The
United Kingdom Treasury is using this technology to release public data on public spend-
ing, see http://data.gov.uk/dataset/coins, accessed 3/05/2011. See also Dubosson-Torbay
et al. (nd) on new business models for music distribution.
49. Ofcom has a digital literacy programme, see http://www.imlrf.org/member/ofcom as does the
European Commission, at http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/tl/edutra/skills/index_en.
htm, part of the i2010 strategy aimed at inclusion and e-learning, accessed 1/07/2010.
50. Boyle (1996: 169) in Shamans, Software & Spleens on law and the information society.
See also Boyle (2008) The Public Domain on enclosing the commons.
51. See Pilieci (2011).
52. See European Commission (2001, 2004, 2011) for relevant directives.
53. It is open to signature by the negotiating countries until March 2013 (ACTA, 2010).
54. ACTA (2010: Sec. 5, Art. 2.18.4, emphasis added).
55. WIPO (2011: 7).
56. See WIPO (1998).
57. See WIPO (2009).
58. WIPO (2009: 45). TRIPS forms Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the
World Trade Organization (WTO, 1994). TRIPS is seen as offering ‘an opportunity to use
intellectual property protection to accelerate economic, social, and cultural development, as
well as to increase awareness of intellectual property as a key natural resource in developing
nations’ (WIPO, 1998: 9).
59. WIPO (1998: 9).
60. WIPO (1998: 12).
61. See UNESCO (2005a, 2009).
62. See Meyer (2000) for a discussion of changing ideas about digital platforms.
63. The European Commission’s Digital Agenda for Europe 2020 emphasizes the need for the
development of open and interoperable solutions to create open platforms for new pro-
ducts and services (European Commission, 2010b: 2.5.3), in part, by working with stake-
holders to develop a new generation Web-based applications and services. The case
considered here was started earlier in the framework of European Commission supported
enterprise systems projects. The European Commission adopted an Electronic Commerce
Directive in 2000 to encourage the take up of ICTs within the single European market
(European Commission, 2000b, 2010d).
64. This discussion is based on two European Commission-funded research projects: ‘Digital
Business Ecosystem’ (DBE) (2003–2006) approx. €10.5m and ‘Open Philosophies for
Associative Autopoietic Digital Ecosystems’ (OPAALS) (2007–2010) approx. €9m, which
NOTES
221

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
aimed to develop a digital platform for small- and medium-sized enterprises, and in the
latter case, for the research community. Dr Paolo Dini, Senior Research Fellow, London
School of Economics and Political Science, was Scientiﬁc Coordinator of the DBE and
Coordinator of the OPAALS projects, and Principal Investigator for LSE activities in both
projects. I was a participant in both projects, contributing in various ways to the social
science outputs of the projects. These projects were part of a large cluster of projects in areas
such as Enterprise Software, Enterprise Interoperability and Collaboration to develop
future Internet applications. See http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/activities/foi/
research/index_en.htm, accessed 28/07/2011 for lists of the projects. Many of the references
in this section are to deliverables for these projects. I am grateful to P. Dini for his
compilation of the reports which eased my access to them. All DBE and OPAALS projects
documentation was reviewed to develop the account given in this section.
65. Arthur (2009) acknowledges that it is necessary to bracket human activity to think in this way.
66. OPAALS (2010b) presentation on a new copyright model.
67. Nachira et al. (2007: xii) in Digital Business Ecosystems, a comprehensive statement on the
ambitions that underpinned both projects.
68. Berdou (2007: 96) provides a critical view of the digital ecosystems project ambitions.
69. This separation has been criticized in the innovation literature, see, for example, Rosenberg
(1982a) and von Hippel (2005b) on the logic of separating producers and users as
innovators to obtain results through learning. The IBM project partner proposed a classiﬁ-
cation of the small- and medium-sized ﬁrms into ‘drivers’, ‘discovers’, ‘implementers’, and
‘users’, a more sophisticated segmentation, but still one that ignores insights from the
innovation literature.
70. Nachira et al. (2007) provided an early deﬁnition while Nachira was serving as a project
ofﬁcer for this line of work in the European Commission. Moore (1997) is said to have
coined the term ‘business ecosystem’ to indicate that organizations exist in dynamic
interaction.
71. The technical challenge was to develop an open platform based on a decentralized Ecosys-
tem Oriented Architecture (EOA), proposed by Ferronato (2007: 112) which would not be
constrained by the limitations of the Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) which is man-
aged via a centralized governance authority. The system for the digital ecosystem needed
‘self-organizing capabilities’ so that it could operate automatically without human
intervention.
72. This involved an infrastructural and interaction model, interfaces, and Semantics of
Business Vocabulary and Business Rules (SBVR), providing a metamodel for speciﬁcation
of a business context. The aim was to develop an information system with process-like
behaviour without its processes being explicitly deﬁned, see OPAALS (2010a).
73. It was claimed that, compared to the research community, where it was an issue, the absence
of the decentralized data storage system was not an issue for those in small companies
because they had different data storage needs in their ‘ecosystem’.
74. See Dini (2007) on the scientiﬁc foundation for digital ecosystems.
75. Razavi Krause et al. (2010: 24) on the evolutionary and interaction framework.
76. See Darking (2007) on the role of governance.
77. Dini et al. (2010: 33). This form of computing is analogous to ‘the ability of the biological
cell to synthesize particular functional components such as enzymes in response to the
needs of on-going metabolic processes or to signal transduction pathways from outside
222
NOTES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
the cell. The signals to initiate the synthesis of such components are somehow encoded in
the metabolic processes themselves’.
78. See Desodt (2007) on demonstration of the OKS technical platform.
79. Brauer et al. (2007: 30) on principles, models, and processes for the OKS.
80. Shaikh and Berdou (2008: 8) reviewing open knowledge successes and failures.
81. See Brauer et al.’s (2010) report on improving the usability of the OKS.
82. See Bueso (2010), Lapteva (2010), and Nyka¨nen (2010) on complexities of linguistic
patterns in online environments, OKS visualization application and toolkit, and governance
and regulatory strategies for the OKS.
83. Eder et al. (2007: 2) on design of the software for digital ecosystems.
84. Brauer et al. (2007) on principles, models, and processes for the OKS.
85. Personal communication with P. Dini 06/08/2011.
86. See Malone et al. (2010) and OPAALS (2010c) for case studies of partner networks in OSS
value creation and on identity, trust, and accountability in the P2P network.
87. This is the Open Knowledge Society Association Internationale Sans But Lucratif (OKS
AISBL), a Belgian legal entity.
88. Razavi et al. (2007: 116) on architecture for the P2P network.
89. Dini et al. (2008: 8–9) and see Dini et al. (2009) and Munro et al. (2008) on a biological
and mathematical framework for interaction computing, biological design patterns of
autopoietic behaviour, and foundations of the theory of associative autopoietic digital
ecosystems.
90. See Brauer et al. (2010) and Lapteva (2010) on improving the usability of the OKS and on
the complexities of linguistic patterns in online environments.
91. See OPAALS (2010b), Razavi Malone et al. (2010: 45), and Val (2010) on the impact of new
intellectual property legislation on corporate behaviour, use of the P2P network with small-
and medium-sized enterprises in Aragon, and identity, trust, and accountability in the
transaction model.
92. Bueso et al. (2010: 48) on governance and sustainability, and see Botto (2010), Stanley
(2010), and Van Egeraat and Curran (2010) on the experience of a living laboratory in
Trentino, impact of changes in intellectual property legislation, and structures of knowledge
ﬂows in the Irish biotechnology industry. The issues included problems of the virtualization
of information resources, technological turbulence, extraterritoriality, jurisdictional difﬁ-
culties, and multiple information sources.
93. See Dini et al. (2011) in the ‘(Im)possibility of Interdisciplinarity’.
94. See Eder et al. (2007), Razavi Malone et al. (2010), and Razavi Moschoyiannis et al. (2010)
on design of the software for digital ecosystems, the infrastructural and interaction model,
and the integration of identity, trust, and accountability in the transaction model.
95. See Bueso (2010) on governance and sustainability.
96. See Briscoe et al. (2010) and Dini et al. (2010) on gene expression computing and opera-
tional closure of the ecosystem architecture.
97. Similar to an ‘exit and voice’ strategy as suggested by Hirschman (1970) in Exit, Voice and
Loyalty.
98. Braman (1994: 362) in the ‘autopoietic state’.
NOTES
223

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Chapter 7
1. See Mooney (2010).
2. Pfanner (2011) citing President Sarkozy’s speech at the Summit.
3. See OECD (2011a). This communique´ sets out policy principles: promoting and protecting
the global free ﬂow of information; promoting the open, distributed, and interconnected
nature of the Internet; promoting investment and competition in high-speed networks and
services; promoting and enabling the cross-border delivery of services; encouraging multi-
stakeholder cooperation in policy development processes; fostering voluntarily developed
codes of conduct; developing capacities to bring publicly available, reliable data into the
policy making process; ensuring transparent, fair process, and accountability; strengthening
consistency and effectiveness in privacy protection at a global level; maximizing individual
empowerment; and promoting creativity and innovation.
4. See OECD (2011b).
5. McQuail (2003: 91) and see O´ Siochru´ and Girard’s (2002) Media Accountability and Global
Media Governance. The term ‘network governance’ has been coined to describe interactions
among multiple public, semi-public, and private actors. It can be assumed that no single
actor has the power to control the others, such that governance is ‘self-regulating’, that it is
quasi-rational, or that it involves a struggle between conﬂicting interests and goals (So¨r-
enson and Torﬁng, 2008). The self-regulating view is inspired in part by the claim that
‘government is the historically constituted matrix within which are articulated all those
dreams, schemes, strategies and manoeuvres of authorities that seek to shape the beliefs and
conduct of others in desired directions by acting upon their will, their circumstances or
their environment’ (Rose and Miller, 1992: 175). The quasi-rational view is consistent with
a reform approach, see Lindblom (1990) and Melody (1971). A conﬂictual view is consis-
tent with persistent asymmetries of power, see Cammaerts (2005) and Carpentier (2011b)
although these are non-exclusive categories.
6. See Kooiman (1993) and Puppis (2010) for a general discussion of theories of governance.
7. See Mansell and Raboy’s (2011) ‘Introduction’ in The Handbook of Global Media and
Communication Policy.
8. Waite (1877: np), the US Chief Justice who applied the concept based on the British jurist,
Lord Chief Justice Hale’s contributions written in 1676, but not published until 1787 in
Hale (1787), see Hamilton (1930) for a discussion of the ruling.
9. See US Telecommunications Act 1996. The Communications Act was passed in 1934.
10. Hamilton (1930: 1104) in ‘Affectation with Public Interest’.
11. In the United Kingdom, the regulator, Ofcom, is charged with furthering the interests of
citizens and consumers in the ‘public interest’. See UK Communications Act 2003. The
British Broadcasting Corporation is regulated by a Trust, which replaced the Board of
Governors in 2007, see http://www.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/index.shtml, accessed 28/07/2011.
12. Hamilton (1930: 1109).
13. See Melody (1997) in Telecom Reform. Renda (2010) examines the history of the ‘essential
facility doctrine’ in Europe where it was used to encourage ‘open network provision’, that is,
access by competing operators to each other’s networks. In the Internet era it is unclear
which, if any, facilities should be deemed essential. The idea is traced to the earliest days of
the postal service and telegraphy by Magder (2011).
224
NOTES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
14. For example, the UK Enterprise Act 2002, s.58 speciﬁes a public interest in the press and
broadcasting with respect to plurality and high quality. The UK Communications Act 2003
sets out requirements for public service broadcasting such as programming quotas, news
and current affairs programming and production, and the role of the regulator Ofcom. The
BBC’s remit and purposes are provided for by its Charter and Agreement (DCMS, 2006).
See also Feintuck and Varney (2006) on Media Regulation, Public Interest and the Law. In the
United States, the media are regulated by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
and the Telecommunications Act 1996. Websites providing information on the history of
public interest decisions include www.benton.org and www.freepress.net, both accessed
28/07/2011.
15. See Donders and Pauwels (2010) and Tambini (2004) on the implications of new media for
broadcast regulation and public service broadcasting.
16. The Internet can be deﬁned as ‘the global data communication capability realized by the
interconnection of public and private telecommunication networks using Internet Protocol
(IP), Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), and other protocols required to implement IP
inter-networking on a global scale, such as DNS [domain name system] and packet routing
protocols’ (Mathiason, 2009: 11) citing Mueller et al. (2007). See also FCC (2005) for a
policy statement.
17. See Chapter 1 for a discussion of the good society and see O’Hara (2004) on standards for
policy with respect to ICTs and networks, and general standards for policy choice in
Ackerman (1980), Rawls (1972), and Sen (2009), each of which differs in the way decisions
are to be reached about the standard that should apply.
18. See Albagli and Maciel’s (2010: 18) Information, Power and Politics and the United Nations
Development Programme’s (1990) warning about the folly of overemphasizing technology
while neglecting people and their well-being.
19. de Sola Pool (1990: 101) commented that international satellite networks were ‘often
considered a mixed blessing by rulers’ in Technologies Without Boundaries.
20. See Sparks’s (2007) Globalization, Development and the Mass Media for an historical
account.
21. See Arthur (2011). This is one example of the way states exercise power over the communi-
cation system. For other examples, see Gagliardone (2010), Ho et al. (2002), Ibrahim
(2006), and Kalathil and Boas (2003).
22. Escobar (1995: 20) in Encountering Development.
23. See Johnson and Post (1998) for a widely cited early example of this position and Werbach
(1997: 84) for an early paper published by the FCC Ofﬁce of Plans and Policy, which though
not a formal FCC position, takes a complex systems approach.
24. Barlow (1996: 1).
25. See David’s (2001) historical analysis of the ‘accidental information super-highway’. Solum
(2009) provides a summary of models of Internet governance.
26. Sassen (2001: 28) in the ‘Internet and Sovereignty’.
27. See, for example, Anheier et al. (2001), Brown (2001), and Cohen and Rai (2000) on social
movements; and Cammaerts (2008a, 2011), Downing et al. (2001), and McCurdy (2008) on
ICTs and social movements emphasizing that non-state and not-for-proﬁt organizations
can be advocates of positions across the political spectrum.
28. See Bygrave and Bing (2009) and Maclean (2011) for history and mandates, and see
Mathiason (2009) and Mueller (2010b).
NOTES
225

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
29. For discussion of the history and politics of this period, see Mansell and Nordenstreng
(2006), Padovani and Nordenstreng (2005), and Samarajiva and Shields (1990).
30. See ICSCP (1980/2004).
31. Another report focused on the development of the communication infrastructure. The
Missing Links was concerned with telecommunication networks and the implications of
gaps in access to networks for the poor countries (ICWTD, 1984). The technology gap
would later be labelled the ‘digital divide’. There was a tendency to neglect the agency of
active viewers of content and users of technology who would appropriate the tools of the
communication system in their own interests. Some of the arguments especially with
respect to a ‘one way’ ﬂow of information promoted by the market-led model of the
information society were contested and later modiﬁed, see Boyd-Barrett (1998) on media
imperialism. Research on active audiences and on the emergence of a participatory culture
(see Couldry et al., 2007; Jenkins et al., 2009) has helped to counter the earlier model, but
arguably has done little to tackle the persistent asymmetries in the economic power of the
dominant companies who are constructing the infrastructure and establishing online
commercial sites on the Internet.
32. See the World Bank’s (1999) Knowledge for Development annual report which put informa-
tion and ICTs at the centre of its policy. See Soete (1985) for a discussion of technological
leapfrogging and Abramovitz (1986) for factors that are said to enable countries to catch-up
with the ‘modernizing’ leaders. Steinmueller (2001/2) discusses technological leapfrogging
emphasizing the difﬁculties, though he ends on an optimistic note.
33. See Annan (1997). The United Nations General Assembly passed two resolutions on
communication for development and encouraged decision-makers to include this as an
integral component in developing programmes. This is not to suggest that Annan person-
ally was persuaded by this view, but rather that as leader, he promoted it.
34. See UN (2001) for the resolution calling for the Summit.
35. World Bank (1999: 1).
36. This was evident in the texts produced by the WSIS, which had a strong technology-led
orientation, despite concessions to a ‘people-centred, inclusive and development-oriented
Information Society’, respecting human rights, see UN (2008: 48, 2010b), and UN/ITU
(2003a, 2003b, 2005a, 2005b) for the documentation on the Summit. See also Adam (2005)
and Stauffacher and Kleinwa¨chter (2005) for reﬂections by participants.
37. UN (2010a, 2010b). MDG Goal 8, Target 5, includes: ‘In cooperation with the private sector,
make available beneﬁts of new technologies, especially information and communications’,
see http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/global.shtml, accessed 20/05/2010. Some argue
that this was an afterthought. Indicators are used to monitor numbers of ﬁxed telephone
lines, mobile cellular subscriptions, and Internet users per 100 population as well as ﬁxed
and mobile broadband subscribers per 100 population.
38. See, for example, Cammaerts (2008b), Frau-Meigs (2011), Padovani and Nordenstreng
(2005), Padovani and Pavan (2011), and Raboy et al. (2010).
39. See IGF (2010) and http://www.intgovforum.org/cms/dynamiccoalitions, accessed 02/
02/2011. In 2010, the distribution of participants from 107 countries (n = 1461) was
civil society 21%, government 24%, intergovernmental organizations 7%, media 3%,
private sector 23%, and technical and academic 22% (Kleinwa¨chter, 2010). For
details, see Dakroury (2009) and Klang and Murray (2005) on the way human rights
issues are considered; Livingstone (2011) on the case for and against regulating the
226
NOTES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Internet in the interests of children; and Ghosh (2005) on open standards in the OSS
environment.
40. Hofmann (2009) sees the forum as a positive force for change, while Malcolm (2008a,
2008b) sees it as a forum where traditional inequalities are replicated.
41. Drake and Wilson Jr. (2008: 11) in Governing Global Electronic Networks.
42. See Mueller’s (2010b) Networks and States.
43. For the structure of ICANN, see http://www.icann.org/en/about/, accessed 20/03/2011. Board
members are elected and specialize in law and intellectual property, competition, information
systems, banking, politics, social science, computer science and software engineering, mathe-
matics, media, software and network management, electrical and electronic engineering,
physics, chemical engineering, and artiﬁcial intelligence, see http://www.icann.org/en/
general/board.html, accessed 20/03/2011. The Internet Society also seeks to inﬂuence future
developments as a non-proﬁt society, see http://www.isoc.org/isoc/, accessed 20/03/2011.
44. See Mueller (2009) and Palfrey (2004) on ICANN. For commentary, see the Internet
Governance Project website, www.internetgovernance.org. See Freedman (2011) on The
State of Internet Regulation and Hofmann and Botzem (2010) and Stevenson and Clement
(2010) for general overviews of the issues.
45. Mueller (2009: 3).
46. This raises issues around the question of deliberative democracy and the procedures
consistent with multi-stakeholder participation when there is no consensus on the princi-
ples that should guide decision-making, see Gutmann and Thompson (2004), Guttman
(2010), and Stirling (2008).
47. Wu is said to have introduced the term ‘net neutrality’ in 2003, in the United States.
48. Arthur and Halliday (2011).
49. See Denardis’s (2009: 188) Protocol Politics for a detailed analysis of the contested transition
from IPv4 to IPv6. As she argues ‘Internet protocols and the resources they create are the
least visible but arguably most critical component of the Internet’s technical and legal
architecture. The development of universal Internet protocols and the management of
scarce resources are fundamental Internet governance responsibilities’.
50. Braman and Roberts (2003: Table 2) discuss the use of contracts for ‘terms of service’ and
‘acceptable use policies’ which perform a regulatory function based on a study of ISPs in 2002.
51. See Sandvig (2007) on ‘network neutrality is the new common carriage’.
52. Including those offered by Blue Coat Systems, DtecNet Software, L7-ﬁlter, NetScreen-IDP,
and NetScout Systems and the use of Packet Details Markup Language (PDML) (Sluijs,
2010). Bendrath and Mueller (2010: 25) in their review of cases of DPI use by ISPs for trafﬁc
management purposes and at the behest of copyright holders, argue that ‘if there is no
simple “technical ﬁx” to the problems of the Internet, neither is there a one-way march into
the Panopticon. Our ﬁndings suggest that the “end of the Internet” is not pre-determined,
nor is its freedom secure; its future rests very much in our own hands’.
53. Civil liberties are at stake in cases such as that of the US law ﬁrm ACS which accidentally
released many emails to the public, demonstrating the harm that can accompany wrongful
accusations of illegal downloading, for example, a man wrongly accused of downloading
gay porn movies and the collection of a ﬁne from a women despite acknowledging that she
was not the infringer, etc. (Enigmax, 2010).
54. In some countries, people have the right to decide whether to disclose information, but
once it is given away, they have few rights to prevent its secondary use, even when legislation
NOTES
227

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
requires their consent. For differences between Europe and the United States in the use of
ﬁltering technologies and perspectives on free speech, see Elser (2005). See Bing (2005) on
the role of software agents and the techniques embedded in software code. T-Mobile is
reported to be using DPI to manage video data trafﬁc. The European Commission has
brought charges against the UK government for allowing Phorm to employ DPI. There are
reports of DPI use by governments to enhance security against cyber attacks, see http://
www.commondreams.org/view/2011/01/28-12, accessed 07/02/2011.
55. Berners-Lee (2010: 4, 5, emphasis added). Sir Berners-Lee’s co-inventor was Robert Cail-
liau, a Belgian informatics engineer. Lessig emphasizes the threat to innovation of depar-
tures from network neutrality, arguing that deviation from the existing Internet Protocol,
‘creates a tighter integration between the network and the content/applications that the
network is carrying [and] would chill innovation by raising the danger that part of the value
of any innovations might be captured by the network provider’ (cited in Yoo, 2009: 4).
56. See Braman (2011).
57. Content distribution networks (CDN) are operated by ﬁrms that charge for reliability and
quality of information transmission, and substitute data storage for long distance capacity
by using local caches located close to users.
58. See Noam (2010: 5) on ‘Regulation 3.0’.
59. Mueller (2010a) argues that the abundance and scarcity conditions with respect to this
component of the system interact with those relating to the routing system whereby data
packets move from point of origin to point of destination. The Council of Europe (2009: 6)
considers critical resources to include the name root servers, the backbone structure, the
domain name system, addresses, and the transmission protocols, arguing that ‘the Internet’s
openness and accessibility have become preconditions for the enjoyment of fundamental
human rights’.
60. The legal case of Comcast vs FCC sparked renewed debate on network neutrality, see US
(2010). Comcast is a large cable operator and ISP.
61. See Lessig and McChesney (2006) in ‘No Tolls on the Internet’.
62. The principle of common carriage is that operators may not ‘make any unjust or unreasonable
discrimination in charges, practices, classiﬁcations, regulations, facilities, or services. . . . or. . .
make or give any undue or unreasonable preference to any particular person, class of persons,
or locality’ (US, 1996). See Lentz (2011) for changing deﬁnitions of ‘information service’
which emerged in the Computer Inquiries and Melody (1970) for regulation in the early days
of data communication services.
63. See Donahue (2010: 4) for an assessment of the FCC’s network neutrality enquiry. Fixed
network operators are expected to adhere to a set of principles consistent with network
neutrality and there is greater ﬂexibility for mobile operators. See FCC (2010b: paras 1, 8,
35) for details. The policy does not apply to the treatment of illegal use of the Internet or to
discrimination aimed at combating copyright infringement.
64. FCC (2010a: 1).
65. See Chandler (2007: np) for the United States. Rights derive from the United Nations
Universal Declaration of Human Rights which states that ‘Everyone has the right to freedom
of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interfer-
ence and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and
regardless of frontiers’ (UN, 1948: Art 19). See also Nordenstreng (2011).
66. See Wu’s (2010) The Master Switch. See also Goldsmith and Wu (2006) and Wu (1999, 2003).
228
NOTES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
67. For example, in the United States there are symmetrical charges between the mobile and
ﬁxed network operators. In Europe, ﬁxed network companies own many mobile operators
and charges tend to be asymmetrical (Marsden, 2010, 2011). See also Powell and Cooper
(2011) on the way the debate has been treated in the United States and the United Kingdom.
68. See Mansell and Steinmueller (2011, in press) on ‘digital economies and public policies’.
69. See main elements of the reform, http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/policy/ecomm/
tomorrow/reform/index_en.htm, accessed 26/11/2010 and Directive 2009/140/EC (Council
of Europe, 2010; European Commission, 2009a).
70. Council of Europe (2010: para 6).
71. See http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=SPEECH/10/153&format=HT
%20ML&aged=0&language=EN&guiLanguage=en, accessed 26/11/2010.
72. European Commission (2010e: 1).
73. Ofcom in the United Kingdom framed its public consultation on Internet trafﬁc manage-
ment by suggesting that the aim is to balance a right to a neutral Internet with ensuring
incentives are in place to promote competitiveness and economic growth. See Ofcom
(2010) discussion paper on network neutrality. In 2011 Ofcom set out its policy indicating
that it had no immediate concerns about the potential for ‘managed services’ to jeopardize
‘best effort’ services.
74. European Commission (2009b). National regulators have until 2012 (in some cases beyond
that date). In March 2011, Ofcom announced a reduction in the wholesale charges that
mobile operators make to other operators to connect calls to their networks, resulting in an
80 per cent reduction in termination rates by the operators 3, O2, Everything Everywhere,
and Vodafone, over 4 years.
75. Marsden (2011: 64). Marsden’s blog is a resource on the net neutrality issue, see http://
chrismarsden.blogspot.com/, accessed 28/07/2011.
76. For a range of views, see Bauer (2007), Collins (2009), Dutton and Peltu (2005), Faulhaber
(2007), Sidak (2007), Spulber and Yoo (2009), Yoo (2005), and Zittrain (2003).
77. Mueller (2010b: 269) labels the institutions that emerge as ‘organically developed Internet
institutions’ (ODii).
78. Mueller (2010b: 209).
Chapter 8
* From ‘Hope’ or ‘Hoffnung’, ‘Zu was Besserm sind wir geboren! Und was die innere Stimme
spricht, Das ta¨uscht die hoffende Seele nicht’. This poem opens Freeman’s The Economics of
Hope (1992).
1. Silverstone (2007: 26) in Media and Morality and quoted in Chapter 1.
2. See Williams (1990/2008: 51) in Notes on the Underground, building on Mumford’s earlier
work.
3. See Mumford’s (1934) Technics and Civilization. Technics was based on the Greek tekhne.
Dallas W. Smythe (1984) similarly insisted on a broad deﬁnition of technology and on the
need to consider perspectives offered by the humanities, social sciences, and natural
sciences.
4. Mumford’s (1934: 4) Technics and Civilization. Needham (2004) addressed a similar issue in
his magisterial, seven-volume work on science and technology in China, which aimed to
NOTES
229

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
explain why China’s lead did not establish the country’s dominance in the world of science
and technology.
5. Mumford (1934: 366, 367, emphasis added).
6. Turkle (1995: 46, emphasis added) in Life on the Screen.
7. Innis (1951/1991: 190) in Bias of Communication.
8. Innis (1951/1991: 34) in Bias of Communication. He pointed out also that ‘a change in the
type of medium implies a change in the type of appraisal and hence makes it difﬁcult for
one civilization to understand another’ (Innis, 1950/2007: 29).
9. Melody (2003: 420) on ‘policy implications of the new information economy’.
10. Taylor (2007: 176) in A Secular Age.
11. See Livingstone (2011).
12. Stirling (2008) discusses this notion of gradient.
13. Yeats (1926/1989: 219) in ‘Among School Children’.
14. A paraphrasing of Bateson (1972: 463) ‘I have experienced, as have many others, the
disappearance of the division between self and the music to which I was listening’.
15. A ‘bit tax’ or Tobin tax was proposed by a group of European experts, but was met with
strong resistance (Cordell et al., 1997; European Commission High Level Group of Experts,
1996; Soete and Kamp 1996). A digital tax was discussed in 2010 by the World Health
Organization as a means of generating revenues. It has been debated in academic journals
dealing with online commerce and ﬁnancial and trade implications. Some countries are
considering the introduction of some sort of ‘Internet Tax’, for example France which taxes
online advertising. A European Tobin tax on ﬁnancial transactions was proposed again in
the context of the debt crisis in 2011 although at the time of writing was generally not being
received favourably except in France.
16. Hardt and Negri (2001: 404) in Empire.
17. Hardt and Negri (2009: 381–2) in Common Wealth. This moment arises out of the dynamic
of a biopolitical process.
18. Castells (2000: 16) in ‘an exploratory theory of the network society’.
19. See Castells’s (2009) Communication Power.
20. See Gutmann and Thompson (2004).
21. Mumford (1934: 434, 435, emphasis added).
22. It was ﬁrst used in the 1920s in the United States, to refer to studies that bridged the
boundaries of the branches of the natural sciences and, later, to describe studies that crossed
the boundaries of branches of the social sciences. Other terms, such as multidisciplinarity,
may refer to work conducted within generally accepted boundaries of a discipline, but with
subsequent collaboration with those from other disciplines. The term cross-disciplinarity
may refer to research based substantially on analyses and methods from more than one
discipline, see Hulme and Toye (2006) for a useful discussion.
23. Streeten (1974: 26, emphasis added) on the use and transfer of ‘intellectual technology’.
24. Neoclassical economic theory does lay claim to a theory of agency (economic agents
seek to maximize some outcomes and are able to rank their preferences, represented by
a utility function and behavioural economics seeks to take cognitive, social, and emotional
factors into account) even if it is shunned by the humanities and other social science
disciplines.
230
NOTES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
25. In addition, ideas such as autopoiesis in systems theory may not be widely accepted in the
natural science because of the absence of a formal model to render it explanatory and
predictive. The result of this is that ‘in most substantive areas there is what to outsiders
seems like an amazing lack of reciprocal knowledge’ (Abbott, 2001: 142).
26. Plato (360BC) in ‘Allegory of the Cave’.
27. Sen (2009: 18) in The Idea of Justice.
NOTES
231

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
n REFERENCES
Abbey, R. (ed.) (2004). Charles Taylor. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Abbott, A. (2001). Chaos of Disciplines. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Aboujaoude, E. (2011). Virtually You: The Dangerous Powers of the E-Personality. New York:
W. W. Norton & Company.
Abramovitz, M. (1956). ‘Resource and Output Trends in the United States Since 1870’. American
Economic Review, 46(2): 5–23.
—— (1986). ‘Catching Up, Forging Ahead and Falling Behind’. Journal of Economic History,
XLVI(2): 385–406.
Ackerman, B. (1980). Social Justice in the Liberal State. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
ACTA. (2010). Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement, 19 December, http://trade.ec.europa.eu/
doclib/docs/2011/may/tradoc_147937.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
Adam, L. (2005). ‘Financing ICTs for Development with Focus on Poverty’. Document prepared
for Instituto del Tercer Mundo (ITeM), WSIS Papers. Choike.org, July.
Adorno, T. and Horkheimer, M. (1944/1972). ‘The Culture Industry: Enlightenment as Mass
Deception’, in M. Horkheimer and T. Adorno (eds), Dialectic of Enlightenment. New York:
Seabury Press, pp. 120–67.
Aghion, P., David, P. A. and Foray, D. (2009). ‘Science, Technology and Innovation for
Economic Growth: Linking Policy Research and Practice in “STIG Systems”’. Research
Policy, 38(4): 681–93.
Agre, P. E. (1998). ‘Yesterday’s Tomorrow’. Times Literary Supplement, 3 July, pp. 3–4.
—— Rotenberg, M. (eds) (1997). Technology and Privacy: The New Landscape. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.
Alani, H., Dasmahapatra, S., O’Hara, K. and Shadbolt, N. (2003). ‘Identifying Communities of
Practice through Ontology Network Analysis’. IEEE Intelligent Systems, March/April, pp. 18–25.
Albagli, S. and Maciel, M. L. (eds) (2010). Information, Power and Politics: Technological and
Institutional Mediations. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Albarran, A. B. (2002). Media Economics: Understanding Markets, Industries and Concepts (2nd
edn). Ames, IO: Iowa State University Press.
Allen, P. M. and Torrens, P. M. (2005). ‘Knowledge and Complexity’. Futures, 37(7): 581–4.
Althusser, L. (1971). ‘Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses’, Lenin and Philosophy and
Other Essays. London: New Left Books, pp. 79–87.
Amin, A. (ed.) (1994). Post-Fordism: A Reader. Oxford: Blackwell.
Andersen, N. (2011). ‘Major ISPs Agree to “Six Strikes” Copyright Enforcement Plan’.
Arstechnica, 5 July, http://arstechnicacom/tech-policy/news/2011/07/major-isps-agree-to-
six-strikes-copyright-enforcement-planars accessed 28/07/2011.
Anderson, B. (1983). Imagined Communities. London: Verso.
Anderson, C. (2006). The Long Tail: Why the Future of Business is Selling Less of More. New York:
Hyperion.

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Anderson, C. (2009). The Longer Tail: How Endless Choice is Creating Unlimited Demand. New
York: Random House Business.
—— (2010). ‘The Web is Dead: Long Live the Internet—Who’s to Blame: Us’. Wired September,
pp. 1–17.
Andersson, K. P. and Ostrom, E. (2008). ‘Analyzing Decentralized Resource Regimes from a
Polycentric Perspective’. Policy Sciences, 41(1): 71–93.
Anheier, H., Glasius, M. and Kaldor, M. (eds) (2001). Global Civil Society 2001. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Annan, K. (1997). Secretary General Stresses International Community’s Objective of Harnessing
Informatics Revolution for Beneﬁt of Mankind. Geneva. Commission on Science and Technology
for Development ‘Inter-Agency Project on Universal Access to Basic Communication and
Information Services’ 3rd Session, E/CN.16/1997/Misc.3.
Antonelli, C. (2003). ‘The Digital Divide: Understanding the Economics of New Information
and Communication Technology in the Global Economy’. Information Economics and Policy,
15(2): 173–99.
—— (ed.) (2011). Handbook on the Economic Complexity of Technological Change. Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar.
Argyris, C. and Schon, D. A. (1996). Organisational Learning II: Theory, Method and Practice.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Arnett, R. C. (1986). Communication and Community: Implications of Martin Buber’s Dialogue.
Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Arrow, K. J. (1962). ‘The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing’. The Review of Economic
Studies, 29(3): 155–73.
—— (1984). The Economics of Information. Oxford: Blackwell.
Arthur, C. (2011). ‘Vodafone’s Egypt Texts May Do Them Lasting Damage’. The Guardian,
3 February, http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2011/feb/03/vodafone-egypt-text-
messages accessed 28/07/2011.
—— Halliday, J. (2011). ‘No Room at the Internet: Web Space Runs Out’. The Guardian,
2 February, p. 8.
Arthur, W. B. (1990). ‘Positive Feedbacks in the Economy’. Scientiﬁc American, 262: 92–9.
—— (2005). ‘Complexity and the Economy: An Interview with W. Brian Arthur, interviewed by
Robert Delorme and Geoffrey M. Hodgson of EAPE on 8 November in Aiz-en-Provence’, in
J. Finch and M. Orillard (eds), Complexity and the Economy: Implications for Economic Policy.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. 17–32.
—— (2009). The Nature of Technology: What it Is and How it Evolves. New York: Allen Lane.
Ashby, W. R. (1956). An Introduction to Cybernetics. London: Chapman and Hall.
Ashton, K. (2009). ‘That “Internet of Things” Thing’. RFID Journal, 22 June, http://
wwwrﬁdjournalcom/article/view/4986 accessed 28/07/2011.
Athanasopoulos, E., Makridakis, A., Antonatos, S., Antoniades, D., Ioannidis, S., Anagnostakis,
K. and Markatos, E. (2008). ‘Antisocial Networks: Turning a Social Network into a Botnet’.
Information Security, 5222: 146–60.
Atkinson, M. M. and Coleman, W. D. (1992). ‘Policy Networks, Policy Communities and the
Problems of Governance’. Governance: An International Journal of Policy and Administration,
5(2): 154–80.
Avgerou, C. (2002a). Information Systems and Global Diversity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
234
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Avgerou,C. (2002b).‘TheSocioTechnicalNatureofInformationSystemsInnovation’,inC.Avgerou
(ed.), Information Systems and Global Diversity. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 50–71.
Bacon, F. (1597/1924). Essayes. Religious Meditations, Pleaces of Perswasion & Disswasion (Of
Heresies). London: The Haslewood Books.
Bailey, W. and Burgoon, M. (1992). ‘PC at Last! PC at Last! Thank God Almighty, We Are PC at
Last!’. Journal of Communication, 42(2): 95–104.
Bainbridge, D. I. (1994). Intellectual Property (2nd edn). London: Pitman Publishing.
Bakardjieva, M. (2010). ‘The Internet in Everyday Life: Exploring the Tenets and Contributions
of Diverse Approaches’, in R. Burnett, M. Consalvo and C. Ess (eds), The Handbook of Internet
Studies. New York: Wiley-Blackwell, np—e-book edition.
Banks, L. and Wu, S. (eds) (2010). Toward a Behavioral Approach to Privacy for Online Social
Networks. Berlin: Springer.
Bannerman, S. (2009). ‘Canada and the Berne Convention: 1886–1971’. Unpublished PhD
Dissertation, Carleton University, Montreal.
—— (2010). ‘Copyright: Characteristics of Canadian Reform’, in M. Geist (ed.), From ‘Radical
Extremism’ to ‘Balanced Copyright’: Canadian Copyright and the Digital Agenda. Ottawa:
Irwin Law, pp. 17–44.
Barlow, J. P. (1996). A Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace. Davos: Speech at Davos,
Electronic Frontier Foundation at https://projects.eff.org/barlow/Declaration-Final.html
accessed 28/07/2011.
Barnett, C. (2003). Culture and Democracy: Media, Space and Representation. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Baron, N. S. (2008). Always On: Language in an Online and Mobile World. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Barry, A. and Slater, D. (2005). ‘Introduction’, in A. Barry and D. Slater (eds), The Technological
Economy. London: Routledge, pp. 1–27.
Bateson, G. (1951a). ‘Conventions of Communication: Where Validity Depends Upon Belief’,
in J. Ruesch and G. Bateson (eds), Communication: The Social Matrix of Psychiatry. New York:
W. W. Norton & Co., pp. 213–27.
—— (1951b). ‘Information and Codiﬁcation: A Philosophical Approach’, in J. Ruesch and
G. Bateson (eds), Communication: The Social Matrix of Psychiatry. New York: W. W. Norton &
Co., pp. 168–211.
—— (1970/1972). ‘Form, Substance and Difference’, Proceedings of 19th Annual Korzybski
Memorial Lecture for Institute of General Semantics in Steps to an Ecology of Mind: Collected
Essays in Anthropology, Psychiatry, Evolution and Epistemology. New York: Ballantine Books,
pp. 448–66.
—— (1972). Steps to an Ecology of the Mind: Collected Essays in Anthropology, Psychiatry,
Evolution and Epistemology. New York: Ballantine Books.
—— (1979). Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity. New York: Bantam Books.
—— Bateson, M. C. (1987). Angels Fear: Towards an Epistemology of the Sacred. New York:
Macmillan.
Bateson, M. C. (2005). ‘The Double Bind: Pathology and Creativity’. Cybernetics & Human
Knowing, 12(1–2): 11–21.
Bath, C. (2009). ‘Gendered Orders of Knowledge in the Semantic Web’. Paper presented at the 4S
(Society for Social Studies of Science) Annual Meeting, Crystal City, VA, 28 October.
REFERENCES
235

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Bauer, J. M. (2005). ‘Bundling, Differentiation, Alliances and Mergers: Convergence Strategies
in U.S. Communication Markets’. Communications & Strategies, 60(4): 59–83.
—— (2007). ‘Dynamic Effects of Network Neutrality’. International Journal of Communication,
1: 531–47.
Baym, N. K. (2010a). Personal Connection in the Digital Age: Digital Media and Society Series.
Cambridge: Polity Press.
—— (2010b). ‘Social Networks 2.0’, in R. Burnett, M. Consalvo and C. Ess (eds), The Handbook
of Internet Studies. New York: Wiley-Blackwell, np—e-book edition.
BBC News. (2010). ‘Warning Over Anti-Virus Cold-Calls to UK Internet Users’. BBC OnLine,
15 November, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-11754487 accessed 28/07/2011.
Bear, G. (1985). Blood Music. New York: Ace Books.
Beckett, C. and Mansell, R. (2008). ‘Crossing Boundaries: New Media and Networked
Journalism’. Communication, Culture & Critique, 1(1): 90–102.
Beebe, B. (2008). ‘An Empirical Study of US Copyright Fair Use Opinions, 1978–2005’.
University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 156(3): 549–625.
Beer, S. (1959/1964). Cybernetics and Management. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
—— (1966). Decision and Control: The Meaning of Operational Research and Management
Cybernetics. London: John Wiley & Sons.
—— (1994). Brain of the Firm (2nd edn). New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Beinhocker, E. D. (2007). The Origin of Wealth: Evolution, Complexity and the Radical Remaking
of Economics. New York: Random House Business Books.
Bell, D. (1962). The End of Ideology: On the Exhaustion of Political Ideas in the Fifties (Revised
edn). New York: Free Press.
—— (1973). The Coming of Post-Industrial Society: A Venture in Social Forecasting. New York:
Basic Books.
Bellamy, E. (1887/1960). Looking Backward: 2000–1887. New York: Ticknor and Company/
Signet.
Bendrath, R. and Mueller, M. L. (2010). ‘The End of the Net as We Know It? Deep Packet
Inspection and Internet Governance’, 4 August, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?
abstract_id=1653259 accessed 28/07/2011.
Benevenuto, F., Rodrigues, T., Cha, M. and Almeida, V. (2009). ‘Characterizing User Behavior in
Online Social Networks’, in Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Internet
Measurement. New York: ACM, pp. 49–62.
Beniger, J. R. (1986). The Control Revolution: Technological and Economic Origins of the
Information Society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Benkler, Y. (2000). ‘From Consumers to Users: Shifting the Deeper Structures of Regulation
Towards Sustainable Commons and User Access’. Federal Communications Law Journal, 52:
561–79.
—— (2004). ‘Sharing Nicely: On Shareable Goods and the Emergence of Sharing as a Modality
of Economic Production’. Yale Law Journal, 114(2): 273–58.
—— (2006). The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
—— Nissenbaum, H. (2006). ‘Commons-based Peer Production and Virtue’. Journal of Political
Philosophy, 14(4): 394–419.
236
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Bennett, W. L. (2003). ‘New Media Power: The Internet and Global Activism’, in N. Couldry and
J. Curran (eds), Contesting Media Power. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, pp. 17–37.
Bennett, C. J. and Raab, C. D. (2003). The Governance of Privacy: Policy Instruments in Global
Perspective. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Bentham, J. (1787/1995). Panopticon; or the Inspection-House. London: Verso.
Berdou, E. (2007). ‘A Critical, Inward and Outward View of Digital Ecosystems’ Open,
Collaborative Communities: Interdisciplinarity, Sustainability and Scalability at the
Intersection of Gift and Exchange Economies’, in F. Nachira, A. Nicolai, P. Dini, M. Le
Louarn and L. Rivera Leon (eds), Digital Business Ecosystems. Brussels: European
Commission, Directorate General Information Society and Media, pp. 92–7.
—— (2011). Organization in Open Source Communities: At the Crossroads of the Gift and Market
Economies. New York: Routledge.
Berger, P. L. and Luckmann, T. (1966). The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the
Sociology of Knowledge. New York: Doubleday & Company.
Berger, J., with Blomberg, S., Fox, C., Bibb, M. and Hollis, R. (1972). Ways of Seeing. London:
British Broadcasting Corporation and Penguin Books.
Bergquist, M. and Ljungberg, J. (2001). ‘The Power of Gifts: Organizing Social Relationships in
Open Source Communities’. Information Systems Journal, 11: 305–20.
Berners-Lee, T. (2010). ‘Long Live the Web: A Call for Continued Open Standards and
Neutrality’. Scientiﬁc American, 22 November, pp. 1–5.
—— Fischetti, M. (1999). Weaving the Web: The Original Design and Ultimate Destiny of the
World Wide Web. London: Orion.
—— Hendler, J. and Lassila, O. (2001). ‘The Semantic Web’. Scientiﬁc American, 17 May, http://
www.scientiﬁcamerican.com/article.cfm?id=the-semantic-web accessed 28/07/2011.
Bettig, R. V. (1989). ‘Critical Perspectives on the History and Philosophy of Copyright’. Paper
presented at the 72nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Education in Journalism and
Mass Communication, Washington, DC, 10–13 August.
—— Schiller, H. I. (eds) (1997). Copyrighting Culture: The Political Economy of Intellectual
Property. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Bijker, W. E. and Law, J. (1992). Shaping Technology/Building Society: Studies in Sociotechnological
Change. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— Hughes, T. and Pinch, T. (eds) (1987). The Social Construction of Technological Systems:
New Directions in the Sociology and History of Technology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Billig, M., Condor, S., Edwards, D., Gane, M., Middleton, D. and Radley, A. (1990). Ideological
Dilemmas: A Social Psychology of Everyday Thinking. London: Sage.
Bing, J. (2005). ‘The Future of Digital Rights’, in M. Klang and A. Murray (eds), Human Rights in
the Digital Age. London: Glasshouse Press, pp. 203–18.
Bisogni, F., Calallini, S. and Di Trocchio, S. (2011). ‘Cybersecurity at European Level: The Role
of Information Availability’. Communications & Strategies, 81(1): 105–24.
Bloomﬁeld, B. P., Coombs, R., Knights, D. and Littler, D. (eds) (1997). Information Technology
and Organizations: Strategies, Networks and Integration. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Boden, M. A. (ed.) (1996). Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Handbook of Perception and Cognition (2nd
edn). San Diego, CA: Academic Press, Inc.
Bolter, J. D. and Grusin, R. (1999). Remediation: Understanding New Media. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
REFERENCES
237

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Borgman, C. L. (2007). Scholarship in the Digital Age: Information, Infrastructure and the
Internet. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Botto, F. (2010). ‘Challenges and Results of the Trentino DCE Living Laboratory’. Deliverable
11.13, WP 11 Bridging Digital Ecosystems Research to Regional Development and Innovation
in the Knowledge Economy, OPAALS Contract No. IST-034824, European Commission,
August.
Bowker, G. C. (1996). ‘How Things Change: The History of Sociotechnical Structures’, Review
Article. Social Studies of Science, 26(1): 173–82.
—— Star, S. L. (1999). Sorting Things Out: Classiﬁcation and its Consequences. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Bowles, S. (1998). ‘Endogenous Preferences: The Cultural Consequences of Markets and Other
Economic Institutions’. Journal of Economic Literature, 36(1): 75–111.
Boyd, D. M. and Ellison, N. B. (2008). ‘Social Network Sites: Deﬁnition, History, and
Scholarship’. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(1): 210–30.
Boyd-Barrett, O. (1998). ‘Media Imperialism Reformulated’, in D. Thussu (ed.), Electronic
Empires: Global Media and Local Resistance. London: Arnold, pp. 157–76.
Boyle, J. (1996). Shamans, Software & Spleens: Law and the Construction of the Information
Society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
—— (2008). The Public Domain: Enclosing the Commons of the Mind. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Brake, D. (2009). ‘As If Nobody’s Reading: The Imagined Audience and Socio-technical Biases in
Personal Blogging Practice in the UK’. Unpublished PhD Thesis, Department of Media and
Communications. London School of Economics and Political Science.
Braman, S. (1994). ‘The Autopoietic State: Communication and Democratic Potential in the
Net’. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 45(6): 358–68.
—— (1995). ‘Alternative Conceptualizations of the Information Economy’. Advances in
Librarianship, 19: 99–116.
—— (2006). ‘Tactical Memory: The Politics of Openness in the Construction of Memory’. First
Monday, 11(7): 1–21.
—— (2006). Change of State: Information, Policy and Power. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— (2011). ‘The Framing Years: Policy Fundamentals in the Internet Design Process,
1969–1979’. The Information Society, 27(5): 295–310.
—— Roberts, S. (2003). ‘Advantage ISP: Terms of Service as Media Law’. New Media & Society,
5(3): 422–48.
Brand, S. (1987). The Media Lab: Inventing the Future at MIT. New York: Viking Penguin.
Braudel, F. (1979/1992). Civilization and Capitalism: 15th–18th Century: The Perspective of the
World (trans. S. Reynolds). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Brauer, M., Dini, P., Dory, B., English, A., Iqani, M. and Zeller, F. (2007). ‘Principles,
Models and Processes for the Development of the Open Knowledge Space’. Deliverable 10.5,
WP 10 on Sustainable Community Building, OPAALS Contract No. IST-034824, European
Commission, July.
—— Steinicke, I. and Zeller, F. (2010). ‘Report on Recommendations for Improving the
Usability of the OKS’. Deliverable 10.21, WP 10 on Sustainable Community Building,
OPAALS Contract No. IST-034824, European Commission, March.
238
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Brautigan, R. (1968). ‘All Watched Over by Machines of Loving Grace’, The Pill versus The
Springhill Mine Disaster. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifﬂin, p. 117.
—— (1970). ‘The Library’, in The Abortion: An Historical Romance 1966. New York: Simon and
Schuster, pp. 11–17.
Breen, M. (2011). Uprising: The Internet’s Unintended Consequences. Champaign, IL: Common
Ground Publishing.
Breindl, Y. and Houghton, T. J. (2010). ‘Techno-Political Activism as Counterpublic Spheres:
Discursive Networking within Deliberative Transnational Politics?’ Paper presented at the ICA
Conference, Singapore, 22 June, http://canterbury-nz.academia.edu/TessaHoughton/Talks/
24893/Techno-political_Activism_as_Counterpublic_Spheres_Discursive_Networking_ Within_
Deliberative_Transnational_Politics accessed 28/07/2011.
Bresnahan, T. F. and Trajtenberg, M. (1995). ‘General Purpose Technologies “Engines of
Growth?”’. Journal of Econometrics, 65(1): 83–108.
Bressand, A., Distler, C. and Nicolaidis, K. (1989). ‘Networks at the Heart of the Service
Economy’, in A. Bressand and K. Nicolaidis (eds), Strategic Trends in Services: An Inquiry
into the Global Service Economy. Grand Rapids, MI: Ballinger Publishers, pp. 17–32.
Briscoe, G., Dini, P., Nehaniv, C., Oros, N., Yinusa, A. and Buck, M. (2010). ‘Integration of Gene
Expression Computing and Operational Closure in the Software Ecosystem Architecture’.
Deliverable 1.5, WP 1 on Cell Biology, Autopoiesis and Biological Design Patterns, OPAALS
Contract No. IST-034824, European Commission. October.
British Broadcasting Corporation (2009). ‘Electronic Tagging of Young People Shows Sharp
Rise’. BBC News, 15 December, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/8413148.stm accessed
28/07/2011.
Brock, G. W. (1994). Telecommunications Policy for the Information Age: From Monopoly to
Competition. Boston, MA: Harvard University Press.
Brooks, F. (1982). The Mythical Man-Month. London: Addison-Wesley Publishing Co.
Brown, C. (2001). ‘Cosmopolitanism, World Citizenship and Global Civil Society’. Critical
Review of International Social and Political Philosophy, 3(1): 7–27.
Brown, J. S. and Duguid, P. (1998). ‘Organizing Knowledge’. California Management Review,
40(3): 90–112.
—— —— (2000). The Social Life of Information. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Bruns, A. (2010). ‘Distributed Creativity: Filesharing and Produsage’, in S. Sonvilla-Weiss (ed.),
Mashup Cultures. Vienna: Springer-Verlag, pp. 24–37.
Brusoni, S. and Prencipe, A. (2001). ‘Unpacking the Black Box of Modularity: Technologies,
Products and Organizations’. Industrial and Corporate Change, 10(1): 179–205.
Buckley, W. (1967). Sociology and Modern Systems Theory. Englewood Cliffs, CA: Prentice-Hall.
—— (1968). ‘Society as a Complex Adaptive System’, in W. Buckley (ed.), Modern Systems
Research for the Behavioural Scientist. Chicago, IL: Aldine.
Bueso, P. (2010). ‘Governance and Regulatory Strategies for DEs: OKS AISBL’. Deliverable 12.12,
WP 12 on Open Source Software Innovation and Socio-economic Models for Digital
Ecosystems, OPAALS Contract No. IST-034824, European Commission, October.
—— Oliver, D., Martin, T., Gomez, L. and Vollmer, D. (2010). ‘Governance and Sustainability
Strategies for DEs’. Deliverable 12.12, WP 12 on Open Source Software Innovation and Socio-
economic Models for Digital Ecosystems, OPAALS Contract No. IST-034824, European
Commission, July.
REFERENCES
239

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Bumgarner, B. A. (2007). ‘You Have Been Poked: Exploring the Uses and Gratiﬁcations of
Facebook Among Emerging Adults’. First Monday, 12(11): np.
Burkart, P. (2010). Music and Cyberliberties. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press.
Burke, M., Marlow, C. and Lento, T. (2009). ‘Feed Me: Motivating Newcomer Contribution in
Social Network Sites’, in Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. New York: ACM, pp. 945–54.
Burnett, R. (2010). ‘Internet and Music’, in R. Burnett, M. Consalvo and C. Ess (eds), The
Handbook of Internet Studies. New York: Wiley-Blackwell, p. np—e-book version.
Bush, V. (1945). ‘As We May Think’. The Atlantic Monthly, 176(1): 101–8.
Bygrave, L. A. and Bing, J. (eds) (2009). Internet Governance: Infrastructures and Institutions.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Byrne, D. (1998). Complexity Theory and the Social Sciences. London: Routledge.
Calabrese, A. and Sparks, C. (eds) (2004). Toward a Political Economy of Culture, Capitalism and
Communication in the 21st Century. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
Calhoun, C. (1992). ‘Introduction: Habermas and the Public Sphere’, in C. Calhoun (ed.),
Habermas and the Public Sphere. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 1–48.
—— (2002). ‘Imagining Solidarity: Cosmopolitanism, Constitutional Patriotism and the
Public Sphere’. Public Culture, 14(1): 147–71.
Callon, M. (2001). ‘Four Models for the Dynamics of Science’, in S. Jasanoff, G. E. Markle,
J. C. Peterson and T. Pinch (eds), Handbook of Science and Technology Studies. London: Sage,
pp. 29–63.
Cammaerts, B. (2005). ‘Through the Looking Glass: Civil Society Participation in the WSIS and the
Dynamics between Online/Ofﬂine Interaction’. Communications & Strategies, 60(4): 151–74.
—— (2008a). ‘Critiques on the Participatory Potentials of Web 2.0’. Communication, Culture &
Critique, 1(3): 358–76.
—— (2008b). Internet-Mediated Participation Beyond the Nation State. Manchester: Manchester
University Press.
—— (2011). ‘Disruptive Sharing in a Digital Age: Rejecting Neoliberalism?’. Continuum:
Journal of Media & Cultural Studies, 25(1): 47–62.
—— Meng, B. (2011). Creative Destruction and Copyright Protection: Regulatory Responses to
File-sharing. Media Policy Brief 1. London: London School of Economics and Political
Science,
http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/mediapolicyproject/2011/03/21/media-policy-project-policy-
brief-1-creative-destruction-and-copyright-protection/ accessed 28/07/2011.
—— Van Audenhove, L. (2005). ‘Online Political Debate: Unbounded Citizenship and the
Problematic Nature of a Transnational Public Sphere’. Political Communication, 22(2): 147–62.
Capra, F. (2002). The Hidden Connections: A Science for Sustainable Living. London: Harper
Collins.
Carey, J. W. (1989/1992). ‘A Cultural Approach to Communication’, Communication as Culture:
Essays in Media and Society. London: Routledge, pp. 13–36.
Carpentier, N. (2011a). Media and Participation: A Site of Ideological-Democratic Struggle.
Bristol: Intellect.
—— (2011b). ‘Policy’s Hubris: Power, Fantasy, and the Limits of (Global) Media Policy
Interventions’, in R. Mansell and M. Raboy (eds), Handbook of Global Media and
Communication Policy. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 113–28.
240
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Carr, N. (2010). The Shallows: What the Internet is Doing to Our Brains. New York: W. W. Norton
& Company.
Castells, M. (1996). The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture Volume I: The Rise of the
Network Society. Oxford: Blackwell.
—— (1997). The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture Volume II: The Power of
Identity. Oxford: Blackwell.
—— (1998). The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture Volume III: End of Millennium.
Oxford: Blackwell.
—— (2000). ‘Materials for an Exploratory Theory of the Network Society’. British Journal of
Sociology, 51(1): 5–24.
—— (2001). The Internet Galaxy: Reﬂections on the Internet, Business and Society. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
—— (2009). Communication Power. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Castoriadis, C. (1987). The Imaginary Institution of Society: Creativity and Autonomy in the
Social Historical World (trans. K. Blamey). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chadwick, A. (2006). Internet Politics: States, Citizens, and New Communication Technologies.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chandler, J. A. (2007). ‘Reclaiming the First Amendment: Constitutional Theories of Media
Reform: A Right to Reach and Audience, An Approach to Intermediary Bias on the Internet’.
Hofstra Law Review, 35(3): 1095–138.
Charlton, N. G. (2008). Understanding Gregory Bateson: Mind, Beauty, and the Sacred Earth.
New York: State University of New York Press.
Checkland, P. (1981). Systems Thinking Systems Practice. Chichester: Wiley.
Chen, H., Ding, L., Wu, Z., Yu, T., Dhanapalan, L. and Chen, J. Y. (2009). ‘Semantic Web for
Integrated Network Analysis in Biomedicine’. Brieﬁngs in Bioinformatics, 10(2): 177–92.
Chenail, R. J. and Morris, G. H. (1995). The Talk of the Clinic: Explorations in the Analysis of
Medical and Therapeutic Discourse. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Chouliaraki, L. (2006). ‘Towards an Analytics of Mediation’. Critical Discourse Studies, 3(2):
153–78.
Chroust, A.-H. (1946). ‘The Origin and Meaning of the Social Compact Doctrine’. Ethics, 57(1):
38–56.
Ciastellardi, M., de Almeida, C. M. and de Kerckhove, D. (2011). ‘From Ontologies to
Folksonomies: A Design-driven Approach from Complex Information to Bottom-Up
Knowledge’. Unpublished paper, IN3, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, Barcelona.
Ciborra, C. (2004). ‘Digital Technologies and the Duality of Risk’. London: ESRC Centre for
Analysis of Risk and Regulation, Discussion Paper No. 27. London School of Economics and
Political Science, October.
Clark, J. M. (1961). Competition as a Dynamic Process. New York: The Brookings Institution.
Cohen, S. (1980). Folk Devils and Moral Panics. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
—— (2001). States of Denial: Knowing about Atrocities and Suffering. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Cohen, N. S. (2008). ‘The Valorization of Surveillance: Towards a Political Economy of
Facebook’. Democratic Communique, 22(1): 5–22.
Cohen, R. and Rai, S. (eds) (2000). Global Social Movements. London: Athlone.
REFERENCES
241

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Coleman,
S.
(2005).
‘New
Mediation
and
Direct
Representation:
Reconceptualizing
Representation in the Digital Age’. New Media & Society, 7(2): 177–98.
Collins, R. (2009). Three Myths of Internet Governance: Making Sense of Networks, Governance
and Regulation. Bristol: Intellect.
Comor, E. (1994). ‘Introduction: The Global Political Economy of Communication and IPE’, in
E. Comor (ed.), The Global Political Economy of Communication. London: St. Martin’s Press,
pp. 1–18.
Conville, R. L. and Rogers, L. E. (1998). The Meaning of ‘Relationship’ in Interpersonal
Communication. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers.
Cordell, A. J., Ide, T. R., Soete, L. and Kamp, K. (1997). The New Wealth of Nations: Taxing
Cyberspace. Toronto: Between the Lines.
Coriat, B., Petit, P. and Schme´der, G. (eds) (2006). The Hardship of Nations: Exploring the Paths
of Modern Capitalism. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Cote´, M. and Pybus, J. (2007). ‘Learning to Immaterial Labour 2.0: MySpace and Social
Networks’. Ephemera: Theory & Politics in Organization, 7(1): 88–106.
Couldry, N. (2003). ‘Digital Divide or Discursive Design? On the Emerging Ethics of
Information Space’. Ethics and Information Technology, 5(2): 89–97.
—— (2010). Why Voice Matters: Culture and Politics after Neoliberalism. London: Sage.
—— Livingstone, S. and Markham, T. (2007). Media Consumption and Public Engagement:
Beyond the Presumption of Attention. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Council of Europe (2009). Internet Governance and Critical Internet Resources. Strasbourg:
Media and Information Society Division, Directorate General of Human Rights and
Legal Affairs, Council of Europe. http://www.coe.int/t/informationsociety/documents/
internetcriticalresources_en.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2010). Declaration of the Committee of Ministers on Network Neutrality. Strasbourg:
Council of Europe.
Couts, A. (2011, 31 March). ‘Microsoft Files Antitrust Lawsuit Against Google in EU’. Digital
Trends.
http://www.digitaltrends.com/computing/microsoft-ﬁles-antitrust-lawsuit-against-
google-in-eu/ accessed 28/07/2011.
Cowan, R. and Foray, D. (1997). ‘The Economics of Codiﬁcation and the Diffusion of
Knowledge’. Industrial and Corporate Change, 6(3): 595–622.
Cox, J., Collins, A. and Drinkwater, S. (2010). ‘Seeders, Leechers and Social Norms: Evidence from
the Market for Illicit Digital Downloading’. Journal of Economics and Policy, 22(4): 299–305.
Cusumano, M. A. (2010). Staying Power: Six Enduring Principles for Managing Strategy and
Innovation in an Uncertain World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— Yofﬁe, D. B. (1998). Competing on Internet Time: Lessons from Netscape and its Battle with
Microsoft. New York: The Free Press.
Dakroury, A. (2009). Communication and Human Rights. Dubuque, IA: Kendall Hunt
Publishing.
Dalle, J.-M., David, P. A., Ghosh, R. A. and Steinmueller, W. E. (2005). ‘Advancing Economic
Research on the Free and Open Source Software Mode of Production’, in M. Wynants and
J. Cornelis (eds), How Open is the Future? Economic, Social & Cultural Scenarios inspired by
Free & Open-Source Software. Brussels: Vrjie Universiteit Brussels Press, pp. 395–426.
Damasio, A. (2003). Looking for Spinoza: Joy, Sorrow, and the Feeling Brain. Orlando, FL:
Harcourt, Inc.
242
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Damasio, A. and Meyer, K. (2008). ‘Behind the Looking Glass’. Nature, 454(10): 167–8.
Danet, B. and Herring, S. C. (eds) (2003). ‘The Multilingual Internet: Language, Culture and
Communication in Instant Messaging, E-mail and Chat’. Special Issue, Journal of Computer
Mediated Communication, 9(1): np.
—— —— (2007). The Multilingual Internet: Language, Culture and Communication Online.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Darking, M. (2004). ‘Integrating On-line Learning Technologies into Higher Education: A Case
Study of Two UK Universities’. Unpublished PhD Thesis, Information Systems Group,
London School of Economics and Political Science.
—— (2007). ‘Understanding the Role of Governance in the Context of Digital Ecosystems’, in
F. Nachira, A. Nicolai, P. Dini, M. Le Louarn and L. Rivera Leon (eds), Digital Business
Ecosystems. Brussels: European Commission Directorate General Information Society and
Media, pp. 79–82.
Dasgupta, P. (1988). ‘Trust as a Commodity’, in D. Gambetta (ed.), Trust: Making and Breaking
Cooperative Relations. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 49–72.
Daugherty, T., Eastin, M. S. and Bright, L. (2008). ‘Exploring Consumer Motivations for
Creating User-Generated Content’. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 8(2): 16–25.
David, P. A. (1975). Technical Change, Innovation and Economic Growth: Essays on American and
British Experience in the 19th Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—— (1990). ‘The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the Modern
Productivity Paradox’. The American Economic Review, 80(2): 355–61.
—— (1993). ‘Intellectual Property Institutions and the Panda’s Thumb: Patents, Copyrights,
Trade Secrets in Economic Theory and History’, in M. B. Wallerstein, M. E. Mogee and
R. A. Schoen (eds), Global Dimensions of Intellectual Property Rights in Science and Technology.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press, pp. 19–61.
—— (2001). ‘The Evolving Accidental Information Super-Highway’. Oxford Review of Economic
Policy, 17(2): 159–87.
—— (2004). ‘The End of Copyright History?’. Review of Economic Research on Copyright Issues,
1(2): 5–10.
David, M. (2010). Peer to Peer and the Music Industry: The Criminalization of Sharing. London:
Sage Publications.
David, P. A. and Bunn, J. A. (1988). ‘The Economics of Gateway Technologies and Network
Evolution: Lessons from the Electricity Supply Industry’. Information Economics and Policy, 3:
165–202.
—— Foray, D. (2003). ‘Economic Fundamentals of the Knowledge Society’. Policy Futures in
Education, 1(1): 20–49.
Davidow, W. H. (2011). Overconnected: Where to Draw the Line at Being Online. London:
Headline Press.
—— Malone, M. S. (1992). The Virtual Corporation: Structuring and Revitalizing the
Corporation for the 21st Century. New York: Harper Collins Publishers.
Davies, A. (1996). ‘Innovation in Large Technical Systems: The Case of Telecommunications’.
Industrial and Corporate Change, 5(4): 1143–80.
Dawkins, R. (1982). The Extended Phenotype. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— (1989). The Selﬁsh Gene (2nd edn). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
de Kerckhove, D. (2010). The Augmented Mind. Milan: Digitpub.
REFERENCES
243

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
De Landa, M. (1991). War in the Age of Intelligent Machines. New York: Zone Books.
—— (2000). 1,000 Years of Non-Linear History. New York: Swerve Editions.
—— (2011). Philosophy and Simulation: The Emergence of Synthetic Reason. London:
Continuum International Publishing Group.
de Sola Pool, I. (1990). Technologies Without Boundaries: On Telecommunications in a Global Age
(ed. E. M. Noam). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Dean, J. (2003). ‘Why the Internet is not a Public Sphere’. Constellations, 10(1): 95–112.
Debatin, B., Lovejoy, J. P., Horn, A.-K. and Hughes, B. N. (2009). ‘Facebook and Online Privacy:
Attitudes, Behaviors, and Unintended Consequences’. Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, 15(1): 83–108.
Dejean, S., Penard, T. and Suire, R. (2010). ‘Une Premiere Evaluation des Effets de la Loi Hadopi
sur les Pratiques des Internautes Francais’. Marsouin.org, Measure & Analyse des Usages
Numeriques, CREM and University of Rennes 1, March.
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (1980/1987). A Thousand Plateaus: Captialism and Schizophrenia,
Vol. 2 (trans. B. Massumi). Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Delorme, R. (2010). Deep Complexity and the Social Sciences. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Denardis, L. (2009). Protocol Politics: The Globalization of Internet Governance. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Department of Business Innovation and Skills (BIS) and Department for Culture Media and
Sport (DCMS). (2009). Digital Britain: Final Report. London: BIS and DCMS, June.
Department for Culture Media and Sport (2006). Broadcasting: An Agreement Between Her
Majesty’s Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport and the British Broadcasting
Corporation. London: DCMS, July, http://www.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/assets/ﬁles/pdf/about/
how_we_govern/agreement.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
Derks, D., Bos, A. E. R. and von Grumbkow, J. (2008). ‘Emoticons in Computer-Mediated
Communication: Social Motives and Social Context’. CyberPsychology & Behavior, 11(1): 99–101.
Desodt, T. (2007). ‘Demonstration Implementation of the OKS Technical Platform’. Deliverable
10.4, WP 10 on Sustainable Community Building, OPAALS Contract No. IST-034824,
European Commission, June.
DiMaggio, P., Hargittai, E., Neuman, W. R. and Robinson, J. P. (2001). ‘Social Implications of
the Internet’. Annual Review of Sociology, 27: 307–36.
DiMicco, J. M., Millen, D. R., Geyer, W., Dugan, C., Brownholtz, B. and Muller, M. (2008).
‘Motivations for Social Networking at Work’, Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work. New York: ACM, 711–20.
Dini, P. (2007). ‘A Scientiﬁc Foundation for Digital Ecosystems’, in F. Nachira, A. Nicolai,
P. Dini, M. Le Louarn and L. Rivera Leon (eds), Digital Business Ecosystems. Brussels:
European Commission Directorate General Information Society and Media, pp. 24–47.
—— Briscoe, G., Munro, A. and Lain, S. (2008). ‘Towards a Biological and Mathematical
Framework for Interaction Computing’. Deliverable 1.1, WP 1 on Automata Theory and
Autopoiesis, OPAALS Contract No. IST-034824, European Commission, March.
—— Briscoe, G., Van Leeuwen, V., Munro, A. and Lain, S. (2009). ‘Biological Design Patterns of
Autopoietic Behaviour in Digital Ecosystems’. Deliverable 1.3, WP 1 on Cell Biology,
Autopoiesis and Biological Design Patterns, OPAALS Contract No. IST-034824, European
Commission, September.
244
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Dini, P. Egri-Nagy, A., Nehaniv, C., Schilstra, M., Van Leeuwen, V., Munro, A. and Lain,
S. (2010). ‘Mathematical Models of Gene Expression Computing’. Deliverable 1.4, WP 1 on
Cell biology, Autopoiesis and Biological Design Patterns, OPAALS Contract No. IST-034824,
European Commission, October.
—— Iqani, M. and Mansell, R. (2011). ‘The (Im)Possiblity of Interdisciplinarity: Lessons from
Constructing a Theoretical Framework for Digital Ecosystems’. Culture, Theory and Critique,
52(1): 3–27.
Dixon, A. N. (2009). ‘Liability of Users and Third Parties for Copyright Infringements on the
Internet: Overview of International Developments’, in A. Strowel (ed.), Peer-to-Peer File
Sharing and Secondary Liability in Copyright Law. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. 12–42.
Donahue, H. C. (2010). ‘The Network Neutrality Inquiry’. Info, 12(2): 3–8.
Donders, K. and Pauwels, C. (2010). ‘The Introduction of an Ex Ante Evaluation for New Media
Services: Is Europe Asking for It, or Does Public Service Broadcasting Need It?’. International
Journal of Media and Cultural Politics, 6(2): 133–48.
Dopfer, K. and Potts, J. (2004). ‘Evolutionary Foundations of Economics’, in J. S. Metcalfe and
J. Foster (eds), Evolution and Economic Complexity. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. 3–23.
Dosi, G. (1982). ‘Technological Paradigms and Technological Trajectories: A Suggested
Interpretation of the Determinants and Directions of Technical Change’. Research Policy, 11:
147–62.
Dotsika, F. (2009). ‘Uniting Formal and Informal Descriptive Power: Reconciling Ontologies
with Folksonomies’. International Journal of Information Management, 29(5): 407–15.
Downing, J. D. H., Ford, T. V., Gill, G. and Stein, L. (2001). Radical Media: Rebellious
Communication and Social Movements. London: Sage.
Doyle, G. (2002). Understanding Media Economics. London: Sage.
Drahos, P. and Braithwaite, J. (2003). Information Feudalism: Who Owns the Knowledge
Economy? New York: The New Press.
Drake, W. J. and Wilson, Jr., E. (2008). Governing Global Electronic Networks: International
Perspectives on Policy and Power. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Drucker, P. F. (1959). The Landmarks of Tomorrow: A Report on the New ‘Post-Modern’ World.
New York: Transaction Publishers.
—— (1969). ‘Knowledge Society’. New Society, 13(343): 629–31.
DuBoff, R. B. (1983). ‘The Telegraph and the Structure of Markets in the United States, 1845–1890’.
Research in Economic History, 8: 253–77.
Dubosson-Torbay, M., Pigneur, Y. and Usunier, J.-C. (nd). Business Models for Music
Distribution after the P2P Revolution. Lausanne: University of Lausanne.
Ducatel, K., Bogdanowicz, M., Scapolo, F., Leijten, J. and Burgelman, J.-C. (2001). Scenarios for
Ambient Intelligence in 2010, Final Report. Seville: Institute Prospective Technological Studies.
Duman, H., Healing, A. and Ghanea-Hercock, R. (2009,). ‘An Intelligent Agent Approach for
Visual Information Structure Generation’, in Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Intelligent
Agents 2009, Nashville, TN, pp. 55–62.
Dutton, W. H. and Peltu, M. (2005). ‘The Emerging Internet Governance Mosaic: Connecting
the Pieces’. Forum Discussion Paper No. 5, Oxford: Oxford Internet Institute.
—— Shepherd, A. (2005). ‘Conﬁdence and Risk on the Internet’, in R. Mansell and B. S. Collins
(eds), Trust and Crime in Information Societies. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. 207–44.
REFERENCES
245

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Dutton, W. H., Helsper, E. J. and Gerber, M. M. (2009). The Internet in Britain 2009. Oxford:
Oxford Internet Institute.
European Broadcasting Union (2010). Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Technologies and Services. Geneva:
EBU. http://tech.ebu.ch/docs/techreports/tr009.pdf accessed 27/07/2011.
Eco, U. (1994). ‘How Not to Use the Mobile Phone’, in How to Travel with a Salmon and Other
Essays (trans. W. Weaver). London: Secker & Warburg, pp. 139–42.
Economides, N. and Katsamakas, E. (2006). ‘Two-Sided Competition of Proprietary vs. Open
Source Technology Platforms and the Implications for the Software Industry’. Management
Science, 52(7): 1057–71.
Eder, R., Kurz, T., Heistracher, T. J., Bayon, V., Russo, M. and Filieri, A. (2007). ‘Design of
Software Generation Prototype’. Deliverable 2.1, WP 2 on Automatic Code Generation from
Models, OPAALS Contract No. IST-034824, European Commission, July.
Eicher-Catt, D. and Catt, I. E. (eds) (2010). Communicology: The New Science of Embodied
Discourse. Madison, WI: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press.
Electronic Frontier Foundation. (2011). ‘The Content Industry and ISPs Announce a “Common
Framework for Copyright Alerts”: What Does It Mean for Users?’. Electronic Frontier Foundation,
7 July, http://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2011/07/content-industry-and-isps-announce-common
accessed 27/07/2011.
Eliot, T. S. (1936). ‘Choruses from the Rock (1934)’, in T. S. Eliot (ed.), Collected Poems
1909–1935. New York: Harcourt Brace, p. 179.
Elkin-Koren, N. (2006). ‘Exploring Creative Commons: A Skeptical View of a Worthy Pursuit’,
in P. B. Hugenholtz and L. Guibault (eds), The Future of the Public Domain. Amsterdam:
Kluwer Law International, pp. 325–45.
Ellison, N. B., Steinﬁeld, C. and Lampe, C. (2007). ‘The Beneﬁts of Facebook “Friends”: Social
Capital and College Students’ Use of Online Social Network Sites’. Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication, 12(4): 1143–68.
Ellul, J. (1990). The Technological Bluff (trans. G. W. Bromiley). Grand Rapids, MI: William
B. Eerdmans Publishing.
Elser, B. W. (2005). ‘Filtering, Blocking and Rating: Chaperones or Censorship?’, in M. Klang
and A. Murray (eds), Human Rights in the Digital Age. London: Glasshouse Press, pp. 99–110.
Engle, E. A. (2002). ‘When is Fair Use Fair? A Comparison of EU and US Intellectual Property
Law’. Transnational Lawyer, 15: 187–225.
Enigmax. (2010). ‘ACS: Law (Gay) Porn Letters Target Pensioners, Married Men’. TorrentFreak,
25 September, http://torrentfreak.com/acslaw-gay-porn-letters-target-pensioners-married-
men-100925/ accessed 28/07/2011.
Ernesto. (2010). ‘Canadian Movie Pirate ‘maVen’ Sent to Jail’. TorrentFreak, 17 March, http://
torrentfreak.com/canadian-movie-piracy-maven-sent-to-jail-100317/ accessed 28/07/2011.
Escobar, A. (1995). Encountering Development: The Making and Unmaking of the Third World.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Etzioni, A. (2002). ‘The Good Society’. Seattle Journal for Social Justice, 1(1): 93–6.
Europa RAPID Press Releases. (2009, 5 November). ‘Agreement on EU Telecoms Reform Paves
Way for Strong Consumer Rights, an Open Internet, a Single European Telecoms Market and
High-Speed Internet Connections for All Citizens’. Europa RAPID. http://europa.eu/rapid/
pressReleasesAction.do?reference=MEMO/09/491 accessed 28/07/2011.
246
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
European Commission (1994). Europe and the Global Information Society: Recommendations to
the European Council (Bangemann Report). Brussels: European Commission. http://www.
epractice.eu/ﬁles/media/media_694.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (1995). Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the Protection
of Individuals with Regard to the Processing of Personal Data and on the Free Movement of
such Data. Brussels: European Commission. http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/
docs/95-46-ce/dir1995-46_part1_en.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2000a). Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. Brussels: European
Commission, 2000/C 364/01. http://www.europarl.europa.eu/charter/pdf/text_en.pdf accessed
28/07/2011.
—— (2000b). Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2000
on Certain Legal Aspects of Information Society Services, in Particular Electronic Commerce, in
the Internal Market (Directive on Electronic Commerce). Brussels: European Commission.
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32000L0031:EN:HTML
accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2001). Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2001
on the Harmonisation of Certain Aspects of Copyright and Related Rights in the Information
Society. Brussels: European Commission. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.
do?uri=OJ:L:2001:167:0010:0019:EN:PDF accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2004). Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004
on the Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights. Brussels: European Commission. http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2004:195:0016:0025:en:PDF accessed 28/
07/2011.
—— (2006). Directive 2006/116/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12
December 2006 on the Term of Protection of Copyright and Certain Related Rights. Brussels:
European
Commission.
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:
L:2006:372:0012:0018:EN:PDF accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2007). ‘Antitrust: Commission Welcomes CFI Ruling Upholding Commission’s Decision
on Microsoft’s Abuse of Dominant Position’, 17 September, http://europa.eu/rapid/
pressReleasesAction.do?reference=MEMO/07/359 accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2008). Consolidated Version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
(TFEU). Brussels: European Commission OJ C115/47. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/
LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2010:083:0047:0200:en:PDF accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2009a). Directive 2009/140/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of 25 November
2009 Amending Directives 2002/21/EC on a Common Regulatory Framework for Electronic
Communications Networks and Services, 2002/19/EC on Access to, and Interconnection of,
Electronic Communications Networks and Associated Facilities, and 2002/20/EC on the
Authorisation of Electronic Communications Networks and Services, OJEU L337/37. Brussels:
European Commission. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2009:337:
0037:0069:EN:PDF accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2009b). ‘Telecoms: Commission Acts on Termination Rates to Boost Competition’,
7 May, http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/09/710 accessed 28/07/
2011.
—— (2010a). ‘Antitrust: Commission Probes Allegations of Antitrust Violations by Google’,
30 November, http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/10/1624&format=
HTML&aged=0&language=EN&guiLanguage=en accessed 28/07/2011.
REFERENCES
247

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
European Commission (2010b). A Digital Agenda for Europe: Communication from the
Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social
Committee and the Committee of the Regions. Brussels: European Commission COM(2010)
245 ﬁnal. http:// eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2010:0245:FIN:EN:PDF
accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2010c). ‘Digital Agenda for Europe: Key Initiatives’. European Commission Memo/10/200,
19 May, http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=MEMO/10/200&format=
HTML&aged=0&language=EN&guiLanguage=en accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2010d). Europe in Figures: Eurostat Yearbook 2010. Luxembourg: Eurostat Statistical
Books.
—— (2010e). Report on the Public Consultation on ‘The Open Internet and Net Neutrality in
Europe’. Brussels: European Commission. http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/policy/
ecomm/doc/library/public_consult/net_neutrality/report.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2011). Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on a Single Market
for Intellectual Property Rights—Boosting Creativity and Innovation to Provide Economic
Growth, High Quality Jobs and First Class Products and Services in Europe. Brussels: European
Commission
COM(2011)287
ﬁnal.
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/
ipr_strategy/COM_2011_287_en.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
European Commission High Level Group of Experts (1996). Building the European Information
Society for Us All—Interim Report, First Reﬂections of the High Level Group of Experts.
Luxembourg: Ofﬁce for Ofﬁcial Publications of the European Communities. http://www.
epractice.eu/ﬁles/media/media_688.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
European Parliament (2007). Draft Report on Cultural Industries in the Context of the Lisbon
Strategy. European Parliament Committee on Culture and Education, Rapporteur, Guy
Bono, PR/684266EN. http://www.europarl.europa.eu/meetdocs/2004_2009/documents/pr/
684/684266/684266en.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2008). Report on Cultural Industries in Europe (2007/2153(INI)). European Parliament
Committee on Culture and Education, Rapporteur, Guy Bono, A6-0063/2008. http://www.
europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-//EP//NONSGML+REPORT+A6-2008-0063
+0+DOC+PDF+V0//EN accessed 28/07/2011.
Evans, D. S., Hagiu, A. and Schmalensee, R. (2005). ‘A Survey of the Economic Role of Software
Platforms in Computer-based Industries’. CESifo Economic Studies, 51(2/3): 189–224.
Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and Social Change. Cambridge: Polity.
Faulhaber, G. R. (2007). ‘Network Neutrality: The Debate Evolves’. International Journal of
Communication, 1: 680–700.
Federal Communications Commission (2005). Policy Statement. Washington, DC: FCC, FCC
05-151. http://www.publicknowledge.org/pdf/FCC-05-151A1.pdf, accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2010a). Dissenting Statement of Commissioner Meredith Attwell Baker Re: Preserving the
Open Internet, GN Docket No. 09-191, Broadband Industry Practices, WC Docket No. 07-52.
Washington, DC: FCC. http://transition.fcc.gov/Daily_Releases/Daily_Business/2010/db1221/
DOC-303746A5.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2010b). Report and Order in the Matter of Preserving the Open Internet, Broadband
Industry
Practices,
GN
Docket
No.
09-191,
WC
Docket
No.
07-52.
Washington,
DC: FCC. http://www.scribd.com/doc/47905173/FCC-Report-and-Order-In-the-Matter-of-
Preserving-the-Open-Internet-Broadband-Industry-Practices accessed 28/07/2011.
248
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Feenberg, A. (1991). Critical Theory of Technology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— (1992). ‘Subversive Rationalization, Technology, Power, and Democracy’. Inquiry—An
Interdisciplinary Journal of Philosophy, 35(3–4): 301–22.
—— (1999). Questioning Technology. New York: Routledge.
—— (2000). Looking Backward, Looking Forward: Reﬂections on the 20th Century. Burnaby, BC:
Hitotsubashi University Conference on the 20th Century—Dreams and Realities. http://
www-rohan.sdsu.edu/faculty/feenberg/hit1ck.htm accessed 20/10/2010.
—— (2010a). Between Reason and Experience: Essays in Technology and Modernity. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
—— (2010b). Ten Paradoxes of Technology. Burnaby, BC: Simon Fraser University, SFU Canada
Chair Seminar Series, 11 February, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-HzJ_Jkqa2Q accessed
10/07/2011.
Fein, M. L. (1992). Analyzing Psychotherapy: A Social Role Interpretation. New York: Praeger.
Feintuck, M. and Varney, M. (2006). Media Regulation, Public Interest and the Law (2nd edn).
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Fenton, N. (2007). ‘Contesting Global Capital, New Media, Solidarity, and the Role of a Social
Imaginary’, in B. Cammaerts and N. Carpentier (eds), Reclaiming the Media: Communication
Rights and Democratic Media Roles. Bristol: Intellect Books, pp. 225–42.
Ferree, M., Gamson, W., Gerhrard, J. and Rucht, D. (2002). ‘Four Models of the Public Sphere in
Modern Democracies’. Theory and Society, 31(3): 289–324.
Ferronato, P. (2007). ‘Ecosystem Oriented Architecture (EOA) vs SOA’, in F. Nachira, A. Nicolai,
P. Dini, M. Le Louarn and L. Rivera Leon (eds), Digital Business Ecosystems. Brussels:
European Commission Directorate General Information Society and Media, pp. 111–18.
Fingar, P. (2009). Dot Cloud: The 21st Century Business Platform Built on Cloud. Tampa, FL:
Meghan-Kiffer Press.
Fleming, M. (2010, 21 October). ‘MPAA Urges Japan on Pic Pirate Issue’. Deadline Hollywood.
http://www.deadline.com/tag/piracy-graduated-response/ accessed 28/07/2011.
Flichy, P. (2007) The Internet Imaginaire. Trans. L. Carey-Libbrecht, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Foray, D. (2004). The Economics of Knowledge. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— (ed.) (2009). The New Economics of Technology Policy. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
—— Steinmueller, W. E. (2003). ‘The Economics of Knowledge Reproduction by Inscription’.
Industrial and Corporate Change, 12(2): 299–319.
Forge, S., Blackman, C., Bohlin, E. and Cave, M. (2009). ‘A Green Knowledge Society: An ICT
Policy Agenda to 2015 for Europe’s Future Knowledge Society’. A Study for the Ministry of
Enterprise, Energy and Communications, Government Ofﬁces of Sweden by SCF Associates,
Ltd. Final Report.
Foucault, M. (1978). The History of Sexuality. Vol. 1: An Introduction. New York: Pantheon.
France. (2009). LOI n 2009-1311 du 28 octobre 2009 relative a` la protection pe´nale de la proprie´te´
litte´raire et artistique sur internet No. 2009-1311 of 28 October 2009. Paris: Government of
France. http://legifrance.gouv.fr/afﬁchTexte.do?cidTexte=JORFTEXT000021208046&dateTexte=
accessed 28/07/2011.
Fraser, I. (2007). Dialectics of the Self: Transcending Charles Taylor. New York: Academic Press.
Fraser, N. (1990). ‘Rethinking the Public Sphere: A Contribution to the Critique of Actually
Existing Democracy’. Social Text, 25/26: 56–80.
—— (2010). Scales of Justice: Reimagining Political Space in a Globalizing World. New York:
Columbia University Press.
REFERENCES
249

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Frau-Meigs, D. (2011). Media Matters in the Cultural Contradictions of the ‘Information Society’:
Towards a Human Rights-based Governance. Strasbourg: Council of Europe Publishing.
Freedman, D. (2011). ‘The State of Internet Regulation’. Paper presented at the IAMCR
Conference, Istanbul, 13–17 July.
Freeman, C. (1988). ‘Introduction’, in G. Dosi, C. Freeman, R. Nelson, G. Silverberg and L. Soete
(eds), Technical Change and Economic Theory. London: Pinter Publishers, pp. 1–8.
—— (1992). The Economics of Hope: Essays on Technical Change, Economic Growth and the
Environment. London: Pinter Publishers.
—— (1995). ‘The “National System of Innovation” in Historical Perspective’. Cambridge
Journal of Economics, 19: 5–24.
—— (2007). ‘The ICT Paradigm’, in R. Mansell, C. Avgerou, D. Quah and R. Silverstone (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of Information and Communication Technologies. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, pp. 34–54.
—— Louc¸a, F. (2001). As Time Goes By: From Industrial Revolutions to the Information
Revolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— Perez, C. (1988). ‘Structural Crises of Adjustment, Business Cycles and Investment
Behaviour’, in G. Dosi, C. Freeman, R. Nelson, G. Silverberg and L. Soete (eds), Technical
Change and Economic Theory. London: Pinter, pp. 38–66.
Frenken, K. (2006). Innovation, Evolution and Complexity Theory. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Fuchs, C. (2009). ‘Information and Communication Technologies and Society: A Contribution
to the Critique of the Political Economy of the Internet’. European Journal of Communication,
24(1): 69–87.
Fukuyama, F. (1992). The End of History and the Last Man. New York: Avon Books, Inc.
Fuller, S. (2000). Thomas Kuhn: A Philosophical History for Our Times. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Functowicz, S. and Ravetz, J. R. (1994). ‘Emergent Complex Systems’. Futures, 26(6): 568–82.
Gagliardone, I. (2010). ‘Development and Destabilization: The Selective Adoption of ICTs in
Ethiopia’. Unpublished PhD Thesis, Department of Media and Communications, London
School of Economics and Political Science.
Galbraith, J. K. (1996). The Good Society: The Humane Agenda. New York: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Gandy, Jr., O. H. (2009). Coming to Terms with Chance: Engaging Rational Discrimination and
Cumulative Disadvantage. Burlington, VA: Ashgate.
Gaonkar, D. P. (2002). ‘Toward New Imaginaries: An Introduction’. Public Culture, 14(1): 1–19.
Garnham, N. (1979). ‘Contribution to a Political Economy of Mass-communication’. Media,
Culture and Society, 1(2): 123–46.
—— (1986). ‘Contribution to a Political Economy of Mass-Communication’, in R. Collins,
J. Curran, P. Scannell, P. Schlesinger and C. Sparks (eds), Media, Culture and Society: A Critical
Reader. London: Sage, pp. 9–32.
—— (1990). ‘Media Theory and the Political Future of Mass Communication’, in F. Inglis (ed.),
Capitalism and Communication: Global Culture and the Economics of Information. London:
Sage, pp. 1–19.
Gawer, A. and Henderson, R. M. (2007). ‘Platform Owner Entry and Innovation in
Complementary Markets: Evidence from Intel’. Journal of Economics and Management
Strategy, 16(1): 1–34.
250
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Geels, F. W. (2002). ‘Technological Transitions as Evolutionary Reconﬁguration Processes:
A Multi-Level Perspective and a Case-Study’. Research Policy, 31: 1257–74.
—— (2010). ‘Ontologies, Socio-technical Transitions (to Sustainability), and the Multi-level
Perspective’. Research Policy, 39(4): 495–510.
—— Schot, J. (2007). ‘Comment on “Techno Therapy or Nurtured Niches?”’. Research Policy,
36(7): 1100–1.
Georgiou, M. (2006). Diaspora, Identity and the Media: Diasporic Transnationalism and
Mediated Spatialities. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Gershuny, J. (1978). After Industrial Society? The Emerging Self Service Economy. London:
Macmillan.
Get Safe Online. (2010). UK Internet Security: State of the Nation, The Get Safe Online Report
2010. London: Get Safe Online.
Ghosh, R. A. (2005). Free/Libre/Open Source Software: Policy Support. Maastricht: MERIT,
University of Maastricht. http://ﬂosspols.org/deliverables/FLOSSPOLS-D04-openstandards-
v6.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
Gibson, W. (1984). Neuromancer. New York: Ace Books.
Giddens, A. (1991). Modernity and Self-Identity: Self and Society in the Late Modern Age.
Cambridge: Polity Press.
—— (1993). New Rules of Sociological Method: A Positive Critique of Interpretative Sociologies
(2nd edn). Stanford, CA: University of Stanford Press.
—— Piersin, C. (1998: 77). Conversations with Anthony Giddens: Making Sense of Modernity.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Giusto, D., Iera, A., Morabito, G. and Atzori, L. (eds) (2010). The Internet of Things: 20th
Tyrrhenian Workshop on Digital Communications. New York: Springer.
Gladwell, M. and Shirky, C. (2011). ‘From Innovation to Revolution: Do Social Media Make
Protests Possible?’. Foreign Affairs, March/April, np.
Goergen, M., Mallin, C., Mitleton-Kelly, E., Al-Hawamdeh, A. and Hse-Yu, I. (2010). Corporate
Governance and Complexity Theory. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Golbeck, J. (2007). ‘The Dynamics of Web-based Social Networks: Membership, Relationships
and Change’. First Monday, 12(11): np.
—— Hendler, J. and Parsia, B. (2003). ‘Trust Networks on the Semantic Web’, in M. Klusch,
S. Ossowski, A. Omicini and H. Laamanen (eds), Proceedings of Cooperative Information
Agents VII (CIA 2003). Berlin: Springer, pp. 238–49.
Golding, P. and Murdock, G. (2001). ‘Digital Divides: Communications Policy and its
Contradictions’. New Economy, 8: 110–15.
Goldsmith, J. L. and Wu, T. (2006). Who Controls the Internet? Illusions of a Borderless World.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gore, A. (1993). ‘Remarks by Vice President Albert Gore at the National Press Club’.
Washington, DC, 21 December.
Gould, S. J. (2007). Punctuated Equilibrium. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Graham, G. (1999). The Internet://A Philosophical Inquiry. London: Routledge.
Graham, P. (2007). ‘Political Economy of Communication: A Critique’. Critical Perspectives on
International Business, 3(3): 226–45.
REFERENCES
251

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Gramsci, A. (1971). Selections From the Prison Notebooks (ed. and trans. Q. Hoar and
G. N. Smith). London: Lawrence and Wishart.
Grant, C. B. (2003). ‘Destabilizing Social Communication Theory’. Theory Culture & Society,
20(6): 95–119.
Gras, A. (1993). Grandeur et de´pendance: sociologie des macro-syste`mes technique. Paris: Presses
universitaires de France.
Griliches, Z. (1996). ‘The Discovery of the Residual: A Historical Note’. Journal of Economic
Literature, 34(3): 1324–30.
Grusin, R. (2010). Premediation: Affect and Mediality After 9/11. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Guimo´n, J. and Zac de Filc, S. (eds) (2001). Challenges of Pscyhoanalysis in the 21st Century:
Psychoanalysis, Health, and Psychosexuality in the Era of Virtual Reality. New York: Kluwer
Academic.
Gunkel, D. J. (2003). ‘Second Thoughts: Toward a Critique of the Digital Divide’. New Media &
Society, 5(4): 499–522.
—— (2010). ‘The Real Problem: Avatars, Metaphysics and Online Social Interaction’. New
Media & Society, 12(1): 127–41.
Gutmann, A. and Thompson, D. F. (2004). Why Deliberative Democracy? Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Guttman, N. (2010). ‘Public Deliberation on Policy Issues: Normative Stipulations and Practical
Resolutions’, in C. T. Salmon (ed.), Communications Yearbook No. 34. New York: Routledge,
pp. 169–212.
Haas, P. M. (1992). ‘Introduction: Epistemic Communities and International Policy
Coordination’. International Organization, 46(1): 1–36.
Habermas, J. (1962/1989). The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a
Category of Bourgeois Society. Cambridge: Polity.
—— (1997). ‘The Public Sphere’, in S. E. Bonner (ed.), 20th Century Political Theory: A Reader.
London: Routledge.
Haddon, L. (2004). Information and Communication Technologies in Everyday Life. Cambridge:
Berg.
—— (ed.) (2011). The Contemporary Internet. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
Hadﬁeld, G. (1992). ‘The Economics of Copyright: An Historical Perspective’. ASCAP Copyright
Law Symposium, 38: 1–46.
Hagiu, A. and Yofﬁe, D. B. (2009). ‘What’s Your Google Strategy?’. Harvard Business Review,
April, 1–7.
Hale, M. (1787). ‘A Treatise, in Three Parts. “Pars Prima. De Jure Maris et Brachiorum
ejufdem.—Pars Secunda. De Portibus Maris.—Pars Teria. Conserning the Custom of
Goods Imported and Exported’, in F. Hargrave (ed.), A Collection of Tracts Relative to the
Law of England from Manuscripts, Volume 1. Dublin: E. Lynch et al., pp. 1–248.
Halloran, J. D. (1974). Mass Media and Society: The Challenge of Research—An Inaugural Lecture
delivered in the University of Leicester, 25 October 1973. Leicester: Leicester University Press.
http://www.asc.upenn.edu/gerbner/archive.aspx?sectionID=95&packageID=350 accessed 28/07/
2011.
Hamelink, C. (2002). ‘Social Development, Information and Knowledge: Whatever Happened
to Communication?’. Journal of Development, 45(4): 4–9.
Hamilton, W. H. (1930). ‘Affectation with Public Interest’. Yale Law Journal, 39(8): 1089–112.
252
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Hampton, K. N. and Gupta, N. (2008). ‘Community and Social Interaction in the Wireless City:
Wi-Fi Use in Public and Semi-Public Places’. New Media & Society, 10(6): 831–50.
Handy, C. (1994). The Age of Paradox. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Haraway, D. (1985/1991). ‘A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology and Socialist-Feminism in
the Late Twentieth Century’, in D. Haraway (ed.), Simians, Cyborgs and Women. New York:
Routledge, pp. 149–81.
Hardt, M. and Negri, A. (2001). Empire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
—— —— (2009). Common Wealth. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hargittai, E. (2003). ‘The Digital Divide and What to Do with It’, in D. C. Jones (ed.), The New
Economy. San Diego, CA: Academy Press, pp. 822–38.
—— (2004). ‘Internet Access and Use in Context’. New Media & Society, 6(1): 137–44.
—— (2008). ‘Whose Space? Differences Among Users and Non-Users of Social Network Sites’.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(1): 276–97.
Hargreaves, I. (2011). ‘Digital Opportunity: A Review of Intellectual Property and Growth’.
London: An Independent Report Commissioned by the UK Prime Minister.
Harries-Jones, P. (2004). ‘Revisiting Angels Fear: Recursion, Ecology and Aesthetics’. SEED
Journal, 4(1): 143–65.
Hartmann, M. (2004). Technologies and Utopias: The Cyberﬂaneur and the Experience of ‘Being
Online’. Munich: Verlag Reinhard Fischer.
Hassan, R. (2008). The Information Society. Cambridge: Polity.
Haunss, S. and Shadlen, K. C. (eds) (2009). Politics of Intellectual Property: Contestation Over the
Ownership, Use and Control of Knowledge and Information. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Hayles, N. K. (ed.) (1991). Chaos and Order: Complex Dynamics in Literature and Science.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Healy, K. and Schussman, A. (2003). ‘The Ecology of Open Source Software Development
(Draft)’. Unpublished Working Paper, Department of Sociology, University of Arizona.
Heath, R. L. and Bryant, J. (2000). Human Communication Theory and Research. New York:
Routledge.
Heeks, R. (2010). ‘Understanding “Gold Farming” and Real-Money Trading as the Intersection
of Real and Virtual Economies’. Journal of Virtual Worlds Research, 2(4): 3–27.
Heidegger, M. (1993). ‘Only a God Can Save Us’ (trans. M. Alter and J. Caputo), in R. Wolin
(ed.), The Heidegger Controversy: A Critical Reader. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 91–115.
Henderson, R. M. and Clark, K. B. (1990). ‘Architectural Innovation: The Reconﬁguration of
Existing Product Technologies and the Failure of Established Firms’. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 35: 9–30.
Henten, A., Samarajiva, R. and Melody, W. H. (2003). ‘Designing Next Generation Telecom
Regulation: ICT Convergence or Multi-Sector Utility’. Info, 5(1): 26–33.
Herwig, J. (2009). ‘Liminality and Communitas in Social Media: The Case of Twitter’. Paper
presented at the Critical Internet Research 10.0 Conference, Milwaukee, 7–10 October.
Heylighen, F. and Joslyn, C. (2001). ‘Cybernetics and Second-Order Cybernetics’, in
R. A. Meyers (ed.), Encyclopedia of Physical Science & Technology (3rd edn). New York:
Academic Press, pp. 1–25.
High Court of Justice. (2011). In the High Court of Justice Queen’s Bench Division, Administrative
Court, Case No. CO/7354/2010, between (1) British Telecommunications Plc (2) TalkTalk
REFERENCES
253

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Telecom Group Plc and the Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills. London: High
Court of Justice Queen’s Bench Division, Administrative Court.
Hine, C. (2000). Virtual Ethnography. London: Sage.
Hirschheim, R., Klein, H. K. and Lyytinen, K. (1996). ‘Exploring the Intellectual Structures of
Information Systems Development: A Social Action Theoretical Analysis’. Accounting,
Management & Information Technology, 6(1/2): 1–63.
Hirschman, A. O. (1970). Exit, Voice and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms, Organizations
and States. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
HM Treasury. (2006). Gowers Review of Intellectual Property. London: HM Treasury.
Ho, K. C., Baber, Z. and Knondker, H. (2002). ‘“Sites” of Resistance: Alternative Websites and
State-Society Relations’. British Journal of Sociology, 53(1): 127–48.
Hobday, M. (1998). ‘Product Complexity, Innovation and Industrial Organisation’. Research
Policy, 26: 689–710.
Hodgson, G. M. (2006). Economics in the Shadows of Darwin and Marx: Essays on Institutional
and Evolutionary Themes. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Hoﬂich, J. R. and Hartmann, M. (eds) (2006). Mobile Communication in Everyday Life:
Ethnographic Views, Observations and Reﬂections. Berlin: Frank & Timme.
Hofmann, J. (2009). ‘Critical Internet Resources: Coping with the Elephant in the Room’, in
W. J. Drake (ed.), Internet Governance: Creating Opportunities for All. Sharm el Sheikh, Egypt:
United Nations Committee for Economic and Social Affairs, pp. 1–14.
—— Botzem, S. (2010). ‘Transnational Governance Spirals: The Transformation of Rule-
making Authority in Internet Regulation and Corporate Financial Reporting’. Critical Policy
Studies, 4(1): 18–37.
Hogan, B. J. (2009). ‘Networking in Everyday Life’. Unpublished PhD Dissertation. University of
Toronto.
Holmes, C. A. V. (1998). There Is No Such Thing as a Therapist: An Introduction to the
Therapeutic Process. London: Karnac Books.
Holt, R. (2004). Dialogue on the Internet: Language, Civic Identity, and Computer-Mediated
Communication. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group.
Hookway, B., Kwinter, S. and Mau, B. (1999). Pandemonium: The Rise of Predatory Locales in the
Postwar World. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Architectural Press.
Horton, J. J. and Chilton, L. B. (2010). ‘The Labor Economics of Paid Crowdsourcing’, in
Proceedings of the 11th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce. New York: ACM, pp. 209–18.
Howard, P. N. (2010). The Digital Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Information
Technology and Political Islam. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Huberman, B. A., Romero, D. M. and Wu, F. (2009). ‘Crowdsourcing, Attention and
Productivity’. Journal of Information Science, 35(6): 758–65.
Hughes, T. P. (1987). ‘The Evolution of Large Technological Systems’, in W. E. Bijker,
T. P. Hughes and T. Pinch (eds), The Social Construction of Technological Systems.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 51–82.
Hulme, D. and Toye, J. (2006). ‘The Case for Cross-Disciplinary Social Science Research on
Poverty, Inequality and Well-Being’. Journal of Development Studies, 42(7): 1085–107.
Hustinx, P. (2010). Opinion of the European Data Protection Supervisor on the Current
Negotiations by the European Union of an Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA).
Brussels: Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Union, 2010/C 147. http://www.edps.europa.eu/
254
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
EDPSWEB/webdav/site/mySite/shared/Documents/Consultation/Opinions/2010/10-02-
22_ACTA_EN.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
Ibrahim, Y. (2006). ‘The Role of Regulations and Social Norms in Mediating Online Political
Discourse’. Unpublished PhD Thesis, Department of Media and Communications, London
School of Economics and Political Science.
Ibrus, I. (2010). ‘Evolutionary Dynamics of New Media Forms: The Case of Open Mobile Web’.
Unpublished PhD Thesis, Department of Media and Communications, London School of
Economics and Political Science.
IDATE (2010). DigiWorld Yearbook 2010: The Digital World’s Challenges. Montpellier: IDATE.
Independent Commission for World-wide Telecommunication Development (ICWTD) (1984).
The Missing Link: Report of the Independent Commission for World-wide Telecommunication
Development. Geneva: International Telecommunication Union.
Innis, H. A. (1950/2007). Empire and Communication. Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
republished by Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
—— (1951/1991). The Bias of Communication. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
International Commission for the Study of Communication Problems (ICSCP) (1980/2004).
Many Voices, One World: Report of the International Commission for the Study of
Communication Problems. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld/International Commission
for the Study of Communication Problems.
International Federation for Information Processing (IFIP) (2009). Digital Music Report 2009.
London: IFIP.
—— (2010). Digital Music Report 2010. London: IFIP.
—— (2011). Digital Music Report 2011. London: IFIP.
International Telecommunication Union (ITU) (2006). Digital Life: ITU Internet Report 2006.
Geneva: ITU.
Internet Governance Forum (IGF) (2010). Fifth Meeting of the Internet Governance Forum,
Chairman’s Summary (Expanded Version). Vilnius: IGF.
Internet World Stats. (2011). Internet World Stats—Usage and Population Statistics: Internet
World Stats. http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm accessed 1/06/2011.
Introna, L. D. (1997). Management, Information and Power: A Narrative of the Involved Manager.
Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Ito, Y. (1991). ‘Johoka as a Driving Force of Social Change’. KEIO Communication Review, 12:
33–58.
Jaeger, P. T. and Burnett, G. (2010). Information Worlds. New York: Routledge.
Jefferson, T. (1813). ‘Letter of 1813 to Isaac McPherson’ Thomas Jefferson: Writings. New York:
The Library of America.
Jenkins, H. (2006). Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New York:
New York University Press.
—— Purushotma, R., Weigel, M., Clinton, K. and Robison, A. J. (2009). Confronting the
Challenges of Participatory Culture: Media Education for the 21st Century. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press for John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Reports on Digital Media and
Learning.
Jessop, B. (2005). ‘Cultural Political Economy, the Knowledge-based Economy and the State’, in
A. Barry and D. Slater (eds), The Technological Economy. London: Routledge, pp. 142–64.
REFERENCES
255

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Johansen, H. P. M. (2009). ‘Re-Conceptualising Party-Centred Politics in Terms of ‘Market’:
A Relationship Marketing Approach’. Unpublished PhD Thesis, Department of Media and
Communications, London School of Economics and Political Science.
Johnson, J. (2010). ‘Hacked Twitter Account Leads to Panic for Millions’. The Blog Herald,
26 November, http://www.blogherald.com/2010/11/26/hacked-twitter-account-leads-to-panic-
for-millions/ accessed 28/07//2011.
Johnson, D. R. and Post, D. G. (1998). ‘The New ‘Civic Virtue’ of the Net: A Complex Systems
Model for the Governance of Cyberspace’, in C. Firestone (ed.), The Emerging Internet: 1998
(Annual Review of the Institute for Information Studies). Denver, CO: The Aspen Institute,
pp. 81–108.
Johnson, B., Lorenz, E. and Lundvall, B.-A˚ (2002). ‘Why All This Fuss about Codiﬁed and Tacit
Knowledge?’. Industrial and Corporate Change, 11(2): 245–62.
Jones, S. (1999). Doing Internet Research: Critical Issues and Methods for Examining the Net.
London: Sage Publications.
Jowitt, T. (2010). ‘Google Street View Cars Broke Canadian Privacy Laws’. eweekeurope, 20 October,
http://www.eweekeurope.co.uk/news/google-street-view-cars-violated-canadian-privacy-laws-
10773 accessed 28/07/2011.
Judge, P. (2010). ‘Privacy Group Says Google Broke the Law’. eweekeurope, 10 June, http://www.
eweekeurope.co.uk/news/privacy-group-threatens-legal-action-on-google-7628 accessed 28/07/
2011.
Juneau, P. (1980). ‘Concluding Statement by the Chairman Mr. Pierre Juneau, Deputy Minister
of Communications, Canada’, in OECD (ed.), High Level Conference on Information
Computer and Communications Policies for the 80s, 6–8 October. Paris: OECD.
Jussawalla, M. and Edenﬁeld, H. (eds) (1984). Communication and Information Economics.
Amsterdam: North Holland.
Kahin, B. (2004). ‘Codiﬁcation in Context’, in S. Braman (ed.), The Emergent Global Information
Policy Regime. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 39–61.
Kalathil, S. and Boas, T. C. (2003). Open Networks, Closed Regimes: The Impact of the Internet on
Authoritarian Rule. Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
Katz, J. E. and Aakhus, M. (eds) (2002). Perpetual Contact: Mobile Communication, Private Talk,
Public Performance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Keane, J. (1995). ‘Structural Transformations of the Public Sphere’. The Communications Review,
1(1): 8–22.
Kelly, K. (1995). Out of Control: The New Biology of Machines. London: Fourth Estate.
Kenis, P. and Schneider, V. (1991). ‘Policy Networks and Policy Analysis: Scrutinizing a New
Analytical Toolbox’, in B. Marin and R. Mayntz (eds), Policy Networks Empirical Evidence and
Theoretical Considerations. Frankfurt and Boulder, CO: Campus Verlag and Westview Press,
pp. 25–62.
Keren, M. (2006). Blogosphere: The New Political Arena. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Kettell, S. (2008). ‘The Political Economy of Open-Source in the United Kingdom’. Bulletin of
Science, Technology & Society, 28(4): 306–15.
Klang, M. (2006). Disruptive Technology: Effects of Technology Regulation on Democracy. PhD
Dissertation, Department of Applied Information Technology, Go¨teborg University,
Go¨teborg.
256
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Klang, M. and Murray, A. (eds) (2005). Human Rights in the Digital Age. London: Glasshouse
Press/Cavendish Publishing.
Kleinwa¨chter, W. (2010). ‘Latest Developments in IGF, ICANN and WSIS’. IAMCR Note, http://
iamcr.org/news/642-internet-governance-2010 accessed 19/11/2010.
Klimkiewicz, B. (2008). ‘Media Pluralism and Enlargement: The Limits and Potential for Media
Policy Change’, in D. Ward (ed.), The European Union and the Culture Industries: Regulation
and the Public Interest. Aldershot: Ashgate, pp. 81–104.
Kobilarov, G., Scott, T., Raimond, Y., Oliver, S., Sizemore, C., Smethurst, M., Bizer, C. and Lee,
R. (2009). ‘Media Meets Semantic Web—How the BBC Uses DBpedia and Linked Data to
Make Connections’. The Semantic Web: Research and Applications: Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, 5554: 723–37.
Kollock, P. (1999). ‘The Economies of Online Cooperation: Gifts and Public Goods in
Cyberspace’, in M. A. Smith and P. Kollock (eds), Communities in Cyberspace. London:
Routledge, pp. 220–42.
Kooiman, J. (1993). ‘Governance and Governability: Using Complexity, Dynamics and
Diversity’, in J. Kooiman (ed.), Modern Governance: New Government-Society Interactions.
London: Sage, pp. 35–48.
Korzybski, A. (1933/1994). Science & Sanity: An Introduction to Non-Aristotelian Systems and
General Semantics (5th edn). Englewood, NJ: Institute of General Semantics.
Kraut, R. E., Patterson, M., Lundmark, V., Kiesler, S., Mukhopadhyay, T. and Scherlis, W. (1998).
‘Internet Paradox: A Social Technology that Reduces Social Involvement and Psychological
Well-being?’. American Psychologist, 53(9): 1017–32.
—— Kiesler, S., Boneva, B., Cummings, J., Helgeson, V. and Crawford, A. (2002). ‘Internet
Paradox Revisited’. Journal of Social Issues, 58(1): 49–74.
Krippendorff, K. (1984). ‘An Epistemological Foundation for Communication’. Journal of
Communication, 34(2): 21–36.
—— (1989). ‘The Power of Communication and the Communication of Power: Toward an
Emancipatory Theory of Communication’. Communication, 12(3): 175–96.
—— (1995). ‘Undoing Power’. Critical Studies in Mass Communication, 12(2): 101–32.
Krotz, F. (2007). ‘The Meta-process of “Mediatization” as a Conceptual Frame’. Global Media
and Communication, 3(3): 256–60.
Krugman, P. (1996). The Self-Organising Economy. New York: Blackwell.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
—— (2000). The Road Since Structure: Philosophical Essays, 1970–1993, with an Autobiographical
Interview (ed. James Conant and John Haugeland). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Ku¨ng, L., Picard, R. G. and Towse, R. (2008). The Internet and the Mass Media. London: Sage.
Kurzweil, R. (2006). The Singularity is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology. London: Gerald
Duckworth & Co Ltd.
Lacan, J. (ed.) (1994). Le se´minaire. Livre IV: La relation d’objet. Paris: Seuil.
Lachica, R. and Karabeg, D. (2008). ‘Metadata Creation in Socio-semantic Tagging Systems:
Towards Holistic Knowledge Creation and Interchange’, in L. Maicher and L. Garshol (eds),
Scaling Topic Maps. Berln: Springer, pp. 160–71.
Laclau, E. (1990). New Reﬂections on the Revolution of Our Time. London: Verso.
REFERENCES
257

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Laclau, E., Mouffe, C. (1985). Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: Towards a Radical Democratic
Politics. London: Verso.
Lahlou, S. (2008). ‘Cognitive Technologies, Social Science and the Three-Layered Leopardskin
of Change’. Social Science Information, 47(3): 227–51.
Lakhani, K. R. and von Hippel, E. (2003). ‘How Open Source Software Works: “Free” User-
to-user Assistance’. Research Policy, 32(6): 923–43.
Lamberton, D. M. (ed.) (1971). The Economics of Information and Knowledge: Selected Readings.
Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Lampe, C., Ellison, N. B. and Steinﬁeld, C. (2008). ‘Changes in Use and Perception of Facebook’,
in Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work.
New York: ACM, pp. 721–30.
Langlois, R. N. (2002). ‘Modularity in Technology and Organization’. Journal of Economic
Behavior & Organization, 49(1): 19–37.
Lapteva, O. (2010). ‘Complexities and Frequencies of Linguistic Patterns (Natural and Formal)
in Online Environments’. Deliverable 6.13, WP 6 on Socio-construction of Language,
OPAALS Contract No. IST-034824, European Commission, July.
LaRose, R. and Kim, J. (2007). ‘Share, Steal, or Buy? A Social Cognitive Perspective of Music
Downloading’. Journal of Cyberpsychology & Behavior, 10(2): 267–77.
Lasar, M. (2011). ‘Big Content, ISPs Nearing Agreement on Piracy Crackdown System’. Ars
Technica, June, http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/news/2011/06/big-content-isps-nearing-
agreement-on-piracy-crackdown-system.ars accessed 28/07/2011.
Lasswell, H. D. (1951). ‘Educational Broadcasters as Social Scientists’. Paper presented at the
NAEB Annual Convention, Biloxi, Mississippi, 2–5 November.
—— (1972). ‘Communications Research and Public Policy’. The Public Opinion Quarterly, 36(3):
301–10.
Latour, B. (1994). ‘On Technical Mediation—Philosophy, Sociology, Genealogy’. Common
Knowledge, 3: 29–64.
—— (2005). Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
—— Woolgar, S. (1986). Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientiﬁc Facts (Revised edn).
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Law, J. (1999). ‘After ANT: Complexity, Naming and Topology’, in J. Law and J. Hassard (eds),
Actor Network Theory and After. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 1–14.
Layard, R. (2005). Happiness: Lessons from a New Science. New York: Penguin.
Lazarsfeld, P. F. (1941/2004). ‘Administrative and Critical Communications Research’, in
J. D. Peters and P. Simonson (eds), Mass Communication and American Social Thought: Key
Texts 1919–1968. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, pp. 166–73.
Lazzarato, M. (1996). Immaterial Labour (Trans. P. Colilli and E. Emery). Generation-Online.
org. http://www.generation-online.org/c/fcimmateriallabour3.htm accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2004). Towards an Inquiry into Immaterial Labour. Makeworlds.org. http://www.
makeworlds.org/node/141 accessed 28/07/2011.
Leadbeater, C. (2007). We-Think: Mass Innovation, Not Mass Production. London: Proﬁle Books.
Leghorn,
R.
S.
(2011).
Richard
S
Leghorn
Biography:
RichardLeghorn.com.
http://
richardleghorn.com/index.html accessed 28/07/2011.
258
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Lehdonvirta, V. and Virtanen, P. (2010). ‘A New Frontier in Digital Content Policy: Case Studies
in the Regulation of Virtual Goods and Artiﬁcial Scarcity’. Policy & Internet, 2(2): 7–29.
Lenhart, A. and Madden, M. (2005). Teen Content Creators and Consumers. Washington, DC:
Pew Internet & American Life Project.
—— Purcell, K., Smith, A. and Zickuhr, K. (2010). Social Media & Mobile Internet Use Among
Teens and Young Adults. Washington, DC: Pew Internet & American Life Project.
Lentz, R. G. (2011). ‘Regulation as Linguistic Engineering’, in R. Mansell and M. Raboy (eds),
The Handbook of Global Media and Communication Policy. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell,
pp. 432–48.
Leonard-Barton, D. (1992). ‘Core Capabilities and Core Rigidities: A Paradox in Managing New
Product Development’. Strategic Management Journal, 13: 111–25.
Lerner, J. and Tirole, J. (2000). ‘Some Simple Economics of Open Source Software’. Journal of
Industrial Economics, 50(2): 197–234.
Lesage, F. (2009). ‘Networks for Art Work: An Analysis of Artistic Creative Engagements with
New
Media
Standards’.
Unpublished
PhD
Thesis,
Department
of
Media
and
Communications, London School of Economics and Political Science.
Lessig, L. (1999). Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace. New York: Basic Books.
—— (2001). The Future of Ideas: The Fate of the Commons in a Connected World. New York:
Random House.
—— (2003). ‘The Creative Commons’. Florida Law Review, 55(3): 736–77.
—— (2006). Code: Version 2.0. New York: Basic Books.
—— (2008). Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy. London:
Bloomsbury Academic.
—— McChesney, R. (2006). ‘No Tolls on the Internet’. The Washington Post, 8 June.
Letts, P. (nd). ‘The Rise of and Future of Crowdsourcing’. Blurgroup. http://www.internetworld.
co.uk/page.cfm/Link=196/nocache=true accessed 27/07/2011.
Le´vy, P. (1997). Collective Intelligence: Mankind’s Emerging World in Cyberspace (trans.
R. Bononno). New York: Helix Books—Perseus Books.
Lewis, M. W. (2000). ‘Exploring Paradox: Toward a More Comprehensive Guide’. Academy of
Management Review, 25(4): 760–76.
Licklider, J. C. R. and Taylor, R. W. (1968). ‘The Computer as a Communication Device’.
International Science and Technology, 76(April): 21–31.
Liebowitz, S. J. (2006). ‘File Sharing: Creative Destruction or Just Plain Destruction?’. The
Journal of Law and Economics, 49(1): 1–28.
—— Margolis, S. E. (2005). ‘Seventeen Famous Economists Weigh in on Copyright: The Role of
Theory, Empirics, and Network Effects’. Harvard Journal of Law and Technology, 18(2): 435–57.
Lievrouw, L. A. (2009). ‘New Media, Mediation, and Communication Study’. Information,
Communication & Society, 12(3): 303–25.
Light, B. and McGrath, K. (2010). ‘Ethics and Social Networking Sites: A Disclosive Analysis of
Facebook’. Information Technology and People, 23(4): 290–311.
Lilly, J. C. (1972). Programming and Metaprogramming in the Human Biocomputer. New York:
The Julian Press.
Lindblom, C. E. (1990). Inquiry and Change: The Troubled Attempt to Understand & Shape
Society. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
REFERENCES
259

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Lindner, T., Fritsch, L., Plank, K. and Rannenberg, K. (2004). ‘Exploitation of Public and Private
WiFi Coverage for New Business Models’, in W. Lamersdorf, V. Tschammer and S. Amarger
(eds), Building the E-Service Society: E-Commerce, E-Business, and E-Government. Dordrecht:
Springer, pp. 131–48.
Litman, J. (2001). Digital Copyright. New York: Prometheus Books.
Livingstone, S. (1996). ‘On the Continuing Problem of Media Effects’, in J. Curran and
M. Gurevitch (eds), Mass Media and Society. London: Edward Arnold, pp. 305–24.
—— (2003). ‘On the Challenges of Cross-National Comparative Media Research’. European
Journal of Communication, 18(4): 477–500.
—— (2009). ‘On the Mediation of Everything. ICA Presidential Address’. Journal of
Communication, 59(1): 1–18.
—— (2011). ‘Regulating the Internet in the Interests of Children: Emerging European and
International Approaches’, in R. Mansell and M. Raboy (eds), Handbook on Global Media and
Communication Policy. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 505–24.
—— Haddon, L., Go¨rzig, A. and O´ lafsson, K. (2011). Risks and Safety on the Internet: The
Perspective of European Children. Full Findings. London: LSE, EU Kids Online. http://www.
edukidsonline.net accessed 28/07/2011.
Ljundgberg, J. (2000). ‘Open Source Movements as a Model of Organizing’. European Journal of
Information Systems, 9(4): 208–16.
Luhmann, N. (1985). A Sociological Theory of Law. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
—— (1992). ‘Autopoiesis: What is Communication?’. Communication Theory, 2: 251–59.
—— (1995). Social Systems (trans. John Bednarz and Dirk Baecker). Paolo Alto, CA: Stanford
University Press.
—— (1996/2000). The Reality of the Mass Media (trans. K. Cross). Paolo Alto, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Lukes, S. (1974/2005). Power: A Radical View (2nd edn). London: Macmillan.
Lundgren, A. (1995). Technological Innovation and Network Evolution. London: Routledge.
Lundstrom, J., Widriksson, J. and Zaunders, V. (2010). ‘Changes in Media Consumption and
File Sharing: The Impact of Legislation and New Digital Media Services’. Jo¨nko¨ping
International Business School, May.
Lundvall, B.-A˚ . (ed.) (1992). National Systems of Innovation: Towards a Theory of Innovation and
Interactive Learning. London: Pinter.
—— Johnson, B. (1994). ‘The Learning Economy’. Journal of Industry Studies, 1(2): 23–42.
Lyon, D. (2006). Theorizing Surveillance: The Panopticon and Beyond. Uffcolm Devon: Willan
Publishing.
—— (2007). Surveillance Studies: An Overview. Cambridge: Polity Press.
—— (2009). ID Cards as Surveillance. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Macdonald, S. (1998). Information for Innovation: Managing Change from an Information
Perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Machlup, F. B. (1962). The Production and Distribution of Knowledge in the US Economy.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
MacKenzie, D. (1996). Knowing Machines: Essays on Technical Change. Cambridge MA: The
MIT Press.
260
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
MacKenzie, D. and Wajcman, J. (eds) (1985). The Social Shaping of Technology. Milton Keynes:
Open University Press.
Maclean, D. (2011). ‘The Evolution of GMCP Institutions’, in R. Mansell and M. Raboy (eds),
Handbook of Global Media and Communication Policy. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 40–57.
Madianou, M. and Miller, D. (2011). Migration and New Media: Transnational Families and
Polymedia. London: Routledge.
Magder, T. (2011). ‘The Origins of International Agreements and Global Media: The Post, the
Telegraph, and Wireless Communication Before World War I’, in R. Mansell and M. Raboy
(eds), Handbook of Global Media and Communication Policy. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell,
pp. 23–39.
Makau, J. M. (2011). ‘Response and Conclusion: AVision of Applied Ethics for Communication
Studies’, in G. Cheney, S. May and D. Munshi (eds), The Handbook of Communication Ethics.
New York: Routledge, pp. 494–515.
Makeen, M. F. (2000). Copyright in a Global Information Society: The Scope of Copyright Protection
under International, US, UK and French Law. The Hague: Kluwer Law International.
Malcolm, J. (2008a). ‘Appraising the Success of the Internet Governance Forum’. Internet
Governance Project, 21 November, http://internetgovernance.org accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2008b). Multi-Stakeholder Governance and the Internet Governance Forum. Wembley, WA:
Terminus Press.
Malone, P., Mcloughlin, M. and Finnegan, J. (2010). ‘Integration of Identity, Trust and
Accountability into P2P Network’. Deliverable 5.5, WP 5 on Integration with the Digital
Ecosystem Platform, OPAALS Contract No. IST-034824, European Commission, Project
Review, October.
Maniadaki, K. (2011). ‘The Application of Competition Law to Questions of Access to
Platforms for the Distribution of Online Content: The Case of Network Neutrality’. Paper
presented at the EuroCPR Conference, Ghent, 26–28 March.
Manovich, L. (2009). ‘The Practice of Everyday (Media) Life: From Mass Consumption to Mass
Cultural Production’. Critical Inquiry, 35(2): 319–31.
Mansell, R. (1994). ‘A Networked Economy: Unmasking the ‘Globalisation’ Thesis’. Telematics
and Informatics, II(1): 25–43.
—— (1995). ‘Standards, Industrial Policy and Innovation’, in R. Hawkins, R. Mansell and
J. Skea (eds), Standards, Innovation and Competitiveness: The Politics and Economics of
Standards in Natural and Technical Environments. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. 213–27.
—— (1996). ‘Information Highways: Controls, Signals, Congestion and Tolls’, in C. Scott and
O. Audeoud (eds), The Future of EC Telecommunications Law: Series of Publications by the
Academy of European Law in Trier, Vol. 19. Cologne: Bundesanzeiger, pp. 41–50.
—— (2004). ‘Political Economy, Power and New Media’. New Media & Society, 6(1): 74–83.
—— (ed.) (2009). The Information Society (Critical Concepts in Sociology), Four Volumes.
London: Routledge.
Mansell, R. (2011). ‘New Visions, Old Practices: Policy and Regulation in the Internet Era’.
Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies, 25(1): 19–32.
—— (2011). ‘Power and Interests in Information and Communication Technologies and
Development:
Exogenous
and
Endogenous
Discourses
in
Contention’.
Journal
of
International Development, pre-publication on Web.
REFERENCES
261

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Mansell, R. and Nordenstreng, K. (2006). ‘Great Media and Communications Debates—An
Assessment of the MacBride Report after 25 Years’. Information Technologies and International
Development, 3(4): 15–36.
Mansell, R. and Raboy, M. (2011). ‘Introduction: Foundations of the Theory and Practice of
Global Media and Communication Policy’, in R. Mansell and M. Raboy (eds), The Handbook
of Global Media and Communication Policy. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 1–20.
—— Steinmueller, W. E. (2000). Mobilizing the Information Society: Strategies for Growth and
Opportunity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— —— (2010). ‘British Telecommunications plc (“BT”) and TalkTalk Telecom Group
Limited v Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills (“BIS”) in the Matter of an
Intended Claim’. Report prepared for Judicial Review of the Digital Economy Act 2010. LSE
Enterprise, London.
—— —— (2011). ‘Digital Economies and Public Policies: Contending Rationales and
Outcome Assessment Strategies’, in W. H. Dutton (ed.), Oxford Handbook of Internet
Studies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— —— (2011 under review-a). ‘Copyright Infringement Online: The Case of the Digital
Economy Act Judicial Review in the United Kingdom’. New Media & Society.
—— —— (2011 under review-b). ‘The Copyright Paradox: Creative Destruction, under review
Re-publication and the Impact of New Technologies’. Industrial and Corporate Change.
Marinos, A. and Briscoe, G. (2009). ‘Community Cloud Computing’. Cloud Computing: Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, 5931: 472–84.
Marion, R. (1999). The Edge of Organization: Chaos, Complexity Theories and Formal Social
Systems. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Markham, A. N. and Baym, N. K. (eds) (2009). Internet Inquiry: Conversations about Method.
London: Sage Publications.
Marsden, C. T. (2010). ‘European Law and Regulation of Mobile Net Neutrality’. European Journal
of Law and Technology, 1(2): np. http://ejlt.org//article/view/32/52 accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2011). ‘Network Neutrality and Internet Service Provider Liability Regulation: Are the
Wise Monkeys of Cyberspace Becoming Stupid?’. Global Policy Journal, 2(1): 53–64.
Martin-Barbero, J. (1993). Communication, Culture and Hegemony: From the Media to
Mediations. London: Sage.
Masuda, Y. (1980). ‘Computopia: Rebirth of Theological Synergism’, in Y. Masuda (ed.), The
Information Society as Post-Industrial Society. Tokyo: Institute for the Information Society,
pp. 146–54.
Mateos-Garcia, J. and Steinmueller, W. E. (2008a). ‘The Institutions of Open Source Software:
Examining the Debian Community’. Information Economics and Policy, 20(4): 333–44.
—— —— (2008b). ‘Open, But How Much? Growth, Conﬂict, and Institutional Evolution in
Open-Source Communities’, in A. Amin and J. Roberts (eds), Community, Economic
Creativity, and Organization. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 254–82.
Mathiason, J. (2009). Internet Governance: The New Frontiers of Global Institutions. London:
Routledge.
Mathur, P. (2003). ‘Theorizing “Ecological Communication”’. Unpublished PhD Dissertation in
Science and Technology Studies, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University,
Blacksburg, VA.
Mattelart, A. (1996/2000). Networking the World: 1794–2000 (trans. J. A. Cohen). Minneapolis,
MN: University of Minnesota Press.
262
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Mattelart, A. and Mattelart, M. (1998). Theories of Communication: A Short Introduction (trans.
S. G. Taponier). London: Sage.
Maturana, H. R. (1997). Metadesign in Articulos y Conferences. Santiago: Instituto de Terpia
Cognitiva. http://www.inteco.cl/articulos/006/doc_ing1.htm accessed 28/07/2011.
—— Varela, F. J. (1987). Tree of Knowledge: The Biological Roots of Human Understanding (trans.
R. Paolucci). Boston, MA: Shambhala.
Mauss, M. (1954/1969). The Gift: Forms and Functions of Exchange in Archaic Societies. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Maxwell, R. and Miller, T. (2011). ‘The Environment and Global Media and Communication
Policy’, in R. Mansell and M. Raboy (eds), Handbook of Global Media and Communication
Policy. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 467–86.
May, C. (2007). The World Intellectual Property Organization: Resurgence and the Development
Agenda. New York: Routledge.
Mayntz, R. and Hughes, T. P. (eds) (1988). The Development of Large Technical Systems.
Frankfurt and Boulder, CO: Campus Verlag and Westview Press.
McCaffery, L. (2000). ‘An Interview with William Gibson’. Project Cyberpunk. http://project.
cyberpunk.ru/idb/gibson_interview.html accessed 28/07/2011.
McChesney, R. W. (2008). The Political Economy of Media: Enduring Issues, Emerging Dilemmas.
New York: Monthly Review Press.
McCulloch, W. S. (1945). ‘A Heterarchy of Values Determined by the Topology of Nervous Nets’.
Bulleting of Mathematical Biophysics, 7(December): 89–93.
McCurdy, P. M. (2008). ‘Inside the Media Event: Examining the Media Practices of Dissent!
at the Hori-Zone Eco-Village at the 2005 G8 Gleneagles Summit’. Communications, 33(3):
293–311.
McKercher, C. and Mosco, V. (eds) (2008). Knowledge Workers in the Information Society.
Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
McLuhan, H. M. (1964). Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. New York: McGraw-Hill
Publishers.
McQuail, D. (2003). Media Accountability and Freedom of Publication. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
McWhinney, W. (2005). ‘The White Horse: A Reformulation of Bateson’s Typology of Learning’.
Cybernetics & Human Knowing, 12(1/2): 22–35.
Medina, J. E. M. (2005). ‘The State Machine: Politics, Ideology and Computing in Chile,
1964–1973’. Unpublished PhD in History and Social Study of Science and Technology,
Program in Science, Technology and Society, MIT, Cambridge, MA.
Meier, R. L. (1962). A Communications Theory of Urban Growth. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Melody, W. H. (1970). ‘Regulation and Competition in Data Communications in the United
States: A Redirection of Public Policy’. Paper presented at the Panel on Policy Issues of
Computer/Telecommunications Interaction, Group of Experts on Computer Utilisation,
Paris, 19 October.
—— (1971). ‘Technological Determinism and Monopoly Power in Communications’. Paper
presented at the 84th Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, Jung Hotel,
New Orleans, Louisiana, 28 December.
REFERENCES
263

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Melody, W. H. (1973). ‘The Role of Advocacy in Public Policy Planning’, in G. Gerbner, L. Gross
and W. H. Melody (eds), Communication Technology and Social Policy. New York: John Wiley
& Sons, pp. 165–81.
—— (1985). ‘The Information Society: Implications for Economic Institutions and Market
Theory’. Journal of Economic Issues, XIX(2): 523–39.
—— (ed.) (1997). Telecom Reform: Principles, Policies and Regulatory Practices. Lyngby:
Technical University of Denmark.
—— (1999). ‘Review of “Marshall McLuhan: The Medium and the Messenger” by P. Marchand’.
Information, Communication & Society, 2(3): 374–7.
—— (2003). ‘Policy Implications of the New Information Economy’, in M. Tool and P. Bush
(eds), Institutional Analysis and Economic Policy. Dordrecht: Kluwer, pp. 411–32.
—— Mansell, R. (1983). ‘The Debate over Critical vs. Administrative Research: Circularity or
Challenge’. Journal of Communication, 33(3): 103–16.
Metcalfe, J. S. and Foster, J. (2004). ‘Introduction and Overview’, in J. S. Metcalfe and J. Foster
(eds), Evolution and Economic Complexity. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. ix–xix.
—— Ramlogan, R. (2005). ‘Limits to the Economy of Knowledge and Knowledge of the
Economy’. Futures, 37(7): 655–74.
Meyer, L. (2000). ‘Digital Platforms: Deﬁnition and Strategic Value’. Communications &
Strategies, 38(2): 127–51.
Meyer, T. and Van Audenhove, L. (2010). ‘Graduated Response and the Emergence of a
European Surveillance Society’. Info, 12(6): 69–79.
Meyrowitz, J. (1985). No Sense of Place: The Impact of Electronic Media on Social Behaviour.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mill, J. S. (1829/1874/2000). Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy by John
Stuart Mill, 2nd edn. London: Longmans, Green, Reader and Dyer.
Mills, C. W. (1959/2000). The Sociological Imagination. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mingers, J. C. (1995). Self-producing Systems: Implications and Applications of Autopoiesis.
New York: Plenum Press.
Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI). (1994). Program for Advanced Information
Infrastructure. Tokyo: MITI.
Mintzberg, H. (1989). ‘Five Ps for Strategy’, in H. Mintzberg, J. B. Quinn and S. Ghoshal (eds),
The Strategy Process: Revised European Edition. New York: Prentice-Hall, pp. 13–21.
Mirowski, P. (2002). Machine Dreams: Economics Becomes a Cyborg Science. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Mitchell, R. W. (1991). ‘Bateson Concept of Metacommunication in Play’. New Ideas in
Psychology, 9(1): 73–87.
Mo¨ller, K. and Wilson, D. (eds) (1995). Business Marketing: An Interaction and Network
Perspective. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Monge, P. R. and Contractor, N. S. (2003). Theories of Communication Networks. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Moon, Y.-J. and Sproull, L. (2002). ‘Essence of Distributed Work: The Case of the Linux Kernel’,
in P. Hinds and S. Kiesler (eds), Distributed Work. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 381–404.
Mooney, A. (2010). ‘Internet Regulation Proposal Sets Off Political Firestorm’. CNN Politics, 21
December, http://politicalticker.blogs.cnn.com/2010/12/21/internet-regulation-proposal-sets-off-
political-ﬁrestorm/ accessed 28/07/2011.
264
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Moore, G. E. (1965). ‘Cramming More Components onto Integrated Circuits’. Electronics
Magazine, 38(8): np.
Moore, J. F. (1997). The Death of Competition: Leadership and Strategy in the Age of Business
Ecosystems. New York: Harper Paperbacks.
Moreno, J. L. (1934). Who Shall Survive? Washington, DC: Nervous and Mental Disease
Publishing Company.
Morozov, E. (2009). ‘Iran: Downside to the ‘Twitter Revolution’’. Dissent, 56(4): 10–14.
—— (2011). The Net Delusion: How Not to Liberate the World. New York: Allen Lane.
Morrison, C. M. and Gore, H. (2010). ‘The Relationship between Excessive Internet Use and
Depression: A Questionnaire-Based Study of 1,319 Young People and Adults’. Psychopathology,
43(2): 121–6.
Mosco, V. (1996). The Political Economy of Communication. London: Sage Publications.
—— (2008). ‘Knowledge Workers of the World! Unite?’. Communication, Culture & Critique, 1(1):
105–15.
—— (2009). The Political Economy of Communication (2nd edn). London: Sage.
Mossberger, K., Tolbert, C. J. and McNeal, R. S. (2008). Digital Citizenship: The Internet, Society,
and Participation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mouffe, C. (1999). ‘Deliberative Democracy or Agonistic Pluralism?’. Social Research, 66(3):
746–58.
—— (2005). On the Political. London: Routledge.
Mowery, D. C. (2009). ‘What Does Economic Theory Tell Us About Mission-Oriented R&D?’, in
D. Foray (ed.), The New Economics of Technology Policy. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. 131–47.
Mowles, C. (2011). Rethinking Management: Radical Insights from the Complexity Sciences.
Farnham: Gower.
Mueller, M. L. (2009, 16 November). ‘ICANN, Inc.: Accountability and Participation in the
Governance of Critical Internet Resources’. Internet Governance Project. http://www.
internetgovernance.org/pdf/ICANNInc.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2010a). ‘Critical Resource: An Institutional Economics of the Internet Addressing-
Routing Space’. Telecommunications Policy, 34(8): 405–16.
—— (2010b). Networks and States: The Global Politics of Internet Governance. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
—— Mathiason, J. and Klein, H. K. (2007). ‘The Internet and Global Governance: Principles
and Norms for a New Regime’. Global Governance, 13(2): 237–54.
Mullins, J. (2010). ‘How Crowd-sourcing Has Helped in Haiti’. The New Scientist, 205(2745): 8–9.
Mumford, L. (1934). Technics and Civilization. New York: Harcourt Brace & Company.
Mumford, E. (2000). ‘Socio-technical Design: An Unfulﬁlled Promise or a Future Opportunity’,
in R. Baskerville, J. Stage and J. DeGross (eds), Organizational and Social Perspectives on
Information Technology. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 33–46.
Munro, A., Iqani, M., Moschoyiannis, S., Zeller, F., Gabaldon, J., Colugnati, F. and Bueso,
P. (2008). ‘Foundations of the Theory of Associative Autopoetic Digital Ecosystems: Part 1’.
Deliverable 1.2, WP 1 on Automata Theory and Autopoiesis, OPAALS Contract No. IST-
034824, European Commission, July.
Murdock, G. (1978). ‘Blindspots about Western Marxism: A Reply to Dallas Smythe’. Journal of
Political and Social Theory, 2: 109–19.
REFERENCES
265

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Murdock, G. and Golding, P. (2004). ‘Dismantling the Digital Divide: Rethinking the Dynamics
of Participation and Exclusion’, in A. Calabrese and C. Sparks (eds), Toward a Political
Economy of Culture: Capitalism and Communication in the Twenty-ﬁrst Century. Lanham,
MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, pp. 244–60.
Nachira, F., Nicolai, A., Dini, P., Le Louarn, M. and Rivera Leon, L. (eds) (2007). Digital Business
Ecosystems. Brussels: European Commission Directorate General Information Society and
Media.
Napoli, P. M. (2011). Audience Evolution: New Technologies and the Transformation of Media
Audiences. New York: Columbia University Press.
Nazir, A., Raza, S. and Chuah, C.-N. (2008). ‘Unveiling Facebook: A Measurement Study of
Social Network Based Applications’, Proceedings of the 8th ACM SIGCOMM Conference on
Internet Measurement. New York: ACM, pp. 43–56.
Needham, J. (2004). Science and Civilisation in China, Vol 7, The Social Background and Part 2,
General Conclusions and Reﬂections (edited by K. G. Robinson). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Negroponte, N. (1995). Being Digital. London: Hodder and Stoughton.
Nelson, R. R. (ed.) (1993). National Innovation Systems: A Comparative Analysis. New York:
Oxford University Press.
—— (1994). ‘The Co-evolution of Technology, Industrial Structure, and Supporting
Institutions’. Industrial and Corporate Change, 3(1): 47–63.
—— Winter, S. G. (1977). ‘In Search of a Useful Theory of Innovation’. Research Policy, 6: 36–76.
—— —— (1982). An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Neogi, P. K. and Cordell, A. J. (2010). ‘The Internet and the Need for Governance: Learning from
the Past, Coping with the Future’. Journal of Internet Banking and Commerce, 15(2): 1–30.
Nightingale, P., Brady, T., Davies, A. and Hall, J. (2003). ‘Capacity Utilization Revisited:
Software, Control and Growth of Large Technical Systems’. Industrial and Corporate
Change, 12(3): 477–517.
Noam, E. M. (2010). ‘Regulation 3.0 for Telecom 3.0’. Telecommunications Policy, 34(1–2): 4–10.
Noble, D. F. (1998). The Religion of Technology: The Divinity of Man and the Spirit of Invention.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Nordenstreng, K. (2011). ‘Free Flow Doctrine in Global Media Policy’, in R. Mansell and
M. Raboy (eds), Handbook of Global Media and Communication Policy. Malden, MA:
Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 79–94.
Norris, P. (2001). Digital Divide: Civic Engagement, Information Poverty, and the Internet
Worldwide. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nussbaum, M. C. (2000). Woman and Human Development: The Capabilities Approach.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—— (2006). Frontiers of Justice: Disability, Nationality, Species Membership. Cambridge, MA:
Belknap Press.
Nyka¨nen, O. (2010). ‘Wille Visualisation Toolkit for Developers with a Concise OKS
Visualisation Application Catalogue for End-Users’. Deliverable 10.18, WP 10 on
Sustainable
Community
Building,
OPAALS
Contract
No.
IST-034824,
European
Commission, Project Review, October.
266
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Oberholzer-Gee, F. and Strumpf, K. (2010). File-sharing and Copyright: Music Business Research
Files, World Press.com. http://musicbusinessresearch.ﬁles.wordpress.com/2010/06/paper-
felix-oberholzer-gee.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
Ofﬁce of Communication (Ofcom) (2010). Trafﬁc Management and ‘Net Neutrality’: A Discussion
Document. London: Ofcom.
Ofﬁce of Technology Assessment (OTA). (1986). Intellectual Property Rights in an Age of
Electronics and Information. Washington, DC: OTA.
O’Hara, K. (2004). Trust: From Socrates to Spin. Cambridge: Icon Books.
—— Shadbolt, N. (2005). ‘Knowledge Technologies and the Semantic Web’, in R. Mansell and
B. S. Collins (eds), Trust and Crime in Information Societies. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar,
pp. 113–64.
Oltmann, S. M. (2010). ‘Katz Out of the Bag: The Broader Privacy Ramiﬁcations of Using
Facebook’. Paper presented at the ASIST 2010 Conference, Pittsburgh, PA, 22–27 October.
O’Mahony, S. and Ferraro, F. (2003). ‘Managing the Boundary of an “Open Source” Project’.
Prepared for the Santa Fe Institute Workshop on the Network Construction of Markets, Santa Fe,
NM.
One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) (2010). ‘Nicholas Negroponte on Success of One Laptop Per Child’.
OLPC//News, 20 September, http://www.olpcnews.com/people/negroponte/nicholas_negroponte_
on_success.html accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2011). ‘Who is to Blame for OLPC Peru’s Failure? An OLPC Intern Viewpoint’. OLPC//
News, 24 January, http://www.olpcnews.com/countries/peru/who_is_to_blame_for_olpc_
peru.html accessed 28/07/2011.
OPAALS. (2010a). ‘Finalised Infrastructural and Interaction Model, Interfaces and SBVR’. Based
on D. 3.15 P. Krause and S. Moschoyiannis, WP 3 on Autopoietic P2P Networks, OPAALS
Contract No. IST-034824, European Commission . Project Review, October.
—— (2010b). ‘The Impact of New IP Legislation on Corporate Behaviour, SME Opportunities
and Global Markets for Protected Innovations and the Presentation of a Formal Copyright
Model’. Based on D 11.12 J. Stanley, WP 11 on Bridging Digital Ecosystems Research
to Regional Development and Innovation in the Knowledge Economy, OPAALS Contract
No. IST-034824, European Commission, Project Review, October.
—— (2010c). ‘Case Studies on the Role of Partner Networks in OSS Value Creation and Capture
Process’. Based on D 12.13 F. Botto, WP 11 on Socio-economic Models for Digital Ecosystems,
OPAALS Contract No. IST-034824, European Commission, Project Review, October.
Ophir, E., Nass, C. and Wagner, A. D. (2009). ‘Cognitive Control in Media Multitaskers’, in
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, PNAS Early Edition, pp. 1–5.
Oppy, G. and Dowe, D. (2011). ‘The Turing Test’, in E. N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy, (Spring 2011 edn.) Stanford, CA: Stanford University. http://plato.stanford.
edu/archives/spr2011/entries/turing-test/ accessed 28/07/2011.
Orgad, S. (2005). Storytelling Online: Talking Breast Cancer on the Internet. New York: Peter Lang.
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (1988). New Technologies
in the 1990s: A Socio-Economic Strategy. Paris: OECD.
—— (2010). OECD Information Technology Outlook 2010. Paris: OECD.
—— (2011a). ‘Communique on Principles for Internet Policy-Making’ OECD High Level
Meeting on The Internet Economy: Generating Innovation and Growth, Paris, 28–29 June,
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/40/21/48289796.pdf accessed 28/04/2011.
REFERENCES
267

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (2011b). Shaping Polices
for the Future of the Internet Economy. Paris: OECD. http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/1/29/
40821707.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
Organisciak, P. (2010). ‘Why Bother? Examining the Motivations of Users of Large-Scale Crowd-
Powered Online Initiatives’. Unpublished MA Thesis, Humanities Computing—Library and
Information Studies, University of Alberta, Edmonton. http://repository.library.ualberta.ca/
dspace/bitstream/10048/1370/1/ThesisOrganisciak-08-2010v2.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
Orlikowski, W. J. (1992). ‘The Duality of Technology: Rethinking the Concept of Technology in
Organizations’. Organization Science, 3(3): 398–427.
Osborne, A. (1979). Running Wild: The Next Industrial Revolution. Berkeley, CA: McGraw-Hill Inc.
O´ Siochru´, S. and Girard, B. (2002). Global Media Governance: A Beginners’ Guide. Lanham,
MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
Ostrom, E. (2005). Understanding Institutional Diversity. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Otlet, P. (1934). Traite de documentation: Le livre sur le livre, theorie et pratique. Brusells:
Editiones Mundaneum, Palais Mondial.
Padovani, C. and Nordenstreng, K. (2005). ‘From NWICO to WSIS: Another World
Information and Communication Order?’ Global Media and Communication, 1(3): 264–72.
—— Pavan, E. (2011). ‘Actors and Interactions in Global Communication Governance: The
Heuristic Potential of a Network Approach’, in R. Mansell and M. Raboy (eds), Handbook on
Global Media and Communication Policy. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 543–63.
Palfrey, J. G. (2004). ‘The End of the Experiment: How ICANN’s Foray into Global Internet
Democracy Failed’. Harvard Journal of Law & Technology, 17(2): 410–73.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas. New York: Basic Books.
Park, E. G., Mitchell, C. and de Lange, N. (2008). ‘Social Uses of Digitisation within the Context
of HIV/AIDS: Metadata as Engagement’. Online Information Review, 32(6): 716–25.
Parsons, T. (1951/1991). The Social System. London: Routledge.
Pearson, I. (2010). ‘Mad Scientists’. Futurizon. http://www.futurizon.com/articles/madscientists.
pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
Perez, C. (1983). ‘Structural Change and the Assimilation of New Technologies in the Economic
and Social System’. Futures, 15(4): 357–75.
—— (2002). Technological Revolution and Financial Capital: The Dynamics of Bubbles and
Golden Ages. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Pfanner, E. (2011). ‘G-8 Leaders to Call for Tighter Internet Regulation’. New York Times, 24
May, http://www.nytimes.com/2011/05/25/technology/25tech.html accessed 28/07/2011.
Picard, R. G. (1996). ‘The Rise and Fall of Communications Empires’. Journal of Media
Economics, 9(4): 23–40.
Pichevin, A. (2011). ‘France’s HADOPI Sends Out Final Copyright Infringement Notices, But
Many are Critical’. Billboardbiz, 19 July, http://www.billboard.biz/bbbiz/industry/digital-and-
mobile/france-s-hadopi-sends-out-ﬁnal-copyright-1005282382.story accessed 28/07/2011.
Pierce, C. S. (1931/1935). ‘Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Vols. I–VI’, in C. Hartshorne
and P. Weiss (eds), Collected Papers. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Pierce, J. R. (1956). Electrons, Waves and Messages. New York: Hanover House.
Pierson, J. and Heyman, R. (2011). ‘Dataveillance and Privacy in Social Computing: Conceptual
Exploration and Analysis of Corporate Proﬁling Techniques’. Paper presented at the EuroCPR
Conference, Ghent, 26–28 March.
268
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Pierson, J. and Heyman, R. (2011). ‘Social Media and Cookies: Challenges for Online Privacy’.
Info 13(6): 30–42.
Pilieci, V. (2011). ‘Canadian Songwriters Propose $10 Fee for Music-sharing’. The Gazette, 5 March,
http://www.montrealgazette.com/entertainment/Songwriters+propose+music+sharing/4387146/
story.html accessed 28/07/2011.
Piper, F., Robshaw, M. J. B. and Schwiderski-Grosche, S. (2005). ‘Identities and Authentication’,
in R. Mansell and B. S. Collins (eds), Trust and Crime in Information Societies. Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar, pp. 91–112.
Plato (360BC). ‘The Allegory of the Cave’. The Republic, Book VII (trans. B. Jowett). Cambridge,
MA. http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/republic.8.vii.html accessed 10/07/2011.
Plowman, S. and Goode, S. (2009). ‘Factors Affecting the Intention to Download Music: Quality
Perceptions and Downloading Intensity’. Journal of Computer Information Systems 49(4): 84–97.
Polanyi, K. (1944/2001). The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origins of Our
Time. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Polanyi, M. (1966). The Tacit Dimension. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Pollock, J. T. (2009). Semantic Web for Dummies. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Publishing.
Porat, M. U. and Rubin, M. R. (1977). The Information Economy, Nine Volumes. Washington,
DC: Department of Commerce Government Printing Ofﬁce.
Poteete, A. R., Janssen, M. A. and Ostrom, E. (2010). Working Together: Collective Action, the
Commons, and Multiple Methods in Practice. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Powell, A. and Cooper, A. (2011). ‘Net Neutrality Discourses: Comparing Advocacy and
Regulatory Arguments in the United States and the United Kingdom’. The Information
Society, 27(5): 311–25.
Prencipe, A., Davies, A. and Hobday, M. (eds) (2003). The Business of Systems Integration.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Price, D. (2011). Technical Report: An Estimate of Infringing Use of the Internet. Cambridge:
Envisional Ltd. http://documents.envisional.com/docs/Envisional-Internet_Usage-Jan2011.
pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
Prigogine, I. (1997). The End of Certainty. New York: Free Press.
Puppis, M. (2010). ‘Media Governance: A New Concept for the Analysis of Media Policy and
Regulation’. Communication, Culture & Critique, 3(2): 134–49.
Quiring, O., Von Walter, B. and Atterer, R. (2008). ‘Can Filesharers be Triggered by Economic
Incentives? Results of an Experiment’. New Media & Society, 10(3): 433–53.
Raacke, J. and Bonds-Raacke, J. (2008). ‘MySpace and Facebook: Applying the Uses and
Gratiﬁcations Theory to Exploring Friend-Networking Sites’. CyberPsychology & Behavior,
11(2): 169–74.
Rabby, M. K. and Walther, J. B. (2003). ‘Computer-Mediated Communication Effects on
Relationship Formation and Maintenance’, in D. J. Canary and M. Dainton (eds),
Maintaining Relationships through Communication: Relational, Contextual and Cultural
Variations. London: Routledge, pp. 141–62.
Raboy, M., Shtern, J., with McIver, W. J., Murray, L. J. O., Siochru, S. and Shade, L. R. (2010).
Media Divides: Communication Rights and the Right to Communicate in Canada. Vancouver:
University of British Columbia Press.
Ramage, M. and Shipp, K. (2009). Systems Thinkers. London: Springer.
REFERENCES
269

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Ramshurn, S. D. and Jennings, N. R. (2005). ‘Trust in Agent-based Software’, in R. Mansell and
B. S. Collins (eds), Trust and Crime in Information Societies. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar,
pp. 165–204.
Rapport, N. (1999). ‘Context as an Act of Personal Externalisation, Gregory Bateson and
the Harvey Family in the English Village of Wanet’, in R. Dilley (ed.), The Problem of
Context. New York: Berghahn Books, pp. 187–212.
Rawls, J. (1972). A Theory of Justice. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Raymond, E. S. (1999). The Cathedral and the Bazaar: Musings on Linux and Open Source by an
Accidental Revolutionary. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly and Associates.
Rayward, W. B. (ed.) (1990). International Organisation and Dissemination of Knowledge:
Selected Essays of Paul Otlet, Translated and Edited with an Introduction. Amsterdam:
Elsevier Science Publishers.
Razavi, A., Moschoyiannis, S. and Krause, P. (2007). ‘Preliminary Architecture for P2P Network
Focusing on Hierarchical Virtual Super-Peers, Birth and Growth Models’. Deliverable 3.1, WP
3 on Autopoietic P2P Networks, OPAALS Contract No. IST-034824, European Commission,
June.
—— Krause, P., Munro, A., Gilbert, N., Hoyle, R. and McFadden, J. (2010). ‘Paper on
‘Evolutionary and Interaction Framework’. Deliverable 3.13, WP on Autopoietic P2P
Networks OPAALS Contract No. IST-034824, European Commission, September.
—— Malone, P., Siqueira, P. and Serra, F. (2010). ‘Infrastructure Integration, Distributed Identity,
Trust, Accountability and RESTful Transaction Model’. Deliverable 3.12, WP 3 on Autopoietic
P2P Networks, OPAALS Contract No. IST-034824, European Commission, September.
—— Moschoyiannis, S., Malone, P., Finnegan, J., Agrawa, A., Margarito, A., Wilson Souza Rosa,
D., Heistracher, T. J. and Marinos, A. (2010). ‘Finalised Infrastructural and Interaction
Model, Interfaces and SBVR Part 1’. Deliverable 3.15, WP 3 onAutopoietic P2P Networks,
OPAALS Contract No. IST-034824, European Commission, September.
Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) (2010). ‘RIAA Joins Congressional Caucus
in Unveiling First-Ever List of Notorious Illegal Sites’. RIAA, 19 May, http://www.riaa.com/
newsitem.php?id=58185AFD-5525-19D4-FFD2-4233518393AD accessed 28/07/2011.
Regner, T., Barria, J., Pitt, J. and Neville, B. (2009). ‘An Artist Life Cycle Model for Digital Media
Content: Strategies for the Light Web and the Dark Web’. Electronic Commerce Research and
Applications, 8(6): 334–42.
Renda, A. (2010). ‘Competition-Regulation Interface in Telecommunications: What’s Left of the
Essential Facility Doctrine’. Telecommunications Policy, 34(1–2): 23–35.
Rettie, R. (2009). ‘Mobile Phone Communication: Extending Goffman to Mediated Interaction’.
Sociology, 43(3): 421–38.
Reuters (2010). ‘FTC Ends Probe of Google Street View Controversy’, 27 October. CNBC. http://
www.cnbc.com/id/39870448/FTC_Ends_Probe_of_Google_Street_View_Controversy accessed
28/07/2011.
Rheingold, H. (1993/2000). The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier
(Revised edn). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— (2002). Smart Mobs: The Next Social Revolution. New York: Perseus Press.
Richardson, M., Agrawal, R. and Domingos, P. (2003). ‘Trust Management for the Semantic
Web’, in D. Fensel, K. P. Sycara and J. Mylopoulos (eds), The Semantic Web—ISWC 2003,
Second International Semantic Web Conference. Berlin: Springer, pp. 351–68.
270
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Rieber, R. W. and Green, M. (1989). ‘The Psychopathy of Everyday Life: Antisocial Behavior and
Social Distress’, in R. W. Rieber (ed.), The Individual, Communication and Society: Essays in
Memory of Gregory Bateson. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 48–89.
Rihani, S. (2002). Complex Systems Theory and Development Practice. London: Zed Books.
Robins, K. and Webster, A. (1999). Times of Technoculture: From the Information Society to the
Virtual Life. London: Routledge.
Rogers, E. M. (1962). The Diffusion of Innovations New York: Free Press.
—— (1987). ‘Progress, Problems and Prospects for Network Research: Investigating Relationships
in the Age of Electronic Communication Technologies’. Social Networks, 9: 285–310.
—— (1994/1997). A History of Communication Study: A Biographical Approach. New York: Free
Press.
—— (1995). The Diffusion of Innovations. (4th edn). New York: The Free Press.
Romer, P. (1990). ‘Endogenous Technological Change’. Journal of Political Economy, 98(5, Pt. 2):
71–102.
Rooney, D. and Schneider, U. (2005). ‘The Material, Mental, Historical and Social Character of
Knowledge’, in D. Rooney, G. Hearn and A. Ninan (eds), Handbook on the Knowledge
Economy. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. 19–36.
Rose, N. (1999). Governing the Soul: The Shaping of the Private Self. London: Free Association
Books.
—— Miller, P. (1992). ‘Political Power Beyond the State: Problematics of Government’. British
Journal of Sociology, 43(2): 173–205.
Rosen, R. (1991). Life Itself: A Comprehensive Inquiry into the Nature, Origin and Fabrication of
Life. New York: Columbia University Press.
Rosen, L. (2004). Open Source Licensing: Software Freedom and Intellectual Property Law. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Rosenberg, N. (1976). Perspectives on Technology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—— (1982a). Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
—— (1982b). ‘Learning by Using’ Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 120–40.
—— (1994). Exploring the Black Box: Technology, Economics and History. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Ross, P. (2005). ‘Mediation in New Media Production: Representation and Involvement of
Audiences/Users at NESTA Futurelab’. Unpublished PhD Thesis, Department of Media and
Communications, London School of Economics and Political Science.
—— (2011). ‘Is There an Expertise of Production? The Case of New Media Producers’. New
Media & Society, 13(6): 912–28.
Rosser, J. B. (ed.) (2009). Handbook of Research on Complexity. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Roszak, T. (1994). The Cult of Information: A Neo-Luddite Treatise on High-tech, Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, and the True Art of Thinking (2nd edn). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Ruesch, J. and Bateson, G. (1951). Communication, The Social Matrix of Psychiatry. New York:
Norton.
Russell, S. J. and Norvig, P. (2010). Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (3rd edn).
New York: Prentice-Hall.
REFERENCES
271

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Ryan, J. and Heinl, C. (2010). ‘Internet Access Controls: Three Strikes ‘Graduated Response’
Initiatives’. Note for Comment by The Institute of International and European Affairs (IIEA),
Dublin, May.
Rycroft, R. and Kash, D. (1999). The Complexity Challenge. London: Pinter.
Sadowski, B. M., Sadowski-Rasters, G. and Duysters, G. (2008). ‘Transition of Governance in a
Mature Open Software Source Community: Evidence from the Debian Case’. Information
Economics and Policy, 20(4): 323–32.
Sakata, T., Tada, H. and Ohtake, T. (1997). ‘Metadata Mediation: Representation and Protocol’,
in P. H. Enslow, M. Genesereth and A. Patterson (eds), Selected Papers from the Sixth
International Conference on the World Wide Web. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers,
pp. 1137–46.
Samarajiva, R. and Shields, P. (1990). ‘Integration, Telecommunication, and Development:
Power in the Paradigms’. Journal of Communication, 40(3): 84–105.
Samuelson, P. (2007). ‘Preliminary Thoughts on Copyright Reform’. Utah Law Review, 2007(3):
551–71.
Sandvig, C. (2007). ‘Network Neutrality is the New Common Carriage’. Info, 9(2/3): 136–47.
Santucci, G. (2011). ‘The Internet of Things: A Window to Our Future’. The Internet of Things
Council, February. http://wwwtheinternetofthingseu/content/ge´rald-santucci-internet-things-
window-our-future accessed 28/07/2011.
Sassen, S. (2001). ‘On the Internet and Sovereignty’. Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies, 5(2):
545–59.
Schiller, H. I. (1974). ‘Waiting for Orders—Some Current Trends in Mass Communications
Research in the United States’. Gazette, 1(1): 11–21.
—— (1981). Who Knows? Information in the Age of the Fortune 500. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Schiller, D. (1996). Theorizing Communication: A History. New York: Oxford University Press.
—— (2007). How to Think about Information. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Schmitz, H.-C., Wolpers, M. and Kirschenmann, U. (2009). Contextualized Attention Metadata:
CAPLE-Group, Fraunhofer FIT.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1934/1961). The Theory of Economic Development: An Inquiry into Proﬁts,
Capital, Credit, Interest and the Business Cycle. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Scott, A. and Street, J. (2001). ‘From Media Politics to E-protest? The Use of Popular Culture
and New Media in Parties and Social Movements’, in F. Webster (ed.), Culture and Politics in
the Information Age: A New Politics? London: Routledge.
Sen, A. (1985). ‘Rights as Goals’, in S. Guest and A. Milne (eds), Equality and Discrimination:
Essays in Freedom and Justice. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, pp. 12–26.
—— (1999). Development as Freedom. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— (2009). The Idea of Justice. New York: Allen Lane.
Sennett, R. (2006). The Culture of the New Capitalism. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Shaikh, M. and Berdou, E. (2008). ‘Review of Open Knowledge Initiatives Successes and Failures
Evolving Characterization of the OSS 2.0 Phenomenon’. Deliverable 8.3, WP 8 on Open
Source and Open Knowledge, OPAALS Contract No. IST-034824, European Commission,
May.
Shannon, C. E. (1948). ‘The Mathematical Theory of Communication’. Bell System Technical
Journal, 27: 379–423 and 623–56.
272
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Shannon, C. E. and Weaver, W. (1949). Mathematical Theory of Communication. Urbana, IL:
University of Illinois Press.
Shapiro, A. L. (1999). The Control Revolution: How the Internet is Putting Individuals in Charge
and Changing the World We Know (1st edn). New York: Public Affairs.
Shapiro, C. and Varian, H. R. (1998). Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network
Economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Shirky, C. (2010). Cognitive Surplus: Creativity and Generosity in a Connected Age. New York:
Allen Lane.
Sidak, J. G. (2007). ‘What is the Network Neutrality Debate Really About?’. International Journal
of Communication, 1: 377–88.
Silverstone, R. (1994). Television and Everyday Life. London: Routledge.
—— (1999). Why Study the Media? London: Sage Publications.
—— (2002). ‘Complicity and Collusion in the Mediation of Everyday Life’. New Literary
History, 33(4): 761–80.
—— (2007). Media and Morality: On the Rise of the Mediapolis. Cambridge: Polity Press.
—— Hirsch, E. (eds) (1992). Consuming Technologies: Media and Information in Domestic
Spaces. London: Routledge.
Simmel, G. (1946). The Web of Group-Afﬁliations (trans. R. Bendix). New York: Free Press.
Sinclair, L. (2010). ‘Surﬁng the Web Can Make You Depressed’. Sky News Online, 3 February, http://
news.sky.com/skynews/Home/Technology/Internet-Surﬁng-Linked-To-Depression-According-
To-New-Research-In-Psychopathology/Article/201002115540691 accessed 28/07/2011.
Skeels, M. M. and Grudin, J. (2009). ‘When Social Networks Cross Boundaries: A Case Study of
Workplace Use of Facebook and LinkedIn’, Proceedings of the ACM 2009 International
Conference on Supporting Group Work. New York: ACM, pp. 95–104.
Sluijs, J. P. (2010). ‘Network Neutrality Between False Positives and False Negatives: Introducing
a European Approach to American Broadband Markets’. Federal Communications Law
Journal, 62(1): 77–117.
Smythe, D. W. (1977). ‘Communications: Blindspot of Western Marxism’. Canadian Journal of
Political and Social Theory, 1(3): 1–27.
—— (1981). Dependency Road: Communications, Capitalism, Consciousness and Canada.
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
—— (1984). ‘New Directions for Critical Communications Research’. Media Culture and
Society, 6(3): 205–17.
Soete, L. (1985). ‘International Diffusion of Technology, Industrial Development and
Technological Leapfrogging’. World Development, 13(3): 409–22.
—— Kamp, K. (1996). ‘The “Bit Tax”: The Case for Further Research’. Draft Paper, MERIT,
University of Maastricht, 12 August.
Solow, R. M. (1956). ‘A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth’. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 70(1): 65–94.
Solum, L. B. (2009). ‘Models of Internet Governance’, in L. A. Bygrave and J. Bing (eds), Internet
Governance: Infrastructures and Institutions. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 48–91.
So¨renson, E. and Torﬁng, J. (eds) (2008). Theories of Democratic Network Governance.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Sparks, C. (2007). Globalization, Development and the Mass Media. London: Sage.
REFERENCES
273

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Spulber, D. F. and Yoo, C. S. (2009). Networks in Telecommunications Economics and Law.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stacey, R., Grifﬁn, D. and Shaw, P. (2000). Complexity and Management: Fad or Radical
Challenge to Systems Thinking? London: Routledge.
Stallman, R. (2009). ‘Viewpoint: Why “Open Source” Misses the Point of Free Software’.
Communications of the ACM, 52: 31.
Stanley, J. (2010). ‘The Impact of New IP Legislation on Corporate Behaviour, SME
Opportunities and Global Markets for Protected Innovations and the Presentation of a
Formal Copyright Model’. Deliverable 11.12, WP 11 on Bridging Digital Ecosystems
Research to Regional Development and Innovation in the Knowledge Economy, OPAALS
Contract No. IST-034824, European Commission, September.
Star, S. L. and Griesemer, J. R. (1989). ‘Institutional Ecology, “Translations” and Boundary
Objects: Amateurs and Professionals in Merkeley’s museum of Vertebrate Zoology,
1907–1939’. Social Studies of Science, 19(3): 387–420.
—— Ruhleder, K. (1994). ‘Steps Towards an Ecology of Infrastructure: Complex Problems in
Design and Access for Large-Scale Collaborative Systems’, in Proceedings of the ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work. New York: ACM, pp. 253–64.
Stauffacher, D. and Kleinwa¨chter, W. (eds) (2005). The World Summit on the Information Society:
Moving from the Past into the Future. New York: United Nations Task Force on ICTs.
Steier, F. (2005). ‘Exercising Frame Flexibility’. Cybernetics & Human Knowing, 12(1–2): 36–49.
Steinmueller, W. E. (2000). ‘Will New Information and Communication Technologies Improve
the “Codiﬁcation” of Knowledge’. Industrial and Corporate Change, 9(2): 361–76.
—— (2001/2). ‘ICTs and the Possibilities for Leapfrogging by Developing Countries’.
International Labour Review, 140(2): 193–211.
—— (2006). ‘Learning in the Knowledge-based Economy: The Future as Viewed from the Past’,
in C. Antonelli, D. Foray, B. H. Hall and W. E. Steinmueller (eds), New Frontiers in the
Economics of Innovation and New Technology. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. 207–38.
Stevenson, J. H. and Clement, A. (2010). ‘Regulatory Lessons for Internet Trafﬁc Management
from Japan, the European Union, and the United States: Toward Equity, Neutrality, and
Transparency’. Global Media Journal—Canadian Edition, 3(1): 9–29.
Stigler, G. J. (1961). ‘The Economics of Information’. Journal of Political Economy, 69(3): 213–25.
Stiglitz, J. E., Sen, A. and Fitoussi, J.-P. (2010). Report by the Commission on the Measurement
of Economic Performance and Social Progress. Paris: Commission on the Measurement of
Economic Performance and Social Progress.
Stiglitz, J. E. (2010). Freefall: Free Markets and the Sinking of the Global Economy. London: Allen
Lane.
Stirling, A. (2008). ‘“Opening Up” and “Closing Down”: Power, Participation, and Pluralism in
the Social Appraisal of Technology’. Science, Technology & Human Values, 33(2): 262–94.
Strategic Advisory Board for Intellectual Property Policy. (2010). The Economics of Copyright
and Digitisation: A Report on the Literature and the Need for Further Research, Prepared by
C. Hanke, Erasmus University for the Strategic Advisory Board for Intellectual Property
Policy, Rotterdam.
Streeten, P. P. (1974). Some Problems in the Use and Transfer of an Intellectual Technology: The
Social Sciences and Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.
274
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Streeten, P. P. (1982). ‘Approaches to a New International Economic Order’. World Development,
10(1): 1–17.
Strickland,
J.
(2011).
‘How
Web
3.0
Will
Work’.
HowStuffWorks.
http://computer.
howstuffworks.com/web-305.htm accessed 28/07/2011.
Subrahmanyam, K., Reich, S. M., Waechter, N. and Espinoza, G. (2008). ‘Online and ofﬂine
Social Networks: Use of Social Networking Sites by Emerging Adults’. Journal of Applied
Developmental Psychology, 29(6): 420–33.
Summerton, J. (ed.) (1994). Changing Large Technical Systems. Boulder, CO: Westwiew Press.
Sunstein, C. R. (2001). Republic.com. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
—— (2009). Going to Extremes: How Like Minds Unite and Divide. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Surowiecki, J. (2004). The Wisdom of Crowds: Why the Many are Smarter than the Few and How
Collective Wisdom Shapes Business, Economies, Societies and Nations. New York: Doubleday.
Swanson, E. B. and Ramiller, N. C. (1997). ‘The Organizing Vision in Information Systems
Innovation’. Organization Science, 8(5): 458–74.
Tambini, D. (2004). ‘The Passing of Paternalism: Public Service Television and Increasing
Channel Choice’, in D. Tambini and J. Cowling (eds), From Public Service Broadcasting to
Public Service Communications. London: Institute for Public Policy Research, pp. 46–60.
Tapscott, D. (1995). The Digital Economy: Promise and Peril in the Age of Networked Intelligence.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
—— (2010). ‘ClimateSpark—A New Venture Capital Context’. Don Tapscott Blog, 3 November,
http://dontapscott.com/2010/11/03/climatespark-a-new-venture-capital-contest/ accessed
28/07/2011.
—— Williams, A. D. (2007). Wikinomics: How Mass Collaboration Changes Everything.
New York: Tantor Media.
Taylor, C. (2002a). ‘Modern Social Imaginaries’. Public Culture, 14(1): 91–124.
—— (2002b). Understanding the Other: A Gadamerian View on Conceptual Schemes.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— (2004). Modern Social Imaginaries. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
—— (2007). A Secular Age. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
TERA Consultants. (2010). Building the Digital Economy: The Importance of Saving Jobs in the EU’s
Creative Industries. Paris: TERA Consultants, Commissioned by the International Chamber of
Commerce/BASCAP Initiative. http://www.teraconsultants.fr/assets/publications/PDF/2010-
Mars-Etude_Piratage_TERA_full_report-En.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
The Economist. (2011). ‘Not Just Talk: Clever Services on Cheap Mobile Phones Make a Powerful
Combination—Especially in Poor Countries’. The Economist, pp. 1–4.
The Guardian. (2010). ‘Britain Logs On To a World-beating £100bn Internet Economy’. The
Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2010/oct/28/net-worth-100bn-uk accessed
28/07/2011.
Thelwall, M. (2008). ‘Social Networks, Gender, and Friending: An Analysis of MySpace Member
Proﬁles’. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 59(8): 1321–30.
The White House. (2009). Open Government: A Progress Report to the American People.
Washington, DC: United States Government White House, December.
Thompson, E. P. (1971). ‘The Moral Economy of the English Crowd in the Eighteenth Century’.
Past and Present, 50: 78–136.
REFERENCES
275

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Thompson, J. B. (1982). ‘Ideology and the Social Imaginary: An Appraisal of Castoriadis and
Lefort’. Theory and Society, 11(5): 659–81.
Thompson, J. B. (1993). ‘The Theory of the Public Sphere’. Theory, Culture & Society, 10(3):
173–89.
—— (1995). The Media and Modernity: A Social Theory of the Media. Cambridge: Polity.
Time Magazine (1993). ‘The Info Highway: Bringing a Revolution in Entertainment, News, and
Communication’. Time Magazine, 12 April, http://www.atlanticﬁnancial.com/about-atlantic-
ﬁnancial/time_magazine_information_highway.htm accessed 09/09/2011.
Titelman, G. Y. (1996). Random House Dictionary of Popular Proverbs and Sayings. New York:
Random House.
Tofﬂer, A. (1980). The Third Wave. New York: Pan Books.
—— Tofﬂer, H. (2006). Revolutionary Wealth: How It Will Be Created and How It Will Change
Our Lives. New York: Currency.
Toulouse, C. and Luke, T. W. (eds) (1998). The Politics of Cyberspace. London: Routledge.
Toure´, H. I. (2008). ITU Secretary-General’s Declaration on Cybersecurity and Climate Change.
Geneva: High-Level Segment of Council, International Telecommunication Union. http://
www.itu.int/council/C2008/hls/statements/closing/sg-declaration.html accessed 28/07/2011.
Trivers, R. (1985). Social Evolution. Menlo Park, CA: Benjamin Cummings.
Turing, A. (1950). ‘Computing Machinery and Intelligence: Can Machines Think?’. Mind, 59
(236): 433–60.
Turkle, S. (1984/2005). The Second Self: Computers and the Human Spirit. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
—— (1995). Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet. New York: Simon & Schuster.
—— (2011). Alone Together: Why We Expect More from Technology and Less from Each Other.
New York: Basic Books.
United Kingdom Government (2002). Enterprise Act 2002 c.40. London: Government of the United
Kingdom. http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2002/40/section/58 accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2003). Communications Act 2003 c.21. London: Government of the United Kingdom.
thttp://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2003/21/contents accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2010). Digital Economy Act 2010 c.24. London: Government of the United Kingdom.
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/24/contents accessed 28/07/2011.
United Nations (1948). The Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Geneva: United Nations at
http://www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/index.shtml accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2001). United Nations General Assembly Resolution on the World Summit on the Information
Society. New York: United Nations General Assembly, Resolution A/RES/56/183. http://unpan1.
un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/un/unpan014250.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2008). The Millennium Development Goals Report 2008. New York: United Nations.
http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/pdf/The%20Millennium%20Development%20Goals
%20Report%202008.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2010a). The Global Partnership for Development at a Critical Juncture: Millennium
Development Goal 8. New York: United Nations MDG Gap Task Force Report 2010. http://
www.un.org/millenniumgoals/pdf/10-43282_MDG_2010%20(E)%20WEBv2.pdf accessed
28/07/2011.
276
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
United Nations (2010b). The Millennium Development Goals Report 2010. New York: United Nations.
http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/pdf/MDG%20Report%202010%20En%20r15%20-
low%20res%2020100615%20-.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) (2010a). Creative Economy
Report 2010. Geneva: UNCTAD. http://www.unctad.org/Templates/WebFlyer.asp?intItemID=
5763&lang=1 accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2010b). Information Economy Report 2010: ICTs, Enterprises and Poverty Alleviation.
Geneva: United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) (1990). Human Development Report 1990.
New York: United Nations Development Programme.
—— (1999). Human Development Report 1999. New York: United Nations Development
Programme and Oxford University Press.
United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) (2005a).
Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions. Paris:
UNESCO Publishing.
—— (2005b). Towards Knowledge Societies—UNESCO World Report. Paris: UNESCO Publishing.
—— (2009). Investing in Cultural Diversity and Intercultural Dialogue: UNESCO World Report.
Paris: UNESCO Publishing.
United Nations/International Telecommunication Union(2003a). DeclarationofPrinciples: Building
the Information Society: A Global Challenge in the New Millennium. Geneva: United Nations and
International Telecommunication Union, WSIS-03/Geneva/Doc/4-E, 12 December.
—— (2003b). Plan of Action: WSIS. Geneva: United Nations and International Telecommunication
Union, WSIS-03/Geneva/Doc/5-E, 12 December.
—— (2005a). Tunis Agenda for the Information Society. Tunis: United Nations and International
Telecommunication Union, WSIS-05/Tunis/Doc/6(Rev.1)-E, 18 November.
—— (2005b). Tunis Commitment. Tunis: United Nations and International Telecommunication
Union, WSIS-05/Tunis/Doc/7-E, 18 November.
United States Government. (1958). USA v Western Electric Company, Inc and American Telephone
and Telegraph Co., Report Regarding Equipment Manufactured by Western for the Bell System,
Hearings before the Antitrust Subcommittee of the Committee of the Judiciary House of
Representatives, 85th Congress, Second Session, Part II, Volume III, Consent Decree Programme
of the Department of Justice. Washington, DC: United States Department of Justice.
—— (1996). Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. LA. No. 104-104, 110 Stat. 56 (1996).
Washington, DC: United States Government. http://www.fcc.gov/Reports/tcom1996.pdf
accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (1998). Digital Millennium Copyright Act. United States: United States Government.
http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=105_cong_public_laws&docid=f:
publ304.105.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2009). Copyright Law of the United States and Related Laws Contained in Title 17 of the
United States Code. Washington, DC: United States Government. http://www.copyright.gov/
title17/circ92.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
—— (2010). Comcast Corp. v. FCC, Case No. 08-1291. Washington, DC: United States District
of Columbia Circuit, Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. http://pacer.cadc.
uscourts.gov/common/opinions/201004/08-1291-1238302.pdf accessed 22/11/2010.
REFERENCES
277

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
United States Government. (2011). S.968: Protect IP Act—Preventing Real Online Threats to
Economic Creativity and Theft of Intellectual Property Act of 2011. Washington, DC: United
States Government, 12 May, http://leahy.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/BillText-PROTECTIPAct.
pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
Universities-National Bureau Staff (ed.) (1962). The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity:
Economic and Social Factors (ed. R. R. Nelson). Washington, DC: National Bureau of
Economic Research Inc.
Urry, J. (2004). ‘Small Worlds and the New “Social Physics”’. Global Networks, 4(2): 109–30.
Val, J. (2010). ‘A Complete Use Case Integration with Aragon SMEs’. Deliverable 5.10, WP on
Integration with the Digital Ecosystem Platform, OPAALS Contract No. IST-034824,
European Commission Project Review, October.
Vanberg, A. D. (2011). ‘Search Engine Dominance in the European Digital Economy’. Paper
presented at the EuroCPR Conference, Ghent, 26–28 March.
Van Couvering, E. J. (2010). ‘Search Engine Bias: The Structuration of Trafﬁc on the World-
Wide Web’. Unpublished PhD Thesis, London School of Economics and Political Science.
Van de Donk, W., Loader, B. D., Nixon, P. G. and Rucht, D. (eds) (2004). Cyberprotest: New
Media, Citizens and Social Movements. London: Routledge.
Van Der Graaf, A. A. C. G. (2009). ‘Designing for Mod Development: User Creativity as Product
Development Strategy on the Firm-hosted 3D Software Platform’. Unpublished PhD Thesis,
Department of Media and Communications, London School of Economics and Political Science.
Vanderstraeten, R. (2000). ‘Autopoiesis and Socialization: On Luhmann’s Reconceptualization
of Communication and Socialization’. British Journal of Sociology, 51(3): 581–98.
Van Dijck, J. and Nieborg, D. (2009). ‘Wikinomics and its Discontents: A Critical Analysis of
Web 2.0 Business Manifestos’. New Media & Society, 11(5): 855–74.
van Dijk, J. A. G. M. (2006a). ‘Digital Divide Research, Achievements and Shortcomings’.
Poetics, 34(4–5): 221–35.
—— (2006b). The Network Society (2nd edn). London: Sage Publications.
Van Egeraat, C. and Curran, D. (2010). ‘Structures of Knowledge Flow and Innovation in the
Irish Biotechnology Industry’. Deliverable 11.11, WP 11 Bridging Digital Ecosystems Research
to Regional Development and Innovation in the Knowledge Economy, OPAALS Contract
No. IST-034824, European Commission, June.
van Eijk, N. (2009). ‘Search Engines, the New Bottleneck for Content Access’ in J. Haucap and
B. Preissl (eds), Telecommunication Markets: Drivers and Impediments. Heidelberg: Springer
Physica-Verlag, pp. 141–56.
Veblen, T. (1899/2008). The Theory of the Leisure Class. Charleston, SC: Forgotten Books.
Vinge, V. (1993). ‘Technological Singularity’. Whole Earth Review (Spring): np. Original version
presented at the VISION-21 Symposium, NASA Leis Research Center and Ohio Aerospace
Institute, 30–31 March 1993, Winter.
von Bertalanffy, L. (1950). ‘An Outline of General System Theory’. British Journal of the
Philosophy of Science, 1(2): 134–65.
—— (1956). ‘General System Theory’. General Systems Yearbook, 1: 1–10.
—— (1968). General Systems Theory: Foundations, Development, Applications. New York:
Braziller.
von Goethe, J. W. (1797). Der Zauberlehrling (The Sorcerer’s Apprentice) (trans. E. Zeydel).
http://www.margotserowyﬁneart.com/socapppoem.html accessed 28/07/2011.
278
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
von Hippel, E. (2002). ‘Shifting Innovation to Users via Toolkits’. Management Science, 48(7):
821–33.
—— (2005a). Democratizing Innovation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— (2005b). ‘Open Source Software Projects as “User Innovation Networks”’, in J. Feller,
B. Fitzgerald, S. Hissam and K. R. Lakhani (eds), Perspectives on Free and Open Source
Software. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 267–78.
von Schiller, F. (1797). Hope (Trans. E. Ezust). Die Horen. http://www.recmusic.org/lieder/
get_text.html?TextId=14499 accessed 28/07/2011.
Wade, R. H. (2002). ‘Bridging the Digital Divide: New Route to Development or New Form of
Dependency?’. Global Governance, 8(4): 365–88.
Wagner, R. K. and Sternberg, R. J. (1985). ‘Practical Intelligence in Real World Pursuits—The
Role of Tacit Knowledge’. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49(2): 436–58.
Waite, C. J. (1877). Opinion of the Court. Supreme Court of the United States, 94 US 113 Munn
v. Illinois. http://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/historics/USSC_CR_0094_0113_ZO.html
accessed 28/07/2011.
Wall, D. S. (ed.) (2001). Crime and the Internet. London: Routledge.
Walsham, G. (1993). Interpreting Information Systems in Organizations. Chichester: John Wiley.
Walther, J. B. (2007). ‘Selective Self-presentation in Computer-mediated Communication:
Hyperpersonal Dimensions of Technology, Language, and Cognition’. Computers in Human
Behavior, 23(5): 2538–57.
—— Van Der Heide, B., Kim, S.-Y., Westerman, D. and Tong, S. T. (2008). ‘“The Role of
Friends” Appearance and Behavior on Evaluations of Individuals on Facebook: Are We
Known by the Company We Keep?’. Human Communication Research, 34(1): 28–49.
—— —— Hamel, L. M. and Shulman, H. C. (2009). ‘Self-Generated Versus Other-Generated
Statements and Impressions in Computer-Mediated Communication’. Communication
Research, 36(2): 229–53.
Warner, M. (2002). ‘Publics and Counterpublics’. Public Culture, 14(1): 49–90.
Warschauer, M. (2003). Technology and Social Inclusion: Rethinking the Digital Divide.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wasko, J., Murdock, G. and Sousa, H. (eds) (2011). The Handbook of Political Economy of
Communications. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Waskul, D. D. (2005). ‘Ekstasis and the Internet: Liminality and Computer-mediated
Communication’. New Media & Society, 7(1): 47–63.
Watt, R. (2000). Copyright and Economic Theory: Friends or Foes? Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Watts, A. W. (1961). Psychotherapy, East and West. New York: Pantheon Books.
Watzlawick, P., Jackson, D. and Beavin, J. (1967). Pragmatics of Human Communication: A Study
of Interaction Patterns, Pathologies, and Paradoxes. New York: W. W. Norton.
Weber, S. (2004). The Success of Open Source. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Webster, F. (1999). ‘Media Technology and Society, a History: From the Telegraph to the
Internet’. European Journal of Communication, 14(3): 417–18.
—— (2006). Theories of the Information Society (3rd edn). London: Routledge.
Weick, K. E. (2001). Making Sense of the Organization. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wellman, B. (1983). ‘Network Analysis: Some Basic Principles’, in R. Collins (ed.), Sociological
Theory. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, pp. 155–200.
REFERENCES
279

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Wellman, B., Quan-Haase, A., Boase, J., Chen, W., Hampton, K. N., Diaz, I. and Miyata,
K. (2003). ‘The Social Affordances of the Internet for Networked Individualism’. Journal of
Computer Mediated Communication, 8(3): np.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning and Identity. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Werbach, K. (1997). ‘Digital Tornado: The Internet and Telecommunications Policy’. FCC Ofﬁce
of Plans and Policy Working Paper Series No. 29, Washington, DC, March.
Wessels, B. (2010). Understanding the Internet: A Socio-Cultural Perspective. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.
White, H. (1992). Identity and Control. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Whitehead, A. N. and Russell, B. (1910). Principia Mathematica. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Whitley, E. A. (1997). ‘In Cyberspace All They See Is Your Words: A Review of the Relationship
between Body, Behaviour and Identity Drawn from the Sociology of Knowledge’. Information
Technology and People, 10(2): 147–63.
—— Hosein, G. (2009). Global Challenges for Identity Policies. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Wiener, N. (1948/1961). Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the Animal and
Machine. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— (1950). The Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society. New York: Houghton
Mifﬂin.
Wilden, A. (1972/2001). System and Structure: Essays in Communication and Exchange (2nd
edn). London: Tavistock Publications and Routledge.
—— Hammer, R. (1987). The Rules are No Game: The Strategy of Communication. London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Willcocks, L., Venters, W. and Whitley, E. A. (2011). ‘Cloud and the Future of Business: From
Costs to Innovation, Part Three: Impacts’. Report prepared for Accenture in association with
The Outsourcing Unit, Department of Management, London School of Economics and
Political Science.
Williams, R. (1990/2008). Notes on the Underground: An Essay on Technology, Society and the
Imagination, (New edn). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Williams, R. (1996). Communications. London: Chatto & Windus.
Williamson, J. (1990). Latin American Adjustment: How Much Has Happened. Washington, DC:
Institute for International Economics.
Wilson, D. S. (2008). Evolution for Everyone: How Darwin’s Theory Can Change the Way We
Think about Our Selves. New York: Delta Trade Paperbacks.
Winner, L. (1977). Autonomous Technology: Technology Out of Control as a Theme in Political
Thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Winston, B. (1998). Media, Technology and Society: From the Telegraph to the Internet. London:
Routledge.
Wittgenstein, L. (1951). Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. New York: Humanities Press.
World Bank. (1999). World Development Report—Knowledge for Development. Washington, DC:
The World Bank.
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) (1886). Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works. Geneva: World Intellectual Property Organization. http://www.
wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/trtdocs_wo001.html accessed 28/07/2011.
280
REFERENCES
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) (1998). WIPO Annual Report. Geneva:
WIPO.
—— (2009). World Intellectual Property Organization: An Overview. Geneva: WIPO.
—— (2011). WIPO Summer School Reading Material. Geneva: WIPO. http://www.wipo.int/
export/sites/www/academy/en/courses/summer_school/summer_school_textbook.pdf
accessed 28/07/2011.
World Trade Organization (WTO) (1994). Marrakesh Declaration of 15 April 1994. Marrakesh:
WTO. http://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/legal_e/marrakesh_decl_e.pdf accessed 28/07/2011.
Wright, A. (2003). ‘Forgotten Forefather: Paul Otlet’. Boxes and Arrows. http://www.
boxesandarrows.com/view/forgotten_forefather_paul_otlet accessed 28/07/2011.
Wu, T. (1999). ‘Application-Centered Internet Analysis’. Virginia Law Review, 85(6): 1163–204.
—— (2003). ‘Network Neutrality, Broadband Discrimination’. Journal of Telecommunications
and High Technology Law, 2: 141–79.
—— (2010). The Master Switch: The Rise and Fall of Information Empires. New York: Alfred
A. Knopf.
Yeats, W. B. (1926/1989). ‘Among School Children’, in R. J. Finneran (ed.), The Collected Poems
of W. B. Yeats, Vol 1: The Poems, (2nd edn). New York: Scribner, pp. 219–21.
Yoo, C. S. (2005). ‘Beyond Network Neutrality’. Harvard Journal of Law & Technology, 19(1): 1–77.
—— (2009). ‘Network Neutrality after Comcast: Toward a Case-by-Case Approach to
Reasonable Network Management’. Scholarship at Penn. Law Paper 298, University of
Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia.
Zack, M. H. (1999). ‘Managing Codiﬁed Knowledge’. MIT Sloan Management Review, 40(4):
45–58.
Zeleny, M. and Hufford, K. D. (1992). ‘The Application of Autopoiesis in Systems Analysis: Are
Autopoietic Systems also Social Systems?’. International Journal of General Systems, 21(4):
145–59.
Zittrain, J. (2003). ‘Internet Points of Control’. Boston College Law Review, 44(2): 653–88.
—— (2008). The Future of the Internet and How to Stop It. New York: Allen Lane.
Zˇizˇek, S. (2006). The Parallax View. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Zohar, D. and Marshall, I. (1994). The Quantum Society. New York: William Morrow.
REFERENCES
281

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
This page intentionally left blank 
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
n INDEX
Aboujaoude, Elias, Virtually You 211
actor network theory 203
actualization 102
adaptive action 81, 86, 184–5
mind ampliﬁcation 95–8, 188–90
monopolies of knowledge 26,
185–6
online creativity 186–7
policy corrections 185–90
administrative research 35–8
Agre, Philip 23, 24
Akamai 165
alternative social imaginaries 49–60, 178
Althusser, Louis 88
Amazon 62
America Online (AOL) 165
analogue communication 80
Annan, Koﬁ159
Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement
(ACTA) 132
Apple
iPod 49
iTunes Music Store 130, 221
Arthur, Brian 19, 75
The Nature of Technology 208
artiﬁcial intelligence 47
Ashby, Ross 70
Atomic Age 3, 4, 22
audience commodity 58
automated mediation 108–9
software agents 110–11
and ontologies 111–12
and surveillance 112–15
see also behind-the-screen technology
autonomous technologies 16–17
autopoiesis 71, 73
see also systems theory
avatars 114
bandwidth use 166
Bangemann, Martin 42
Barlow, John Perry, Declaration for the
Independence of Cyberspace 155
Bateson, Gregory 76, 183, 184
Communication: A Social Theory of
Psychiatry 76
Steps to an Ecology of the Mind 76
transmission model of information 77–83
Bateson, Mary Catherine 79
Bear, Greg, Blood Music 16, 196
Beer, Anthony Stafford 69
behind-the-screen technology 103–4, 116,
118, 163–4
deep packet inspection 163–4
intelligent software agents 164
Bell, Daniel 25
Benkler, Yochai 124
Berger, John 5, 29
Berne Copyright Convention (1886) 218
Berners-Lee, Tim 164–5, 216
Bevin, Janet 79
Billig, Michael 85
bio-feedback 54
BitTorrent 130, 205–6
Bollywood Internet Anti-Piracy Alliance 133
Botnets 114
boundary objects 68
Boyle, James 131
Braman, Sandra 88–9, 107, 165
information economy 201
Braudel, Fernand 50
Brautigan, Richard 1, 109
Bush, Vannevar 38, 40, 95
Calhoun, Craig 30
Carey, James 9
Carpentier, Nico 31
Media and Participation 200
Castells, Manuel 25, 50, 64, 85, 89, 97,
189–90
Communication Power 211
The Internet Galaxy 211
Castoriadis, Cornelius 31
The Imaginary Institution of Society 199
central processing unit 213
change 5–10
chilling of Internet use 127–8
citizen journalism 107
civil society organizations in Internet
governance 156–7, 162
civil society vision 87
Clark, Norman 196

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
cloud computing 113–14
co-creation 102, 105
codiﬁcation 53
collaborative culture 102
collective management capacities 160
communication 66–92
analogue 80
digital 80
hyperpersonal 106
multi-level 78–9
communication policy see Internet
regulation
communication power 89
communication systems 28, 93–117
and emergence 118–47
evolution of 25, 29
mind ampliﬁcation 95–8
stimulus-response model 40–1, 200
communication technologies 50
competition 56–7
complex systems 75, 89–91
complexity paradox 3, 15, 66, 179
complexity theory 8, 66–92, 149
CompuServe 165
conservatism 82
conspicuous consumption 100
content distribution networks 228
control 106–7, 141–3
conventions 103–4
convergence 48–9
cookies 113
copyright 64, 121–3, 124
infringement of 127, 219–20
see also intellectual property rights
corporate vision 87
Couldry, Nick 116
Creative Commons licenses 59, 124, 131
critical research 34–8
critical systems framework 85–91
power and complexity 87–9
crowdsourcing 105, 214
Cusumano, Michael, Staying Power 201–2
cyberbalkanization 104
cybernetics 39, 47, 69–75, 207
cyberspace 93
cyberspace ecology 1, 14
Cybersyn project 208
data transmission charges 165–6
David, Paul A. 121
Davidow, William
Overconnected 21
The Virtual Corporation 20–1
De Landa, Manuel, Philosophy and
Stimulation 217
Declaration for the Independence of
Cyberspace 15506
deep packet inspection 163–4
development 7
market-led 25–6
difference 70, 77–83
digital business ecosystems 136–9, 146
digital communication 80
digital divide 24, 226
digital information control 120–35
campaign for 125–7
chilling Internet use 127–8
contradictory industry strategies 129–31
global implications 131–5
information ownership rights 121–3
suppression of innovation 123–5
digital life 15
evolution of 15–20
digital platforms
alternatives and goals 143–5
deﬁnition 135
democratization of 135–45
digital tax 230
disempowerment 104
Dosi, Giovani 196
double bind 79–80
Drucker, Peter 41, 44
Duboff, Richard 50
dynamic system interfaces 67–9
eBay 143
Eco, Umberto 100
economic growth 41, 43, 187
developmental stages 42
endogenous model 51–6
exogenous model 43
ecosystem oriented architecture 222
efﬁcient network management 166
emergence 8, 69, 141–3
empowerment 104, 105, 149, 155
endogenous models
economic growth 51–5
technological change 177
Escobar, Arturo 154
Europe
copyright enforcement 127
network neutrality 169–71
evolution 7–8, 25, 75, 195
of digital life 15–20, 25, 29
284
INDEX
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
exogenous models 51
economic growth 43
technological change 176–7
F/LOSS software 59–60
Facebook 58, 99, 100, 101, 170
see also social media
Facebook Developer Platform 104
fair use 124
Federal Communication Commission
(FCC) 168
ﬁle-sharing 123
ﬁtness 7
Flichy, Patrice The Internet Imaginaire 199
Flypeer 138, 143
Fordism 26
Foucault, Michel 82, 88
Fraser, Nancy 90
Free Software Foundation 116
Freeman, Christopher 54, 196
As Time Goes By 204
Gadamer, Hans-Joerg 199
Galbraith, John Kenneth 4
Garnham, Nicholas 56
general public licenses 59
general purpose technologies 54, 204
general semantics theory 77
general systems theory see systems theory
Get Safe Online 217
Gibson, William, Neuroromancer 93
Giddens, Anthony 33
giffgaff 105
gift economy 205
global reach 154–5
global village 42
good society 3–5, 26, 46
Google 57, 205
information control 165
OpenSocial platform 104
Gore, Al 42
governance see Internet governance
Gowers Report 219
Gramsci, Antonio 88
Habermas, Ju¨rgen 212
habit of thought 78
Hamilton, Walton 152
Haraway, Donna, ‘Cyborg Manifesto’ 16
Hardt, Michael 189
heterarchies 79
hierarchies 79
human agency 66, 68
human interventions 180
human systems 73–5
ICTs 1–2, 16, 46, 50
innovations in 55
‘immaterial labour 2.0’ 58
incommensurability 90
information 23, 41, 52
exchange of 149
freedom of 149
ownership rights 121–3
terminology 38
transmission model 77
information and communication
technologies see ICTs
information control 165–71
information highway 42
information ownership rights 121–3
information processing 12, 38, 42, 45, 54, 56,
64, 67, 71–7, 87, 90
information scarcity paradox 2, 15, 57, 64,
66, 119, 149, 179
information society 1–3, 25, 31, 43–5
market-led development 25–6
power in 55–60
prevailing imaginary 38–49
Innis, Harold A. 26, 50, 77, 180, 185
Bias of Communication 230
innovation 12, 17, 195
institutional 159–62
suppression of 123–5
instrumental research 34–8
intellectual property rights 59, 64, 120,
180, 187
copyright 64, 121–3, 124
enforcement of 132–3
Gowers Report 219
information ownership rights 121–3
intelligent software agents 164
International Federation of the Phonographic
Industry (IFPI) 126
International Intellectual Property Alliance
(IIPA) 126
International Telecommunication
Union 17, 159
Internet 4, 59
deﬁnition 153
Internet Age 3–5, 26, 58, 94
Internet browsers 57
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
Numbers (ICANN) 160–1
Internet governance 18, 148–74, 193–4, 224–9
decision-making 150
INDEX
285

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Internet governance (cont.)
deﬁnition 150
diversity in 154–5
for and against 166
institutional innovations 159–62
network neutrality 162–71
practical arrangements 156–9
private sector 156
public interest 150–5
self-regulation 188–9
stakeholders 148–9, 157, 158
state power 154–5
voluntary codes of practice 153–4
Internet Governance Forum 159–60
Internet paradox 84–5
Internet Protocol 61, 151, 153
Internet Service Providers see ISPs
Internet of Things 17, 196
intervention 18–19, 45, 55–6, 64, 69, 72–9,
81–5, 150–2, 164–6, 179–182
ISPs 125, 157, 163–4
efﬁcient network management 166
good vs. bad 165
iTunes Music Store 130
Jackson, Donald 79
Jefferson, Thomas 198
Jenkins, Henry 123
Kinect 203–4
knowledge 2, 23, 41, 52
mechanization of 26, 180
monopolies of 26, 185–6
tacit 53
terminology 45
knowledge economy 44–5
endogenous economics 51–5
knowledge society 43–5
Korzybski, Alfred 77
Krippendorf, Klaus 81–2
Kroes, Neelie 169
Kuhn, Thomas 36, 70
The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions 200
Kurzweil, Ray 96
Laclau, Ernest 31
language 53, 72
Lasswell, Harold 36
Lazarsfeld, Paul 34–5
Leadbeater, Charles, We-think 102
learning 77–83
Leghorn, Richard 41
Lessig, Lawrence 123, 168
liberalism 24
licenses
Creative Commons 59, 124, 131
general public 59
Licklider, Joseph 109
long tail phenomenon 215
Louc¸a˜, Francisco, As Time Goes By 204
Luddites 16
Luhmann, Niklas 72–3
Lukes, Steven 88
‘machines of loving grace’ 19, 26, 54, 85, 109,
119, 134, 161, 175, 193–4
Machlup, Fritz 41
Macy Conferences on cybernetics 69, 76, 91
Manovich, Lee 103
market power 55–60
mass creativity 102
Masuda, Yoneji 41
Mattelart, Armand 50
Maturana, Humberto, Tree of Knowledge 71
Mauss, Marcel 205
McChesney, Robert 168
McLuhan, Marshall 42, 77
Understanding Media 200
McQuail, Denis 150
mechanization of knowledge 26, 180
mediated virtuality 102–4
control of 105–7
mediation 60–3, 206
automation of 108–15
of everyday life 100–2
Melody, William 181
memex 38, 95–6
meso-rules 75
metacommunication 76–85, 94
Microsoft 57, 205
Internet Explorer 57
Most Valuable Professionals 105
Windows platform 49, 202
Xbox 360 203–4
Mills, C. Wright 30
mind ampliﬁcation 95–8, 188–90
Mingers, John, Self-producing Systems 71–2
Mirowski, Philip, Machine Dreams 91, 200
mispunctuation 80–6, 173
mobile phones 99–100
modding 104
monopolies of knowledge 26, 185–6
monopolization 56–7
Moreno, Jacob 73
Motion Picture Association of America
(MPAA) 125
286
INDEX
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Mouffe, Chantal 31
Mueller, Milton 161
multi-level communication 78–9
Mumford, Lewis 177, 191
Mundaneum 38, 40
Napster 125
Negri, Antonio 189
Negroponte, Nicholas 22, 48, 197–8
Nelson, Richard 196
neoliberalism 18, 196
Netscape 57
network neutrality 162–71
behind-the-screen technology 103–4, 116,
118, 163–4
Europe 169–71
information control 165–71
trafﬁc management 163–4, 167–8
USA 167–9
network society 3
networked liberalism 171
New World Information and
Communication Order
(NWICO) 157
Nintendo Wii 204
Nissenbaum, Martha 124
Noam, Eli 167
Non-Aligned Movement 157
Nussbaum, Martha 4
Frontiers of Justice 195
Woman and Human
Development 195
online creativity 102, 186–7
online identities 97
online interactions 103
limitations of 103
see also social media
ontologies 111–12
open knowledge space 139–41
open source software 59, 60, 135
Oracle 57, 205
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) 148
Osborne, Adam 51
Ostrom, Elinor 198
Otlet, Paul 38–40, 95
Mundaneum 38, 40
paradox 6, 10, 76–85, 164–71, 176–82
adaptive action 81, 86, 184–90
of complexity 3, 15, 66, 179
of information scarcity 2, 15, 57, 64, 66,
119, 149, 179
re-reading of 182–5
Parsons, Talcott, The Social System 72
Paye, Jean-Claude 10
peer-to-peer (P2P) networks 59, 102, 122,
143–4, 163, 205
Perez, Carlota 54
perspectival distortion 114
phone hacking 113
Pierce, John 47
political vision 87
Polyani, Karl, The Great Transformation 198
privacy 106, 188, 215
private networks 165–6
Prodigy 165
produsage 102
prosumption 59, 102, 214
public interest 149, 150–5
contested criteria 152–5
history of 151–2
la Quadrature du Net (QdN) 127
Quesnay, Francois 69
Recording Industry Association of America
(RIAA) 125
remix culture 123–4
Rheingold, Howard, Virtual Communities:
Homesteading on the Electronic
Frontier 48, 96
Rogers, Everett 73
Roundtable on Intellectual Property and
Indigenous Peoples 133
Ruesch, Ju¨rgen, Communication: A Social
Theory of Psychiatry 76
runaway systems 20–2
Russell, Bertrand 209
Saint Simon, Claude Henri de 69
SAP 57
Sassen, Saskia 156
Schiller, Dan 68
Schiller, Herbert 36
science and engineering vision 87
Scully, John 48
Second Life 104
self-generating systems 71–3
self-organization 19, 119, 120, 141–3
self-regulation 153–4, 188–9
Sen, Amartya 4
server farms 165–6
INDEX
287

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Shannon, Claude 69
A Mathematical Theory of
Communication 40
Shirky, Clay 90, 107, 183
Silverstone, Roger 6, 10, 29, 61, 65, 93, 175
Media and Morality 175
Simmel, Georg 73
singularities 15, 19, 96
smart mobs 48
smart tagging 17
Smythe, Dallas W. 58
sociable robots 116
social compact doctrine 195
social imaginaries 12, 29–65, 94, 176–82
administrative vs. critical research 34–8
alternative 49–60, 178
as analytical tool 30–4
deﬁnition of 32
information society 38–49, 87
Internet regulation 149
social media 20, 99, 100
contested imaginaries 107–8
emotional expression 106
Facebook 58, 99, 100, 101, 170
‘friends’ on 100–1
participation in 102–4
privacy conditions 106
Twitter 100, 102, 170
social network analysis 73
Soete, Luc 196
Solow, Robert 44
spam 114
Spotify 130
spyware 114
stakeholders 148–9, 157, 158
Stallman, Richard 116
Steier, Frederick 70
Stigler, George 41
stimulus-response model 40–1, 200
Streeten, Paul 191
Sunstein, Cass 104
surveillance 189
commercial 113
software agents 112–15
system interfaces 67–9
systems thinking 69–75, 76
human systems 73–5
self-generating systems 71–3
self-organizing systems 19
Szlia´rd, Leo´ 38
tacit knowledge 53
Tapscott, Don, Wikinomics 102
Taylor, Charles 5–6, 11, 25, 28, 88, 184, 192
on social imaginary 32–3
Taylor, Robert 109
technics 177, 229
technological change 50–1, 176–8
endogenous model 177
exogenous model 176–7
Thompson, John 31
Tofﬂer, Alvin 214
tracking 113
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (TRIPS) 133–4
trafﬁc management 163–4, 167–8
Turing, Alan 201
Turkle, Sherry 61, 98, 116, 177
Alone Together 27, 108
The Second Self 100
Twitter 100, 102, 170
see also social media
UK
Digital Economy Act (2010) 126
Enterprise Act (2002) 225
network neutrality 170–1
Ofcom 224
United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) 133–4, 157
Human Development Report 23
Millennium Development Goals Report
2010 159
Urry, John 84
USA
Federal Communication Commission
(FCC) 168
network neutrality 167–9
Varela, Francisco, Tree of Knowledge 71
Veblen, Thorstein 78, 99–100
Vinge, Vernon 15, 19, 96
virtual reality 46, 98–108
cultural difference 99
virtual space
crowdsourcing and labouring 105
mediated 102–4, 105–7
see also social media
Voice-over-Internet Protocol 163
voluntary codes of practice 153–4
von Bertalanffy, Ludwig 71
walled gardens 165
Washington Consensus 196
Watzlawick, Paul 79
288
INDEX
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
ways of seeing 5–10, 34–8
wealth creation 17–18, 197
Weaver, Warren, A Mathematical Theory of
Communication 40
Wellman, Barry 73
wetware 217
Whitehead, Alfred 209
Wiener, Norbert 69, 70
Cybernetics: Or Control and
Communication in the Animal and
Machine 39–40
Williams, Raymond 196
Williams, Rosalind 176
Williamson, John 196
Winter, Sydney 196
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 103
World Bank, Knowledge for Development
1998 23
World Intellectual Property Organization
(WIPO) 133, 221
World Summit on the Information
Society 159
World Wide Web Consortium 165
Wu, Timothy 169
YouTube 100, 170
Zˇizˇek, Slavoj 114
INDEX
289

