 
www.allitebooks.com

Copyright © 2016 by Uday veer Singh 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any form or by 
any means, including photocopying, recording, or other 
electronic or mechanical methods, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher, except in the case of 
brief quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain 
other noncommercial uses permitted by copyright law. 
First Edition, 2015 
 
 
www.allitebooks.com

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
To my friends without whose never-failing sympathy and 
encouragement this book would have been finished in 
half the time. Written for Goutam, Dhruv, Aanchal, 
Chirag, Simran, Mohit, Sanjana, Muskan & Jasreen, 
these all are the light of my life, my rocks, and my safe 
place. Not to forget my family & the most faithful 
companion I've had, no name needed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.allitebooks.com

WHO’S WATCHING 
YOU? 
The Internet is flooded with numerous trackers, advertisers & 
unwanted beacons placed on the web by advertising & 
information selling companies, including Google & Facebook 
that are interested in your activities. And most of the time we 
don’t even know how they collect that information, use it and 
even what that information consist of. But, when we look at 
your daily websites from a technical view, there are a lot of 
shadows hidden from your eyes that are watching all your 
activity, following your each click. 
WHY COMPANIES TRACK YOUR ACTIVITY? 
Of course they do it for money, they collect information 
about us & our interests then use that information to present 
some ads related to stuff we like and on the sites we visit. 
And there are now pop-up ads, ads with music and so on, 
there are many types of ads, but all have a common target to 
gain audience’s attention; to gain YOUR attention. 
Mainly, this whole process of tracking & following is used to 
gain information about the web user and change the Internet 
of ads according to it. And this analysis of visitor behavior is 
known as Website visitor tracking or WVT. 
IS IT USEFUL OR HARMFUL? 
www.allitebooks.com

In a way, it is useful for the economy as that analysis of the 
individual’s web activity can be used to provide that visitor 
with content related to his/her preferences and it could be 
either during or after a visit on the site. But on the other 
hand, it also has an added danger of selling or theft of 
personal data along its usage by the spammers and hackers. 
And according to Internet’s rules and acts of various regions, 
if this thing is done without the knowledge of a user, it’s 
considered a breach of browser security.  
ARE YOU READY TO TAKE AN ACTION 
AGAINST THEM? YOU CAN’T! 
Before you make your way to the court or police station, 
make sure that you didn’t give them permission to track or 
watch you. You must me thinking that why would you do 
that. But according to the facts, over 94% of people do that. 
Just think how many time does anyone of us ever read those 
“Terms and Conditions” before ticking the box to accept 
them. Who has got time for that? Isn’t it Right? NO! You 
should take the time to read them, they are important and 
fun as well, sometimes. Take the example of Apple’s terms & 
conditions, if you will read them, you will find a line saying 
that “You can’t use Apple products to build nuclear 
weapons!” sounds weird? But above all, most of the terms & 
conditions documents that you agree to give websites proper 
permission to track you, follow you and also, to use  Cookies. 
So, I would recommend you that you should always read the 
“Privacy Policies” rather than just lying that you have read all 
the terms & conditions before accepting them and surely, 
you will face a low crisis.  
HOW DO THEY DO THAT? 
www.allitebooks.com

This process of tracking works with something that is just like 
e-drones that move along your every click, keeping an eye on 
all your internet activity. Remember, when you just checked 
an item on an e-shopping site and at just next site you will 
see numerous ads related to that item? This works according 
to due to their strategy to make you see the things again and 
again, and convince you to buy them. Even most of the 
Internet users feel anonymity while browsing, yet their 
extensive personal information is getting collected within 
seconds of your opening a site.  
And if we read the Google’s privacy policy then we will find 
that this information consists of a lot of private data 
including telephony log information, device-specific 
information, cookies, name, email address, telephone 
number or credit card etc. 
Actually, it all depends on a single term: The Cookies!  You 
may have heard of this term in a lot of web articles and also, 
from your Mom’s mouth. (But these cookies don’t taste as 
good as your mother’s cookies.)  Web Cookies are the text 
bits that your browser downloads as you surf the web. And 
these carry some useful information about your interaction 
with the web. So, if you visit a website that you have visited 
before, your browser and the website as well, will know that 
you have been there before. And if you use a different 
computer, open a new web browser or delete your cookies, 
that website will treat you as this is your first visit. Cookies 
actually help in faster and improved functioning of browser 
and in a way the web tries to learn your preferences. Like the 
YouTube remembers the volume of the video player that you 
used last time and automatically adjusts it. Just the same 
way Facebook try to understand their users and put the top 
stories according to your interests in your newsfeed. And 
www.allitebooks.com

summing up, with these small things Cookies help to make 
the user experience better. And same does your mommy’s 
cookies to your stomach. But the question that arises here is 
that:   
 
DO YOU NEED TO WORRY? 
I will not say that you have to worry too much, but you 
sometimes you have to be careful about them. So, exactly 
what can you do about that? Blocking any kind of trackers on 
the Internet is very easy with the help of some easy to use 
some software Ghostery, Disconnect or Lightbeam that have 
an ability to cull over 1,900 trackers and 2,300 tracking 
patterns. And in a way you just  need to keep your cookies 
safe and browse in a more private & secure way, here are 
some tips about how you do that: 
 
Eat them in a private place:  You can do your daily 
searches in incognito mode or surf the whole web in 
an Anonymous mode. I mean, just do the work that 
needs privacy in a private manner. And if you want 
to do it in a simple way, just go incognito mode. 
(Using chrome? Press Ctrl+ Shift+ N) 
 
Keep your cookies in a Jar: You can use a Privacy 
Protection Software or a simple browser extension 
to block all the trackers. Also, simple things like 
deleting your cookies at a regular interval and use 
the private mode whenever you can do help you 
protect them. 
www.allitebooks.com

 
Cookies are not for Sharing: Seriously, just like the 
passwords, don’t let anyone steal your cookies. You 
never know what that person can use that 
information for, from cracking your passwords to 
hacking your private life. And in the following 
chapters you will learn how you can do it without 
compromising your browsing experience & time. 
 
 
 
www.allitebooks.com

GOLDEN RULES OF 
WEB BROWSING! 
Remember? Whenever you buy a new product you get a 
manual that along its uses, teaches you about the 
precautions you have to make while using that product. But 
we miss these precautions while using the Internet, so this 
chapter is all about those precautions.  You will learn what 
they are, should we worry about them, and how what harms 
can take place it not taken seriously. So, let’s start from a 
simple topic- 
THE FAKE ACCOUNTS: 
By definition, they are those social-networking accounts that 
someone creates using someone else’s name and 
information. This could be a celebrity’s duplicate account or 
something just created to harass someone. In short, we can 
call them “a virtual con artist”. And according to the stats, 
More than 9% of Facebook accounts are detected fake, but 
the amount of undetected fake accounts is way higher. Also, 
up to 97% of them are of females. Studies also reveal that in 
their “real” accounts, people only fill about 35% of their 
genuine information, which raise the question that 
DO YOU NEED TO WORRY ABOUT THEM? 
With every following day, websites like Facebook are on the 
way of becoming safer so that the level of spam and 
malicious links can also be minimized. Along that the 
www.allitebooks.com

advertising companies on the social networks want to be 
sure that they receive a more genuine audience, not the fake 
guys as increasing proportion of these dodgy accounts is one 
big problem for the advertisers. Other than them they also 
affect the normal users as these accounts are used by people 
to fool others and gain some personal profit along spreading 
spam across the network. So, you do need to do something 
about them, but before that we need to differentiate 
between a fake & real account. 
HOW CAN WE DETECT ONE? 
There’s no perfect way to find one, but following the quick 
tutorial below will surely help you guessing better: 
 
Check their Photos: If an account contains only one 
or even no photos of the individual then there are 
good chances that the account is a fake one. Try 
Googling some random profile pics, most 
commonly, account makers often get theirs from a 
random Google search. 
 
Their recent activities: If that user was just been 
adding random people, making new friends, liking 
random pages, joining random groups, it suggests 
that the profile is fake and the person is just there 
for time passing and getting anonymously popular. 
 
“Show me your friends and I will tell your 
fortune”: If that person has added or followed many 
people of the opposite gender, this suggests that 
the account is made for fun or random dating. 
 
Check the basic Info: Check if there is any ideal 
school, workplace or birthplace and if the person’s 
information feels fake it could be a fake one. And 
www.allitebooks.com

many of the fake accounts have unique birth dates 
like 1 Jan, **** or 31 Dec, ****. Also, do check the 
links they’ve provided to personal websites, social 
media pages, etc. 
Now that you can detect one, you must be wondering how 
you can immune yourself from one, but before moving to 
that point you should about a similar security threat known 
as Phishing. 
 
WHAT ACTUALLY IS PHISHING? 
A phishing website, email or message work in a way that it 
tricks you to reveal your personal information such as bank 
account, contact details and mostly your passwords. It’s the 
most popular type of hacking and also, the easiest one 
according to the hackers like me. But more important thing is 
that we should think that “Why hackers consider this 
easiest?” The answer is that most of us are simply not aware. 
For example, most of us as soon as they see an appealing 
offer tend to click it without even thinking that if that offer 
can even be possible. 
The real reason behind phishing depends eventually on the 
hacker’s intention. Mainly, they will try to attain the 
following details: 
 
Username or password 
 
Bank account number,  security details or full credit 
card numbers 
 
Your mother’s maiden name (In case, it’s your 
security question’s answer.) 

 
And your personal details like your family details 
school or email etc. 
And for the purpose they will use Emails, tweets, online 
advertisement and anything that you can click on. When you 
click on what they want you to click, you get smartly 
redirected to fake sign-in screens, where they simply try to 
steal your passwords. If you want to know what their success 
depends on, it just depends on our foolishness and 
carelessness. As I said above, we just don’t think before 
clicking! 
 
WHAT ARE THE GOLDEN RULES TO PROTECT 
YOU FROM THEM? 
 
Don’t talk to strangers: This is a common but 
ignored tip. You should think twice before accepting 
friend requests from the stranger and if you want to 
be sure that you are safe then you can ask a few 
questions to them like How did they find out about 
you?; Who do you know in common?; Why they 
added you? Or just who they are? 
 
Be a detective: Use the tips that you read before 
and detect if the person that tried to contact you is 
real. 
 
Limit connections: Change your connection 
settings so that people with a mutual connection 
with you or your friends can contact you. Doing this 
is very simple in any social network; just go to 
Settings then privacy. Also, you can block them if 
needed. For the Facebookers, you can easily block 

friend requests or even the person if you don’t have 
a good feeling about him/her. You can also block 
them from bothering you and even report Facebook 
if you feel that they are harmful to you. 
 
Turn on the eagle vision: Here, I mean that before 
clicking on any website that you are not familiar 
with, check its URL first. Mostly, they are designed to 
look like a real company’s website or email, but they 
just can’t simply cover the whole thing as most of 
the domain selling website make sure that the URL is 
used for a business or personal purpose, rather than 
something illegal like hacking. 
E.g.:  Facebook’s real web address is 
“https://www.Facebook.com“, but if a hacker sent it 
to you, it will be something like 
“http://xyz.facebook.com” so, it’s simple to detect 
one. And when the beginners do this, their URL is 
even easier to detect as they will use something like: 
“http://freehostingsite.xyz.com/facebook.php“. 
 
Use a smart browser: Web browsers like Chrome or 
Firefox have the ability to auto-detect a phishing 
website and give you a warning before you visit that 
website. And for this purpose you just need to make 
sure that your browser is smart enough to detect the 
hack. 
 
Don’t trust everyone: You simply don’t need to open 
every email attachment or click every link that you 
receive by any unknown person. Before taking any 
action make sure that legitimate, you can simply 
check the email address or the person’s profile and if 

it doesn't feel safe to you, just simply delete it or 
save others by marking it as a scam. 
 
When you receive an email with a tagline 
“Congratulation you have won an iPhone” or 
something like “A person has left you his property 
while dying” or “Hi, I am XYZ and I want to be your 
friend“, these types of emails or messages are scams 
in almost every case. (Some people can be truly 
lucky to get something like that in real.) So, just 
don’t do what they say and use the above Guidelines 
to protect yourself. 
 
Following these simple rules and increasing your 
attention span will surely help you to get rid of those 
spammers or phishers, but what else can you do to 
increase your security level? You will learn many 
smart ways in the following chapters. 
 

 
Something can be too good to be true: Remember?  

THUGS OF THE 
INTERNET 
As some of you may have already guessed, in this chapter we 
will learn about the Cyber-Bullies who use the internet to 
harass & even blackmail people. So, let’s begin by answering 
the basic question that: 
WHAT IS CYBER-BULLYING? 
Cyber-Bullying is the verbal, emotional or mental abuse to 
anyone through the Internet. Facebook, YouTube, Twitter, 
and Skype are the fun & useful sites that we use every day, 
but they are also the base of the Cyber-bullying and most of 
the victims are students. It’s a kind of Virtual weapon that 
people use to harm others digitally.  
The reason behind its increasing number of cases isn’t that 
the number of bullies is huge or the victims don’t have the 
power, but it’s growing because people don’t complain; they 
just don’t want to fight back! According to a research, Only 1 
in 10 victims will report this crime to their parents or any 
other adult which are the reason they don’t get their 
problems solved and unfortunately, the victims are 2 to 9 
times more likely to commit suicide rather than fighting 
back. Also, as over 80% of teens worldwide use their cell 
phone at a regular interval, Mobile is the most common 
medium of bullying. And if you are wondering about its 
disastrous effects, here are the facts: 

 
About 43% of the kids have been bullied online and 
there are more girls in the “victim” list of Cyber-
Bullying than boys; almost twice than boys. 
 
Feel that the world has understood Love? Think 
again; every 9 out of 10 LGBTQ teens experience 
harassment online. 
 
It kills! CB is the most common reason for suicide 
cases in youth. 
 
And those cases which don't end in death, these 
ends leaving the long-term or even permanent 
damage to the victims’ mind. 
 
Afraid to go to school as you may be bullied? The 
number of “cyberbullied” victims is greater than any 
other type of bullied victims. 
WHO ARE THESE BULLIES? 
He/ she can be anyone who has the access to the internet 
along the thoughts to hurt someone. There is no specific kind 
or type of bullies, but they can be anyone who hates you or is 
jealous of you. In some cases, even the teachers & relatives 
are behind this crime. And the number bullies are more on 
the Internet than real life bullies who can use anyway to 
irritate you. And above all, bullying really sucks! 
But, there must be a reason behind their actions; actually, 
there is more than reason that we can think of: 
 
Jealousy:  This the most common reason behind 
Bullying. People think that you are better than them 
and when they can’t become as good, they try to 
bring you down, this is in human’s blood, so they 
just do it! 

 
False beliefs: Some of them believe that they are 
powerful, some think that others deserve that 
treatment. This often revolves around a person’s 
social or economic status and the society develops a 
stereotype thinking for some people which later 
turn out to become a BIG cause of bullying. 
 
Revenge: There is always someone who will feel 
unjustified by your actions and the reason for this 
can be tormenting from the past. And through 
cyber-bullying, they get a sense of relief and 
vindication for what they have experienced.  
 
Entertainment: This may sound weird, but many 
people actually practice cyberbullying just as a 
source of entertainment because they just want to 
add some excitement and drama to their lives. 
 
Symbol of Power: Many people do relate Cyber 
Bullying to power; they think that people who 
practice this are more powerful than others. They 
also think this as a great social status and use 
Internet to express aggression and that mean girl 
behavior. 
There can be numerous more reasons behind it, but it’s more 
important how you treat this whole thing that finding the 
reason behind it. Before moving to the tackling Cyber-
bullying part, let’s try to answer this question first. 
DO YOU THINK THAT BULLIES DESERVE A 
CHANCE TO IMPROVE? 
Actually, the answer to this question was quite controversial 
& somewhat complicated so, I decided to ask my audience 
through a poll and here’s what I got:  

 
86% (That’s a big number) of people think that just like 
everybody, bullies also deserve a chance to improve. But 
when we look at the rest 14%, this represents the people 
who are somehow related to or involved in Bullying and think 
that every bully deserves punishment. Being a writer, I am 
still confused on choosing any side; one represents the moral 
thinking while other expresses the grief & feeling of revenge. 
So for the final conclusion, let us look at it from both 
viewpoints. 

People who were somehow involved in the process of 
Bullying think that this process should be ended as soon as 
possible!  
Those who choose, what I call, the fighter’s side, think that as 
every real-life criminal is punished as per their level of crime 
the cyber criminals should also be treated similarly no 
discrimination or self-profit should be there. I do agree on 
this. But every criminal in the same crime isn’t equal, in some 
cases, the words of M.K. Gandhi prove to be right, he says 
that “Forgiveness is the attribute of the strong.”  
And everyone should be given a proper chance of self-
improvement. We should give at least one chance to the 
bullies so that they can recreate their image; some of them 
can improve! I personally know a lot of people who wanted to 
improve & did it perfectly; they worked and created a brand 
new & better image of themselves in the society. 
So, after thinking about the situation from alternate sides, 
we can see that somehow both sides just want the “END” of 
Cyber-bullying. We all just want this crappy practice to stop 
and for the criminals, they can either be given a chance to 
improve or should be punished on the basis of the activity. 
Even though, most the world’s Governments doesn’t have 
any powerful laws or rights against cyber crimes like Cyber-
Bullying, there are still many active groups that are using the 
same internet to fight them. 
But you can’t rely on anyone else for your own protection, so 
here’s the things you can do to immune yourself. 
SO, WHAT SHOULD YOU DO WHEN 
TARGETED BY THE THUGS? 
www.allitebooks.com

 
Ignoring them- This is the most effective & 
powerful way to fight them, just like the real life, 
ignore them in the Virtual world too. You can block 
them, unfollow them or just simply don’t look. Of 
course, doing this is not easy as it sounds but until 
you stopped paying attention this will keep hurting 
you; they don’t deserve your attention! 
 
Get the Help- Tell your parents, friends, relatives or 
anyone you trust but stop hiding this. If u kept it to 
yourself it will never end, you cannot make this 
journey alone; you have to report it. You have the 
rights to report. 
 
Just STOP it- As I said earlier, it sucks; it really 
sucks! So just get up & give him what he deserve, 
don’t think about the result, just end this and if you 
were right you will not lose. Raise your voice; turn up 
the volume and let the devil out! 
 
 Be active: All the tips above were for the people 
who are victims of bullying, but this one is the 
Bystanders who see the whole thing but never react. 
These are the people who see the aggressive or 
insulting post about someone but never report it; 
just scroll down. So, just take action and stand for 
the right and make the Criminal Pay. The movement 
when the Bystanders start taking a decision; the 
movement they raise voice is the time when the 
change will come!  
And after all these tips for the victims & the bystanders, 
here’s a single advice that the bullies need:  
 “To have once been a criminal is no disgrace. To remain a 
criminal is the disgrace.”― Malcolm X 

This was all that you need to learn about the subject of cyber-
bullying, but if you want to feel or explore what it feels to be 
its victim, the next chapter will help you in the task. And 
before folding this page, just keep in mind to stand up for 
yourself as well as others and report or fight the Bully rather 
than standing idly. 
 
 

 

A STORY WITH 3 
ENDINGS 
WATCH YOUR WORDS; THEY BECOME YOUR 
ACTIONS! 
 
I am sure you have heard this quote before; if not then this 
story will perfectly make you understand what does it stands 
for. This story is of a young & beautiful soul who used to the 
internet to make her way to the world. Along the meaning of 
this quote, this story will also help you feel what you have 
read about in the last chapter. So, here it is. 
Her name was Jasmine, she was one on the finest looking 
girls from her school along with a very sharp mind like God 
has made her with full dignity; a beauty with a brain! Almost 
everyone who knows her personally loved her personality 
and along with all this, she was also a wonderful writer, she 
loved to write about the world; about the places she had 
traveled; about great people she had met and so on. 
But she didn’t want to keep those stories; those views to 
herself, she was looking for a platform where she can tell the 
whole world that what she really was and to show the real 
power of her pen. In her search for a platform, she got a 
really exciting tool, everyone was crazy about it and it was 
also a great source of information collecting, it was the 
“Internet”! One of her friends introduced her to this virtual 
world, she was really excited to share her words and she did 

so. Even, it was at a small scale, but she gained a lot of 
readers and with every coming day she kept on unfolding the 
Internet of things, and finally she met her new friend the 
“Social Network”; the giant place where everyone had 
something to share and talk about. 
She then started sharing her words at this place, but she was 
unaware of that this place is full of people who will not only 
judge her views but her life. As soon as she started sharing 
her ideas here, some people raised their hands to support 
her, but the hands to pull her down were in a much greater 
number. One of her most popular articles on the social 
network was about the Inner beauty that every person had; it 
gained a lot of audiences although they were interested in 
her, more than her article. Just after publishing it, she started 
receiving the messages and comments of the people: 
These types of messages didn’t stop and when she tried to 

take the help of her friends, they completely ignored her 
saying this is all normal. She tried her best to get herself out 
of this but failed. She was afraid to tell her parents or 
teachers as they don’t want her stay within a limited border; 
within a boundary or rules, guidelines and not to dos. With 
every day, these comments & messages became cheaper 
and all that she could do was nothing. Finally, she made a 
decision to quit the Internet, but somehow one of those 
managed to get her number and started teasing her with the 
prank, blank or abusive calls. 
 
Now, she was even afraid to walk alone in the street as those 
negative words followed her everywhere in her mind she 
always felt like someone is watching her and is ready to 
judge. But like every human she had a limit, her friend, who 
introduced her to the world of the Internet was the one who 
found her body, covered utterly with blood in the school’s 
toilet.  
Oh Yes! She managed to get rid of those voices; those 
judgments that she was afraid of. A word player who became 
afraid of the words left everyone wordless. 
So, did you enjoy the story because I didn’t! Again a woman 
was pushed out of the race of life with by negativity; by the 
judgment system; by the social network! But what if the story 
didn’t go this way? What if this story can be an inspiration for 
us? Let’s re-imagine the story from the time she starting 
receiving those negative comments.  

It was the time when everyone was against her, every 
comment that she got was making her closer to the end, but 
this time a light of hope came: 
Michael, one of her close friend, made her aware of every 
aspect that helped her to tackle any negativity on this anti-
social-network he also unfolded some other important points 
to her feel more free to express her ideas. 
In this way, he became the prince who rescued her princess 
from the dragon of social judgment. 
But why do the stereotypes always says that the price saved 
the princess? And why does our story even need to follow 
them? Let’s try to change it one last time. 

This time, the story goes on like this, being a writer, Jasmine 
had also written about the working and dealing of the 
negativity. She knew how to make these guys shut up, she 
didn’t need to block or report them, also she don’t want 
someone to help her dealing with it; she had the ability to 
fight them in her own way. She was brave enough to stay 
strong and smart enough to teach them a lesson. Here is how 
she dealt with the situation: 
 
And with that Clerk, she fought like a super(Wo)man 

 
Her actions defined the real power; the real beauty of the 
woman that have the power to save any prince from any 
powerful beast.  

Now, I feel satisfied with the story so, if you have read this 
thoroughly, we will now learn about the factors that affected 
and modeled the alternate endings of the story: 
 
Independence: As you saw, if Jasmine had proper 
knowledge and confidence then no man or woman 
would dare to do anything against her. She can be 
independent and self-sufficient; only if she gets 
proper knowledge. 
 
Help: Even if you lack knowledge, you should 
surround yourself with people like Michael who will 
support you in any problem just like a true friend, 
unlike Jasmine’s other friends who ignored her 
problems and just moved on. 
 
Awareness: Imagine the internet where everyone 
has proper knowledge and confidence to tackle any 
attacks or problems, after that there will be no one 
daring to post negative comments or send abusive 
messages. 
 
Responsibility: Think if the social sites get more 
active; they get a technology update through which 
every spam message or post gets removed before 
even you see it. Also, these sites can help people to 
learn about the cyber security and web working. 
So, before we end, there are some things that I want to tell 
you that this whole story inspired by thousands of stories 
that I researched while writing this, including the some 
stories from the people very close to me. I hope you got 
something that you can use personally from the Jasmine’s 
life. But what if Jasmine’s ID was instead targeted by the 
hackers who tried to steal her password? How can she get an 
www.allitebooks.com

unbreakable code to protect her virtual kingdom? The next 
chapter is all about making that perfect code. 

WHAT MAKES A 
PASSWORD 
PERFECT? 
The process of making this perfect code and protect your 
virtual treasure can be a tricky work and a long one too. So, 
we have divided this whole thing into three different sections 
for making it easier to understand and work on. 
MAKING THE PASSWORD 
 
 
Use 12 characters or more. 
 
A mixture of Uppercase (ABCD) & lowercase (abcd) 
alphabets along at least two or three numbers (123). 
 
You can have punctuation or symbols to make it 
safer. (,:;-!? or @&+=>$#*) 
 
Turn phrases into codes (I am the dumbest creature- 
IATDC), it’s safe & easy to remember. 
 
You may use some non-English characters as 96% of 
the hackers just have an English keyboard. 
KEEPING IT SAFE! 
TO DO: 

 
Write it down, in case you forget that, but make sure 
you keep it in a very SAFE place. 
 
Change it several times during a year, but not too 
often, 2 times will work. (Passwords are like 
underwears, change them often.) 
 
Use powerful Antivirus software that will protect 
you from Trojan horses, keyloggers, and other 
malicious hacking tricks. 
NOT TO DO: 
 
 
Do avoid obviously or easy passwords like “12345”, 
“ABCD” or “password”. 
 
Try not to use biographical information like the 
school or college name, company, pet or birthday  
 
Avoid common or simple dictionary words 
 
Do not tell your password to anyone. (At any 
condition!) 
 
Don’t reuse or recycle your old passwords. 
 
Try not use just one single password for all of your 
accounts at least have a small difference. (You will 
learn how at the next page.) 
 
REMEMBERING THE PASSWORD: 
 
 
Keep a backup, maybe you can forget it. 
 
Use a password manager, easiest way to remember 
and feel safe. 

 
Personalize it with each site, it will be different for 
each site; safe & easy to remember; personal touch. 
E.G.: 
o 
FB1234Abcd$ (FB- Facebook) 
o 
TT1234Abcd$ (TT- Twitter) 
o 
IG1234Abcd$ (IG- Instagram) 
Now, if you follow all these steps I am sure not one from a 
computer geek like me to a professional hacker can crack 
your security code unless, the point a gun at your head and 
make you type it. Anyways, this can be true for just a one in a 
million case. 
 
 

HOW WE LITERALLY 
KILL OTHERS ON THE 
INTERNET! 
“I never met her in real life, we just talked on the web. 
But I am sure that she was a really beautiful. She loved sharing 
“what’s on her mind” but, unfortunately, the world she loved 
didn’t like her that much. 
She got disgrace, haterade & jealousy in return of her feelings. 
And as the last option she chooses to quit this judging world 
and I never heard anything from her again.” 
What harms can your words make? It was just a small 
comment, right? No! 
It was bigger and due to our comments; due to us, many 
beautiful souls die and another gets up to have their place 
until someone again judges, what’s on their mind.  
So, as you have read about in some previous pages 
describing the current situation of this so-called “Developed” 
world. We judge others by their actions, but ourselves by our 
intentions. And everyone from the person who just scroll 
down to the one who likes or support one of those negative 
comments become a part of it; part of the crime, that hurts a 
person’s mind. It’s the mother which gives birth to that child 
which we call CyberBullying. Yes! It’s a part of it and most the 
time it develops a base for the bullies to attack the victims. 

“IGNORING FACTS DOES NOT MAKE THEM 
GO AWAY.” 
Earlier, we talked a lot about how we can fight cyber-
bullying, but there are some ways that will just cost our 
common sense and will help to kill it before its birth. Also, 
these will ensure that you don’t help in the growth of this 
crime. 
 
Report, Block or Ask: You already know how you 
can report anything on Facebook, Twitter or G+, but 
do you use that feature? From now whenever you 
see a crappy comment on your or even someone 
else’s post report it! You can even block that person 
or contact him or website’s owner to take action 
about it! 
 
Support the Victim: If you know that someone is 
attacking your friend, you have to help your friend! 
It can be as simple as a back-fire comment or as 
powerful as a full debate; you just need to raise first 
(don’t worry rescue will be there soon). 
 
Ignore: When you know that those people doesn’t 
matter to you then why react? Just keep on ignoring 
and they will stop when they will fail to gain 
attention. 
 
Don’t Ignore: The title may sound Ironical if 
compared to the above one, but you should know 
what the limits are and what you should do when 
someone cross them! 
 
Watch your words: See what you are posting; it 
should not be offensive to someone (if you want 
don’t want to do it intentionally). And if your post 

isn’t offensive, but then someone is acting wrong 
then re-read the steps mentioned above. 
And if we didn’t do anything about our attitude towards this, 
this may turn Internet into a nightmare for someone. This 
may sound weird, but there are some people who believe 
that ‪the ‪Internet‪ is not a ‪safe‪ place for everyone and some 
are even afraid of it. Before starting this book, I met some of 
these people to collect their fears and here they are, each 
with a personalized solution for the problem: 
ARE YOU AFRAID OF THE INTERNET? 
 
Dhruv Setia, Student: 
The Internet has all my personal information; it knows 
everything about me. That scares me! 
Yes, the internet knows a lot about you, but if you think 
again it only knows what you have told it. I mean, it only has 
the information that you have shared with the Internet. So, I 
will recommend you to look again about what you have 
shared on it and remove what you don’t want to be public. 
And the Internet has a lot of options to protect your privacy. 
 
Ravi Sharma, Trader: 
The Internet has all my Money; it has full control over my 
economy. I am afraid that I can lose it! 
Anyone with a lot of digital money lives in the fear of losing it 
due to technical problems. But these kinds of situations are 
very rare. And for the thieves, if we pay a little more 
attention at the things going around on the web, we will 

tackle any spam or hack leading to any kind of loss. So, just 
open up your Mind! 
 
Anonymous: 
The People there are fake and I just can’t trust anyone. 
Fake accounts are way too common nowadays, but still not 
everyone is fake. And on the trusting point, it’s your choice to 
trust whomever you want, but I will recommend that you 
should make sure that person is at least a real one and is also 
someone that can’t cause any harm to you. 
 
Muskaan Goyal, Student: 
I feel trapped in it! There are so many people to judge me, 
but why? I just can’t express myself.  
I know that feel, everyone you know and even people you 
don’t know wants to comment on your opinion and the 
negativity there is way more than the positivity. But still you 
have the options to block, report or simply ignore them. And 
the three chapters of this book are all about dealing with this 
problem. 
 
Alexander Thoryk: 
Definitely the Internet isn’t a safe place. Any personal 
information that you type on your keyboard or store on 
your device (PC, tablet, or Smartphone) could be stolen if 
that device is connected to the Internet. The Connection is 
two-way path: if you are connected to the Internet, the 
Internet is connected to you 

Internet was made for connection and it has done that work 
too, but as the Internet was invented by the people and it’s is 
being destroyed by the people. Actually, it’s not the internet 
from which we fear, but it’s the people of the internet who 
make us afraid. The only solution for this is teaching & 
learning about its safer usage. 
A bunch of creativity arranged pixels on a screen can’t 
possibly scare anyone unless, it’s a horror movie. And it is a 
tool for us to connect with the world, there are no borders 
between people and it’s also an everlasting library of 
knowledge, we just have to look in the right place because 
they have pumped this place full of propaganda. This endless 
library of Knowledge can be only doomed by the harmful and 
immoral uses of it.  
So, coming to the conclusion of this chapter cum message, 
just imagine that you are driving a car and you suddenly see 
someone laying half dead on the road, will you stop or pass 
by? Now, think that car is your mouse; that road is your social 
site and that person is the victim of cyber-crime and you can 
easily scroll down or use your keyboard to spread some 
positivity and save a life!  Just keep in mind that we all are 
responsible for every act of crime that we didn’t try to stop 
and start standing up when you can. 
 
 

 
 

WHICH IS THE BEST 
ANTIVIRUS OR WEB 
PROTECTOR? DO 
YOU EVEN NEED 
ONE? 
In today’s world, we all try to find a safe place to live, love & 
share. And when more than half of our world is digital then 
we always wish & try to make it safer first. For that purpose, 
we get the most costly Antivirus or Malware software that 
sometimes costs more than the device itself. So, which is the 
best software for your protection? And is it really important 
to have one? In this chapter, you will find the real need of 
antivirus along with some better & cheaper alternatives. 
WHY DO YOU NEED AN ANTIVIRUS? 
Worms, Trojan horses, viruses along the other invaders 
attacks our devices and for the protection from them 
Antivirus programs are made. Sometimes, those harmful 
attackers can make your computer really “Sick” along with 
deleting your personal & important data. So, it looks like we 
need an Antivirus as a bodyguard for our System.  
And coming to the service time, an antivirus mainly lasts up 
to 1 year when you have paid for its typical subscription. And 

after that you have to renew the antivirus after that time 
period, which changes with the companies along using your 
valuable internet data on its security updates which are 
necessary to maintain the software (according to its 
developers). 
WHY WE DON’T NEED AN ANTIVIRUS? 
Most people will agree that you need an Antivirus for keeping 
your Devices secure, but there is a condition for it- you need 
a different software for every other device; computer, mobile 
or tablet also, they don’t guarantee full protection and some 
even don’t meet the stuff the guaranteed. According to me, 
it’s not a kind of thing that we really need to worry about or 
to spend money on; there are many alternative ways that are 
cheaper than a typical security program. Although, you can 
depend on them for they do the best they can if bought from 
a trusted producer, but you need to know what you can do 
without them. 
WHAT ARE THE ALTERNATIVES? 
Here are some tips that will definitely work and the only 
thing you need to have for using them is your Brain along 
some common sense in it: 
 
Use passwords:  The most obvious & easy thing is to 
have a password that no one can break and use it to 
secure your data. And your antivirus can’t keep someone 
from accessing your social account or Wi-Fi; only a 
password can! 
 
Fire up the PC: I don’t mean to burn your PC, but I am 
asking you to turn up the firewall which is present in 

most of the Operating Systems by default; you just need 
to make sure it’s turned on. 
 
Avoid public access: Going to the public internet cafes is 
not at all safe even if they give a great internet speed. 
When you are using a public PC, there is an added risk of 
losing your private Information along confidential data. 
Also, you have to depend on third party for your security 
& privacy; you can’t have your antivirus everywhere. 
 
Digital scams; attachments & downloads: Ever saw 
that spam folder you don’t care about, check it someday 
and you will find a bunch of big & powerful promises and 
funny jokes that are actually jokes on you. That all kind 
of stuff is considered as Spam as it can harm your PC 
along stealing your data. So whenever you get an email 
from an unknown or untrusted person always make sure 
that it’s not a hidden malware. For this purpose, you may 
rely on an antivirus. 
 
Save your mobile: Nowadays, mobiles are the easiest & 
popular targets for the hackers, so make sure that you 
always lock your phone and avoid storing your sensitive 
personal data on the device. And use the tip mentioned 
above for avoiding attackers from the emails that you 
receive in your cell phone. If you’re engaged in mobile 
banking then you must have some backup security other 
than your bank’s protection, for which there are many 
security apps, both free & paid out there. 
 
Wipe up the dust: Use file scrubbers to wipe the 
temporary, unused or waste stuff from the PC & phone 
that take up a lot of space and sometimes come up as a 
virus. So, make sure that you keep your Recycle bin 
empty and clean the junk manually or using specified 
software. 

Other then antivirus you use, your security also depends on 
the web browser you use. The question arise here is that 
CAN YOUR BROWSER PROTECT YOU FROM 
THE HACKERS? 
Earlier this year, in the “Pwn2Own hacking challenge” 
security researchers were challenged to hack in major 
browsers and unfortunately, they were able to get all major 
web browsers, taking home the cash prize of $240,000. It 
was the second day of the event when Mozilla Firefox, 
Microsoft Internet Explorer, Google Chrome and Apple Safari 
got exploited by the researchers. And the impressing thing 
was that one of them just took a little less than 1 second to 
exploit Firefox’s out-of-bounds memory vulnerability. 
Another researcher demonstrated three different browser 
exploits against IE 11, Chrome and Safari. 
This whole story seems to be shocking and does put a big 
question mark on the face of the internet security. However, 
we should remember that these people were some of the 
best security workers from around the globe, so I would 
recommend you not to worry much. But if you are still 
worried, just follow the tips you got above and stay relaxed. 
But is there a real browser that can protect you from 
everything? Actually, yes and you will learn about this in the 
upcoming chapter which will explore the secrets within the 
world of the internet and is probably the most interesting 
one too.  
Before ending this chapter, you should take a look at my 
personally favorite tool that I use not only for the web 
security, but also to block some websites that can be 

damaging for the kids like the erotica websites. As the 
Internet is full of dangerous & adult content, it can cause bad 
effects on you or your family members. So this tool that help 
you and I use it on my personal computer too. It’s “Blue 
Coat’s K9 Web Protection”, the free & very powerful 
software against adult content and malware present on the 
Internet. In addition, this also gives the monitoring option & 
manual blocking option that can be protected by your 
personal password. Its features include: 
 
It’s a free Internet filter and blocker for personal use. 
 
It protects you from scams, temptations & malware. 
 
It enables us to Force Safe Search on all major 
search engines. 
 
Set time restrictions to block web access. 
 
Monitor and control web activity. 
 
It has more than 70 categories, including gambling, 
drugs, racism, spyware and phishing. 
 
Automatic content ratings: real-time site analysis. 
 
 
 

WOMEN AND THE 
INTERNET 
 
“You educate a man; you educate a man. You educate a 
woman; you educate a family.”  ― Brigham Young 
 

DO YOU THINK WOMEN ARE SAFE ON THE 
INTERNET? 
This question often bothers me and to reach the best answer 
I thought to ask it to my audience, most women. Here’s what 
I unfolded through it.  
As you can see through the graph on the first page of this 
chapter, 26% of the total audience believes that this virtual 
world is safe for the ladies and only 10% people think that 
this world is not at all safe for women. And more 
interestingly the majority; 64% believe that it all depends on 
the woman and her actions that she performs on the web. 
We will discuss various factors affecting this below. 
 
WHAT’S THE CAUSE? 
The problem isn’t only that women are more likely to be 
treated badly on the web, but also that most of them don’t 
take any action against it. According to several research & 
surveys, as women are more targeted in cyber crimes and 
due to this many ladies just don’t use the internet as they are 
afraid of it. If we have a look at the tech industry, we will find 
that we’re missing out on the innovations and creations that 
the ladies around the globe can make. So, the problem is not 
only the ways of treatment, but also the ways in which we 
react to it. If more women are tech geeks or at least have 
some good basics of its working they can make this place 
safer, not only for themselves, but for everyone else too. 
And thinking about the factors that affect this whole thing, 
we can come up to the following items: 

 
There are many pervs on the web: This was 
actually one of the comments that I got on the poll 
and the internet is really full of people that just use it 
for teasing others & the motive can be something 
serious or something crappy as flirting. But seriously 
this needs to be stopped!  
 
Ladies don’t fight back: Every time a woman 
receives a spam message from anyone she has a 
choice to ignore or make him realize his place, but 
unfortunately 4 out of every 5 women choose to just 
ignore the person. I believe that if they at least try to 
fight back, the situation can be a lot better. 
 
Lack of knowledge: If we talk about a particular 
country then there are more tech geek women than 
men in US who have that great knowledge that I 
can’t imagine having, but looking from the global 
view there is a scarcity of women who are interested 
in the scene behind the working web. Many women 
use the web, but as compared the men only a few of 
them try to learn about the working of the internet 
or its security. This is just, Sad. 
 
Lack of resources:  The number of 
encouragements, the number of teachers and the 
number of resources to make people learn about the 
web is still very low. Even if we inspect the schools, 
their computer classes teach kids how to use Excel, 
word or sometimes one paragraph of antivirus. But 
the number of resources that can actually show us 
the real face of the internet and how it is affecting 
our life is very less. Due to this not only women, but 
everyone is highly affected.  
 
The stereotype thinking: We keep on thinking that 
men are responsible for the safety of the women but 

in real the women are. I think that women don’t 
need these so called “strong” men for them, they 
can become independent if we stop treating them 
as inferior, even this chapter’s title feels like that, 
but it is important as a wake-up call for them, whose 
motto is to make them realize the issues, their 
causes and of course the solutions. 
“We do not need to attend classroom training programs for 
everything. Observation opens the windows of knowledge 
around us.” 
LET’S TALK ABOUT THE SOLUTIONS: 
 
Lend a helping hand: There are numerous 
computer bloggers and geeks like me here and if we 
all worked to teach others what we know we can 
easily able to bring a change. Its start could be small, 
but it will gain power as it will spread by person to 
person like a viral disease; disease to be safe and 
make others safe too. (Yes. we are the Change!) 
 
World cheat the fools only: One of my readers said 
that web is not safe for idiots or people who can’t 
handle themselves. She meant that internet is just 
like the real world economy; the game of the name. 
If we learnt about the psychology of this virtual 
world along with its working, we can easily fight 
back most of the convicts present out there. 
 
Sharing is Saving: Girls keep on sharing all the stuff 
with their gossip gals so, why not some techy girls or 
even boys share these things with their best buddies 
so that they can make their circles safe on the web. 

 
Using internet for the internet: What can’t we 
learn from the web? We can also use it for its own 
safety; you just need to Google it right. 
 
Share & Solve: If we kept our problems hidden deep 
inside us then there will be no solution to them. You 
can share your problems with anyone you trust; it 
can be your friends, family members or anyone. 
Even I get regular mails & calls from the people who 
need my help and if someone shares his/her 
problem with you, you can use your skills to solve 
their problem and together make the world safe. 
(Only if you know how) 
Once we have ensured everyone’s safety it is important that 
we end their fear too. As I wrote in the previous chapters 
some people doesn’t use internet just because they are afraid 
of it, but if we want we can make them realize it is not 
something to fear, rather it is more useful than your Math 
teacher. There are many organizations like Google working 
to get the women, also men on the internet. We can too, 
teach our known ones to try the internet of things for 
anything they want, from cooking recipes to husband 
repairing, but surely in a safer way. 
WHAT DO WOMEN THINK OF THE WEB? 
Katriel Patience: I strongly believe that the internet is safe for 
women for a lot of reasons. The two simple reasons are, we can 
multitask and we apply what we learn from motherhood to 
office work.  
Katriel sounds like a powerful person to me. But still there 
are a lot of people who are unaware of the vices of the virtual 
web and get harmed by it regularly. And in the process of 
www.allitebooks.com

development we have to work along the known, as well as 
unknown; we simply can’t leave anyone behind. 
Dustin Bennett: Her safety depends on that if the woman 
wants attention and doesn’t get what she thought well that’s 
her fault if it’s someone who was hacked they should be 
protected by all. 
If we give everyone proper education about the Internet and 
its safety then there will no need to worry about anything. 
She will do whatever she wants to do and in her own style, 
undisturbed. 
Monsieur Africain: I personally believe that women need to 
become more involved in tech and engineering. That isn’t to 
say that women aren’t becoming involved in it, but the number 
is relatively low. Not everyone is an engineer, though. Both 
men and women can be phished, hacked, and the sort. There 
are men also that need plenty of help in the virtual community 
as well. Not just women. 
I completely agree with these views and I wish that too. Also, 
we can’t forget that women are the most popular target thus 
forcing us to work for them first! But surely, if the 
improvement process went smoothly along the support of 
people like Monsieur, the beam of hope is a big one. 
Contracts IT: Interesting, although it’s one that does depend 
highly on other factors such as the usage, digital communities 
they’re involved in, websites their visiting, malware programs 
installed, etc. As a diversity employer in the IT industry, we’ve 
found that discussions like these are often more complex than 
they seem at first. 

I also believe that people should be aware of what they are 
doing on their device and make sure that it is not affecting 
them in a negative way. 
So, we started from just women, but till reaching the end we 
have covered several aspects that affect everyone, regardless 
of gender or age. And though we have covered a lot 
regarding this topic, there’s a lot still left for the discussion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

HOW IS MY 
COUNTRY 
PERFORMING ON 
THE WEB? | INDIAN 
INTERNET 
As many as 113 million users were affected by a form of online 
attacks in the past year, the India-specific report by Norton by 
Symantec said. On an average, an affected individual loses 
roughly Rs. 16,000 dealing with the fallout of cybercrimes, and 
as many as 30 hours in the aftermath of such an attack. "In the 
past year, 48 percent of India's online population or 
approximately 113 million Indians were affected by online 
crime," said Ritesh Chopra, Country Manager, India, Norton by 
Symantec.  
Also, security levels in the country are so poor that around six 
million devices were estimated to have become ‘slaves’ to the 
Botnet attacks last year, said J. Satyanarayana, Advisor to the 
on Information Technology, Electronics and Communications 
and former Secretary to Government of India. 
So, as the above news reports tell us, there is no other 
opinion that Indians has a very & great impact on the Internet 
& its population, but it still need a lot of improvement & 

development in its several sectors including awareness & 
security of the Web.  
Indian internet population- India has 45 million users on 
Facebook, 15 million on twitter and 45 million on LinkedIn 
from the total 125 million Internet users. (The amount is still 
growing.) And the 60% of social traffic comes from the non-
metro cities of India. This shows us the wide range of Internet 
users in India and tells us that how important is Internet 
security for India, that Government should take seriously as a 
Big concern. Also, with the growth of Smartphones in today’s 
world, the number of Internet users is greatly affected. There 
are more than 92+ Million active social media users that 
access accounts using their cell phones. This emerges the 
need of mobile safety & self-awareness about the Internet 
scams & scandals that are very popular & can be financially 
harmful in today’s digital dependent world. 
E-commerce- The Indian “online” advertising market has 
crossed Rs. 3000 cr. and the e-Commerce of India has 
crossed $24 billion (Rs 1,08,000 crores) which displays that 
increasing impact & influence of online market over the local 
markets, now the e-stores like Flipkart, Amazon, Snapdeal 
etc. are ruling the consumer’s world, this e-market of India 
was $2.5 billion in 2009, it went up to $6.3b in 2011 & to $14b 
in 2012 and is still increasing along with the time. And 
according to Google India, there were 35 million online 
shoppers in India in 2014 which is expected to cross 100 
million by 2017. 
Kids on Social Networks- Do you know that on most of the 
social networking sites just allow people above 13 years of 
age to make an account? Yes, of course. But, according to a 
survey done by ASSOCHAM, about 73% of children from tier-

I & II cities between ages of 8 to 13 are using Facebook and 
other social networking sites. Sadly, in most cases, their 
elders/parents know about this & still they just don’t care. 
However, many of them repent as their kids became addict 
to it. And it has many other bad effects along that including 
Cyber Bullying, online threat & immoral development. 
And at the time of this survey’s release, the Secretary-
General of the organization, Mr. D S Rawat said, “children are 
gaining access to social media sites at a younger age, which 
could expose them to content, people or situations that are out 
of their depth.” So, what did he warned us about? If we check 
several other surveys, we will found that the majority of 
Cyber Bullying cases are about the children from the same 
age group (8 to 13). So, in a way the parents are leading 
children to a worse road of life. 
As an Indian, I felt that I really needed to share this report 
with all my readers to help to understand that this whole 
thing is a very serious matter. And as the quote say, to clean 
the world we have to start from our own house. 
 
 

THE INTERNET OF 
THE KIDS! 
In today’s world, everyone you know surfs The internet and 
more than half of the Internet’s population consist of Teens 
& Kids and 72% of them are also active on social media. In 
this chapter, you will learn how the Internet works for the 
children and what they or their parents can do to make it 
safer for them. 
KNOW WHAT THE INTERNET KNOWS ABOUT 
YOU! 
Google your Name, email, blog, address & phone number to 
check your presence on the Internet. And to make it more 
effective, you can use some special websites that are made 
for this specified purpose: 
    www.zabasearch.com (Only for the US) 
    www.peekyou.com (World) 
    www.Google.com (Good old friend) 
    Other search engines (For full satisfaction) 
Do remember that The internet is not a place where you can 
share or store your personal information including “private” 
pics, contacts & biodata, think of it as a public library where 
you don’t want to store your private papers. 
AND DON’T EVER REPEAT THESE THINGS: 

 I kept on telling people that they should not show, type or 
tell their passwords to anyone, even their closest friend. But, 
still people do that and end up crying, so stop doing that. 
And if you want to make your password more secure then 
head up to one of the previous chapters where I have shared 
some tips for doing that. 
Also, 71% internet users access social media from their cell, 
so you can guess how important its security is. So make sure 
that you always password lock your phone and avoid storing 
your personal data on the device. And if you’re engaged in 
mobile banking then you must have some backup security 
other than your bank’s protection, for which I suggest any 
powerful antivirus. And avoid picking up calls or checking 
emails from unknown or untrusted people. And as your 
digital life is full of attackers, hackers & viruses so you need 
an antivirus to protect it. (Only if you can’t protect 
yourself).This book also contains a chapter on that, if you 
have any confusion check it out. 
 
 

ASPECIAL TOUR TO 
DEEP & DARK WEB! 
Are you aware of the fact that you only 4% of the Web is 
directly accessible and else is considered as “Dark or Deep 
Web” and the more important thing are that you can use 
that Deep web to browse the Internet hidden & free from all 
kind of trackers, hackers & advertisers! And before going 
deeper into the dark web, let’s first learn some of its basics. 
WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE 
DARK WEB AND THE DEEP WEB? WHICH ARE 
WE TALKING ABOUT? 
Dark Web or Deep Web or Deep net, Invisible Web, or Hidden 
Web, although all of these terms tend to be used 
interchangeably, they don't refer to exactly the same thing. 
The 'Deep Web' refers to all web pages that search engines 
cannot find. Thus the 'Deep Web' includes the 'Dark Web', 
but also includes all user databases, webmail pages & 
registration-required web forums. A basic thumb rule is that 
both, 'Dark Web' or 'Deep Web' are typically used by tabloid 
newspapers to refer to dangerous secret online worlds, the 
'Dark Internet' is a boring place where scientists store raw 
data for research. The Deep Web is a catch-all term for all 
web pages that are not indexed for search. And here, we are 
basically talking about the deep web along talking a look at 
the vice world of Dark web. 
 

WHAT IS DEEP WEB? HOW BIG IS IT? 
Deep web, also known as the deep net is that portion of the 
internet whose content is not indexed by standard search 
engines and website.  And early estimates suggest that the 
deep web is 4,000 to 5,000 times larger than the normal web. 
It means dark web covers up to 96% of the internet. 
HOW DOES IT REMAIN HIDDEN? 
 
Most of the content is intentionally hidden from the 
normal internet and is accessible only via special 
software. 
 
It contains some dynamic content which only 
response to a specified submitted query or accessed 
only through a form. 
 
It has the pages which are not linked to each other 
prevent that web programs (which are tended to 
access connected web page) from accessing the 
content. 
 
Some sites have password-protected resources. 
 
Some sites are limited to access their pages in only a 
technical way. 
Coming to the uses, its potential is limitless:  
 
Many people use it for illegal or immoral purpose, 
but this thing can be very useful for private 
browsing. 
 
Even if your country doesn’t provide you Right to 
Privacy, you can use this to work privately. 

 
In heavily censored countries, people use it to 
communicate and exchange information. And also 
to connect with the rest of the World. 
 
It prevents people from learning, tracking or using 
your location or personal data. 
 
It gives you access you to the information that 
“they” don’t want you to know, like thousands of 
banned books, rumored alien documents, global 

secrets and a lot of other sensitive & normal stuff.                                           
 
                          (Image via Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia)  

As you can see through the graph above, the Wikipedia 
reports that Dark web is mostly covered by the drugs & 
related services followed by market and of course fraud. Let’s 
take a broader look at what it really had buried inside it: 
 
Bitcoin services: The only currency used here is 
Bitcoins making it a big market for the e-commerce 
sites. Also, for the illegal transactions & hacking 
services that provide & manipulate them.  
 
Darknet markets: From drugs to weapons, they sell 
everything that you can think of. Earlier last year, 
many of its commercial markets, which mediate 
transactions for illegal drugs and other goods, 
attracted significant media coverage starting with 
the popularity of Silk Road and its subsequent 
seizure by legal authorities. 
 
Hacking services: It feels like the most luxurious 
tool a computer hacker can get. This part of web 
allows a hackers to openly sell their services or as a 
part of groups. The best known till date are 
Hackforum, Trojanforge, Mazafaka, dark0de and the 
TheRealDeal darknet market 
 
Fraud services: Here, you can get fraud credit cards, 
debit cards, bank accounts, phishing sites and 
anything you can imagine to use as a fraud tool. 
 
Agent 47(s): Yes! You read it right. Even though 
most of them are believed to be exclusively scams, 
there are reports that suggest powerful Hitmen 
activity. Even the creator of Silk Road was arrested 
by the FBI for his site and allegedly hiring a hitman 
to kill six people, although the charges. Along this 
urban legend, the story of Slender Man is also 
believed to be originated from here. And a creepy 

game Sad Satan which was first reviewed by 
Youtubers Obscure Horror Corner which they 
claimed to have found via the dark web came to 
existence. And if you really want to know that, I 
have played it and it isn’t any good that you may 
want to ever play.  
 
Terrorism: There are at least some real and 
fraudulent websites claiming to be used by Daesh, 
including a fake one seized in Operation 
Onymous.[42] In the wake of the November 2015 
Paris attacks an actual such site was hacked by an 
Anonymous hacker group GhostSec and replaced 
with an advert for Prozac. 
HOW CAN YOU ACCESS IT?  
The most common used way is the access through special 
software such as Tor.  
Some part of this web is also accessed by some custom 
hardware add-on(s) & proxy hacks that are used by only 
experts to access the deeper contents in Dark web. Leaving 
that part, for beginners, Go to www.torproject.org and 
download the Tor Browser Bundle, which contains all the 
required tools. Depending on what you intend to do on the 
Deep Web, there, reader, I leave you to your own devices and 
wish you good luck and safe surfing. And a warning before 
you goes any further. 
Sites such as Reddit offer lists of links, as do several Wikis, 
including http://thehiddenwiki.org/ - a list that offers access 
to some very bad places. But I won’t recommend going any 
deeper without any expert at your back. (I am serious!) And a 
basic tip: Dark Web sites do go down from time to time, due 

to their dark nature. But if you want good customer service, 
stay out of the dark! 
NOW, SHOULD YOU ACCESS IT? 
ISIS uses it. The Ashley Madison hackers used it. The 
Anonymous group did so. I won’t recommend you to do what 
any of them did. This, “Heaven for Hackers” is a hell for the 
beginners. But, the user can remain anonymous using it if 
they play their cards right, which means they can exchange 
sensitive information without any major restriction.  Coming 
to the point, the internet is made up of layers and just like the 
sea, as you will go deeper you will discover the undiscovered, 
but you will also need a lot of oxygen(safety in this case) at 
your back before you find the next Atlantis.  
For now, just try to use it to protect your anonymity from 
unwanted trackers and leave your adventure skills for the day 
when you find your perfect guide. Most importantly, 
everyone should be aware of what is it and what impact it has 
on everyone’s personal & professional life. And I did my part 
here. 
 
 
 

 

WHAT I PERSONALLY 
LEARNT WHILE 
WRITING IMMUNE 
WEB? 
About 2 and a half months ago, I started writing & learning 
about the Internet safety as a part of my personal goals and 
through it I have learnt that how important the security of 
this virtual world is; I saw & interviewed people, including my 
friends and many of them didn’t even knew the basics of the 
Internet. It was a whole new thing for them. And this made 
me think and realize that the world I was living in; the people 
I was living with are utterly unaware of the virtual vices. 
Along with them, I have learnt many other things too that I 
want to share with you today: 
 
    Unawareness: As I said above, people are still unaware 
about the working and security of the web. Even after writing 
this I still feel that my readers are unaware of some topics 
that I have decided to surely cover in the future. Until then, 
make sure you follow my tips and don’t let any crappy hacker 
attack you. 
    Carelessness: Whenever I question people about Internet 
safety, one of their popular answer is “Does it matter?” and 
eventually, my answer is Yes, but they just don’t care about 

it. And this careless attitude is the major cause of the 
increasing cases of cyber crimes. 
 Women do have an Impact: Just like the real world, women 
have a great impact on the working of our virtual world. They 
are not minority or majority here, but they are the most 
popular target in cyber crimes. That will be so shameful for 
Tech geeks like me if we were unable to protect at least our 
friend girls, sister or girlfriends even in this small, but 
powerful world. But I have also realized that we will remain 
somehow unable to make any change unless a woman 
herself works in her uplifting; her self-education & 
awareness. 
 Some people can’t make passwords: Sound hilarious, but 
maybe even your password isn’t that secure. As we know, a 
password is a common 8 to 12 characters code that we use 
every day, but there are some specified rules that you need 
to follow for making it secure. 
 Bullying is more active than ever: Even today, Cyber-
bullying is active but ignored topic that take place every day 
somewhere and people are unable to take action due to fear 
and sometimes even by their choice. 
Fake accounts can be harmful even to the creator: They 
may seem harmless; people create them to irritate someone 
or just for random dating purpose, but if we look at its effect, 
we will found it as a very dangerous activity. 
Our actions affect others seriously: We don’t think that our 
words affect. (It was just a small comment, we think.) But in 
real, they do! And due to this; due to us, many beautiful souls 

die. This fact is sad but is still true and we should definitely 
take action about it! 
The things that I have learned from while researching from 
Immune Web are limitless, but these were the brief of what I 
have learned from it. While the research, I also met & 
interviewed some people and I am very sorry not for sharing 
them all here, but below is some of the most interesting 
questions and most inspiring answers that I have collected 
from all of them: 
Q. DO YOU FEEL SAFE WHILE USING THE WEB? DO 
YOU ALSO THINK THE SAME FOR YOUR MATE? 
Maybe, I am somewhat same on the web, but for her my 
answer is No! The major reason behind this answer is that 
there are many what I call, cheap people around. All those 
unknown people on internet are the main cause, those who 
use it just to flirt & irritate others. They just look at a 
beautiful face and start sending bad messages to her. 
Q. CAN WE MAKE IT BETTER?  
Maybe, yes, but I am not sure about that. Some basic 
precautions can be taken like girls should not accept the 
friend request of people who are unknown to her and if they 
message they should not reply, she must known the 
surrounding of her area and her profile must be within her 
friends not so in the public. 
Reply:  Basically, for this answer, I am utterly against you. 
Can’t we make this world safe enough that someone can do 
what she wanted to? Why do the girls have to always follow 
some guidelines? Why can’t we make those ‘cheap’ people 
who are a blemish on the name of all men realize their 

mistakes? Some common precautions are acceptable, but 
limiting someone to an area, just because the world is full of 
jerks; this in unacceptable; utterly annul! 
Q. WHAT ARE YOUR VIEWS ABOUT PRIVACY?  
Privacy doesn’t matter friends, but it does in the public. It’s 
on someone’s thinking if he/she likes to share his/her privacy 
with anyone. 
 Q. WHAT DOES A SAFE INTERNET LOOKS LIKE TO 
YOU? 
The security must be the first thing in the list of 
developments. I want the Internet to be developed like if 
someone sends me a bad photo, he must be spam within no 
time. And coming to government, it can only employ some 
smart tech guys like you that can web secure, at least in their 
area. Immune Web in every locality where people come and 
discuss the internet and its security flaws than there will be 
no need of antiviruses, security specialists, and girls’ worries. 
But until that day, this guide will keep you safe at a fine level. 
 
 
 

              THANK 
      YOU! 
 
 
 

  WORDS MY FRIEND WANTED TO SHARE- 
"LIFE IS WHAT HAPPEN WHEN WE'RE BUSY 
MAKING OTHER PLANS" ~ JOHN LENNON  
Laughing is the best and the important part of our life. 
Smiling and laughing has a positive effect on our life and also 
well-being in the society and environment. A good smile to 
others can make the others feel comfortable and happy. 
Smiling is an attractive expression, which is more likely to 
draw people to you rather than push them away. Interaction 
with others is easier and more enjoyable when smiles and 
laughs are shared, and this behavior affects others, making 
others feel better too, and make you a more appealing and 
attractive person to be around. This in turn will have a 
positive effect on our well-being. 
A good example of this is a children’s. We often see the kids 
running around us, constantly laughing and smiling as they 
enjoy living in the moment, while the parents sit around the 
edge, full of the stresses that modern life can bring so many 
problems and other sorrows that we have to face in our 
everyday life and this will also depend us on our daily routine 
laughter. We all elders have to learn from the small children 
that, if they smile without any fear and sorrow then why can't 
we all big ones? Research has shown that there a number of 
health benefits contributed to smiling and laughing.  In 
addition to improve health, these simple facial expressions 
and common human behaviors also matters laughing have a 
very important part in life. When you smile and laugh it feels 
good. This exercises the body, replenishing the cells from a 
lungful of oxygen and gaining all the benefits of exercising 
the body. 

How to Smile and Laugh More Often? 
1.  Smile and laugh regularly.  
2.  Watch funny films, TV, and theater shows. 
3.  Spend time with friends and family that make you feel 
happy.  
4.  Find things to smile and laugh about. 
5.  If we want to impress somebody, make them laugh. 
Goutam Ahuja (@goutamahuja), a writer, my friend & my 
favorite comedian.  

Reply: Your answer is quite interesting; I mean if there is an  
www.allitebooks.com

