 

Implementing SugarCRM 
Introduce the leading Open Source CRM 
application into your small/mid-size business with 
this systematic, practical guide 
 
 
 
 
"Not just a powerful guide to SugarCRM, it's a practical, hands 
on introduction to CRM as a whole."  
– Bernard Golden, Author, "Succeeding with Open Source" 
 
 
 
 
 
Michael J.R. Whitehead 
 
 
 
 
 
  BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI 

Implementing SugarCRM 
A practical guide for small-medium businesses 
Copyright © 2006 Packt Publishing 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission of the publisher, 
except in the case of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews. 
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of the 
information presented. However, the information contained in this book is sold without warranty, 
either express or implied. Neither the author, Packt Publishing, nor its dealers or distributors will 
be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book. 
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all the companies and 
products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. However, Packt Publishing 
cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information. 
 
First published: February 2006 
 
Production Reference: 1030206 
 
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd. 
32 Lincoln Road 
Olton 
Birmingham, B27 6PA, UK. 
ISBN 1-904811-68-X 
www.packtpub.com
Cover Design by www.visionwt.com 

Credits 
Author 
Michael J.R. Whitehead 
 
Reviewer 
Alan Sutton 
 
Technical Editors 
Nanda Padmanabhan 
Rushabh Sanghavi 
 
Editorial Manager 
Dipali Chittar 
 
Development Editor 
David Barnes 
 
Indexer 
Ashutosh Pande 
 
Proofreader 
Chris Smith 
 
Production Coordinator  
Manjiri Nadkarni 
 
Cover Designer 
Helen Wood 
 
 
 
 

About the Author 
Michael J. R. Whitehead is a leading authority on the design and implementation of 
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) systems. Michael's experience and expertise spans a 
thirty year career in software architecture, design, and development as well as business 
management and ownership of multiple technology organizations. Among many other 
accomplishments Michael is the contributing author of the SugarCRM Open Source User Guide. 
Michael has authored this book for entrepreneurs and small/medium business leaders, like himself, 
to help propel the success of their businesses through the disciplined application of CRM best 
practices.  More than just a practical guide for the implementation of SugarCRM, this book 
explores and explains the business implications—and benefits—of customer relationship 
management for the small/medium business. 
Michael is currently the founder and President of The Long Reach Corporation 
(www.thelongreach.com).  Long Reach blends real-world CRM expertise with commercial 
open-source technologies to design, develop, and deliver cost-effective CRM solutions for 
small/medium business and divisions of large enterprises. Long Reach offers a full range of 
SugarCRM implementation, customization, and training services. Long Reach is also the 
developer of Info At Hand, a complete, commercial-grade, customer-centric business management 
solution built on SugarCRM Open Source. 
 
 
To the Whitehead Family: Rennie, Nesta, Maureen, Andrew, Katherine & Suzanne. 
For the help and encouragement they have all given me through the years, and during this 
project, each in their own special way. They have taught me all the important things.  
I’d like to thank John, Clint, and Jacob for having the courage and skills to create the 
wonderful SugarCRM platform, and David Barnes for having the vision to recognize its 
importance at such an early stage.  
 

About the Reviewer 
Al Sutton has worked for several years in systems design, development, and deployment for 
large corporations such as Reuters and Chase Manhattan Bank, smaller organizations, and start-
ups, from which he has gained a wide experience of many types of IT environment. He is 
currently working with Argosy TelCrest on its security software. 

Table of Contents 
Preface 
1
Chapter 1: Doing Business—Better 
5
The Business Benefits of CRM Technology 
6 
Small and Mid-Size Businesses: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly 
6 
Typical Small Business Needs 
7 
What is Customer Relationship Management? 
8 
What is SugarCRM? 
10 
The Beauty of CRM Navigation 
12 
What are my CRM Options? 
14 
Deployment Options 
15 
CRM Customization 
16 
What Will a CRM Do for my Business? 
17 
How Will This Book Help Me Get the CRM That Fits my Business? 
18 
Our Case Study: RayDoc Carpets, Doors, and Windows 
19 
Our Hero: Doc 
20 
What Does the Future Hold for RayDoc? 
20 
Summary 
21 
Chapter 2: One Size Does Not Fit All— CRM Your Way 
23
Identifying the CRM Needs of Your Business 
24 
Which Business Activities will be a Part of Your CRM? 
25 
Accounts and Contacts 
26 
Tracking Leads and Opportunities 
26 
Sales-Force Automation 
27 
Tracking the Sales Pipeline 
28 
Tracking Service Cases and Support Contracts 
28 
Corporate Calendar Management 
29 
Corporate Directory 
29 
Interface Consolidation 
30 
Document Management 
30 
Business Models and Their Specific Requirements 
31 
B2B or B2C? 
31 

Table of Contents 
Products or Services? 
31 
Average Transaction Value, Sales Cycle, and the Recurring Business Model 32 
Location, Location, Location 
33 
Size Does Matter: Two or Two Hundred? 
34 
International Needs 
35 
How Do I Make Shrink-Wrapped Software Suit My Business? 
36 
Customer-Centric Business Management 
37 
Requirement Analysis 
39 
RayDoc CRM Requirements 
39 
Your CRM Requirements Worksheet 
40 
Summary 
42 
Chapter 3: CRM Deployment Options: Which One Is Right for You? 43
Deployment Alternatives 
44 
Server Issues for Self-Hosted and Collocated Deployments 
46 
Choosing a Server Operating System 
46 
Web-Based Application Platforms 
47 
Specifying Your Server Hardware 
48 
Backup and Security Considerations 
51 
Server Security 
52 
Bandwidth Capacity and Reliability Considerations 
53 
Performing the Installation 
54 
Summary 
55 
Chapter 4: CRM Basics 
57
CRM Processes and Terminology 
57 
Accessing the SugarCRM System 
58 
A Quick Tour of SugarCRM 
60 
Themes 
61 
CRM Navigation Basics: Accounts and Contacts 
63 
The Sales Pipeline: Leads and Opportunities 
73 
Aggregating Opportunities: The Sales Pipeline 
79 
The Dashboard 
81 
Calendaring 
86 
Sales Activities 
90 
Creating a Note 
92 
Creating a Task 
93 
Scheduling a Call or Meeting 
94 
Managing Emails 
95 
ii  

Table of Contents 
Email Templates 
98 
Advanced User Interface Features 
99 
Printing Information 
100 
Getting Help 
101 
Exporting Information 
101 
Updating Several Records at Once 
103 
Input Business Card 
103 
Create from vCard 
104 
Quick New Item 
104 
Summary 
105 
Chapter 5: Extending Your CRM's  Business Role 
107
Importing your Data 
108 
Marketing Campaigns 
109 
Targets versus Leads and Contacts 
109 
Creating an Email Template 
112 
Creating an Email Marketing Program 
113 
Adding Targets to the Campaign 
114 
The Mass Emailing Queue 
117 
Tracking a Campaign 
118 
Document Management 
118 
Project Management 
124 
Customer Service Management 
129 
Software Bug Tracking 
131 
Email Notifications 
132 
Interface Consolidation 
133 
RSS News Feeds 
134 
Linking in External Websites 
137 
Linking in a Security Camera 
139 
Assessing your CRM Customization Needs 
141 
Making Changes to your Existing CRM Modules 
141 
Summary 
146 
Chapter 6: Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 147
Free Add-Ons 
149 
Role Management Extension 
149 
Photographic Company Directory 
154 
Constant Availability 
156 
The Sync4j Open Source Project 
157 
 
iii

Table of Contents 
Commercial Open Source Add-Ons 
159 
Human Resources Management 
159 
Service Contract Management 
163 
Receiving POP Email 
167 
Sugar Pro Add-Ons 
171 
Product Catalog and Products Module 
172 
Product Catalog 
173 
Products Module 
175 
Quotes Module 
175 
Forecasting 
179 
Standard and Custom Reporting 
181 
Sales Teams 
188 
Enhanced Role Management: Access Control Lists 
191 
Sugar Wireless 
192 
Add-on Summary Table 
196 
Participating in the Sugar Online Community 
197 
Sugar User Forums 
199 
Summary 
200 
Chapter 7: Managing Your  CRM Implementation 
203
Key Steps to a Successful CRM Implementation 
204 
Planning the Implementation 
205 
Some Common Pitfalls 
206 
It Takes a Team to Win 
207 
Setting Project Goals and Specifications 
208 
Selecting a CRM Development Partner 
209 
System Development 
210 
Data Import 
211 
Pilot Testing 
211 
The CRM Training Process 
211 
Session 1: Initial Management Training and Product Exposure 
212 
Session 2: Management Training Completion and Issue Management 
212 
Session 3: Present Final System Adjustments (Optional) 
213 
Session 4: General User Training Session 
213 
Session 5: Training Completion (Optional) 
214 
CRM Training Materials 
214 
Slide 1: What is a CRM System? 
215 
Slide 2: CRM Deployment Options 
215 
iv  

Table of Contents 
Slide 3: What are our Business Goals? 
216 
Slide 4: What Functional Areas of CRM will we Use the Most? 
216 
Slide 5: What is SugarCRM? 
216 
Slide 6: CRM Basics 1—System Access, Screen Layout, Navigation 
216 
Slide 7: CRM Basics 2—Accounts and Contacts 
216 
Slide 8: CRM Basics 3—Opportunities and the Sales Pipeline, Home Tab 217 
Slide 9: CRM Basics 4—Calendaring 
217 
Slide 10: CRM Basics 5—Activities (Calls, Meetings, Tasks, Notes) 
217 
Slide 11: CRM Basics 6—Email 
217 
Slide 12: CRM Basics 7—Advanced Interface Features 
217 
Slide 13: Extending CRM 1—RSS News and External Sites 
218 
Slide 14: Extending CRM 2—Marketing Campaigns 
218 
Slide 15: Extending CRM 3—Document Management 
218 
Slide 16: Extending CRM 4—Project Management 
218 
Slide 17: Extending CRM 5—Customer Service Management 
218 
Slide 18: Extending CRM 6—Always in Touch 
218 
Slide 19: Extending CRM 7—Reaching Out 
219 
Going Live: Stepwise Introduction 
219 
Continuous Feedback and Enhancement 
219 
Summary 
220 
Chapter 8: Linking SugarCRM to Your Customers 
221
Capturing Customer Leads from a Public Site into your SugarCRM 
Installation 
222 
Customer Self-Service Portals 
228 
Installing the Mambo Portal 
228 
Installing the SugarCRM Portal Components for Mambo 
239 
Adding Cases and Bugs to the Mambo User Menu 
245 
Publish the Sugar Login Form 
248 
Create a New Mambo User 
249 
Create a New Sugar Contact Linked to the Mambo User 
250 
Using Your New Self-Service Portal 
250 
Summary 
254 
Appendix A: Installing SugarCRM on Linux 
255
Basic SUSE Linux Installation 
255 
Configure the SUSE Linux Installation 
256 
Updating the SUSE Linux Installation 
256 
Version 1:  Using a Downloaded DVD of SUSE Linux 10 
257 
Version 2:  Using a Full Retail DVD of SUSE Linux 10 
257 
 
v

Table of Contents 
Continuing the Update… 
257 
Test Apache and PHP 
258 
Configure MySQL 
258 
Configure php.ini 
259 
Install SugarCRM 
260 
Configure Installation Settings 
267 
Forbid Access to Install Directory 
267 
Email Server Integration 
268 
Configure Apache for Multiple Virtual Server Installations 
268 
Appendix B: Installing SugarCRM on Windows Server 
271
Basic SpikeSource Installation 
271 
Re-running the Installation 
282 
Appendix C: Data Import and Export 
283
Importing Accounts and Contacts 
283 
Export Contacts from Your Current Contact Manager 
284 
Import Accounts 
284 
Import Contacts 
287 
Importing Leads and Opportunities 
287 
Exporting Information 
288 
Appendix D: The System Administrator Role 
289
System Administration Duties 
289 
Who Should Be the System Administrator? 
290 
Should More Than One User Be Given System Admin Capability? 
291 
Administration Duties at System Installation Time 
291 
Configuring System Settings 
292 
Defining Currencies and Rates 
293 
Defining System Roles 
294 
Configuring System Tabs 
295 
Defining Releases for Bug Tracker 
296 
Adding System Users 
296 
Using Sugar Studio 
298 
Enabling the Mass Emailer 
298 
Recurring Administration Duties 
299 
User Management 
299 
Resetting Passwords 
300 
vi  

Table of Contents 
General Maintenance 
300 
Checking for Updates to Sugar Open Source 
300 
System Backups 
301 
Data Backups 
301 
Checking Available Storage 
301 
Using the Upgrade Wizard 
302 
Using the Module Loader 
303 
Index 
305
 
vii

 

Preface 
In 1999, a company named Salesforce.com changed the rules for Customer Relationship 
Management (CRM) tools. Once exclusively the domain of multi-million dollar solutions 
designed to be used by large organizations, Salesforce.com revolutionized the capabilities and 
price points of CRM so that it was usable and affordable by much smaller firms.  
In 2004, a further paradigm shift took place, when a Silicon Valley startup by the name of SugarCRM 
released its first version of software that made the benefits of effective CRM available to firms as small 
as home-based businesses (and as large as several thousand employees).  
I have been involved with the SugarCRM Open Source project since its very early days. I 
remember my first thoughts after seeing it—thinking how good the user interface and performance 
were, and wondering why there was no user documentation. One of the first contributions I made 
to the project was the Open Source User Guide—a basic reference guide to the system's operation.  
With Implementing SugarCRM, my goal was to bring more perspective to the topic of CRM 
technology and its role in small/mid-size businesses today, and to illustrate those possibilities with 
a detailed introduction to SugarCRM Open Source. I also wanted to give small/mid-size 
businesses the benefit of the experience I have gained from carrying out over 30 SugarCRM 
implementations just during the course of writing this book.  
This book is intended to help you on two fronts: 
• 
Learning about the recent game-changing advances in the field of Customer 
Relationship Management for small to mid-size businesses, using a step-by-step 
guide to modern CRM capabilities illustrated by worked examples and images from 
SugarCRM Open Source—today's leading open-source CRM solution. 
• 
Leading you though the business analysis process of understanding how your 
organization is different from other firms, and therefore how your CRM should be 
customized so it best fits your needs and business processes.  
I have tried to write a book that will engage you at your current level of knowledge, whether you 
already have some familiarity with CRM principles, or with the details of SugarCRM itself, or 
would like to gain familiarity with the CRM field from the bottom up. It will deliver in-depth 
understanding of CRM concepts, SugarCRM capabilities, and advanced applications, and the 
business context to apply CRM to your real-world challenges.  
From the initial blank sheet of paper you face when first considering a CRM implementation for 
your business, through the detailed business and technology considerations of creating the right 
CRM solution for you, to the challenges of deploying and introducing the CRM into your 
business, this book will lead you each step of the way.   

Preface 
During the course of this book, I will demonstrate and explain how to improve your business processes, 
business performance, and quality of life using CRM tools created specifically for managing small and 
mid-size businesses. By the end of the book you will be doing business—better! 
What This Book Covers 
Chapter 1 introduces you to CRM and shows how CRM systems such as SugarCRM can increase 
your business's productivity and profitability, and lead to richer, even more pleasurable business 
relationships. You'll also meet Doc, the proprietor of our case study business—RayDoc Carpets.  
Chapter 2 provides the critical business analysis process you need to work your way through to 
identify, understand, and satisfy the special CRM needs of your business. The business analysis 
for the RayDoc case study is presented in worksheet format, and then you mark up an analysis 
worksheet for your own business.   
Chapter 3 makes a break from the theoretical, and gets down to the practical considerations of 
deploying your CRM system, explains the options you have to choose from, and ends with your 
new system up and running. 
Chapter 4 helps you take your new CRM for a test drive, providing a step-by-step introduction to 
CRM concepts and usage, illustrated with a task-oriented series of worked examples in 
SugarCRM. This hands-on approach lets you get a real feel for the information held in a CRM and 
how easy it is to find it and keep it up to date.  
Chapter 5 takes you beyond the basic CRM information, and explains the Sugar Open Source features 
you may not have realized were part of a CRM—marketing campaigns, project management, document 
management, RSS news feeds, linking to external websites, and sending email.  
Chapter 6 discusses commercial and Open Source add-ons for SugarCRM. Some important CRM 
capabilities may be found in Open Source and commercial add-ons, including the ability to 
prepare quotes, receiving email within the CRM, security and access control, standard and custom 
report generation, sales forecasting, wireless handheld browser access, wirelessly synchronizing 
CRM data with handheld devices, HR management, and service contract management.  
Chapter 7 is a guide to managing your CRM implementation. How do you make sure that your 
new CRM will be the right fit for your business, and that users will embrace it? This chapter deals 
with the key issues of setting goals and requirements, involving all areas of the business 
throughout the entire process, managing the development of any customizations, and then system 
training and rollout—making sure it becomes a welcome part of the new office routine.    
Chapter 8 explains how to link SugarCRM with your customers. Outside the walls of your 
business, there is an entire world of integration opportunities for your CRM. This chapter explores 
the creation of automated lead capture from your public website, and integration of Sugar Open 
Source with a customer self-service web portal based on the Mambo portal.  
Appendix A details the step-by-step process of installing SugarCRM on a Linux server.  
Appendix B explains the relatively simple process of installing SugarCRM on a Windows server.  
2 

Preface 
Appendix C shows you in detail how to get your valuable data out of your old contact manager or 
CRM, and into SugarCRM.  
Appendix D explains the role and responsibilities of the system administrator—at the time of 
initial system installation, as well as for ongoing support and maintenance.  
Conventions 
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between different kinds of 
information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an explanation of their meaning. 
There are three styles for code. Code words in text are shown as follows: "We can include other 
contexts through the use of the include directive." 
A block of code will be set as follows:  
$_POST['status'] = "New"; 
$_POST['refered_by'] = "Lead Capture Webpage"; 
$_POST['email_opt_out'] = empty($_POST['email_opt_in']) ? 'on' : 'off'; 
When we wish to draw your attention to a particular part of a code block, the relevant lines or 
items will be made bold: 
$_POST['status'] = "New"; 
$_POST['refered_by'] = "Lead Capture Webpage"; 
$_POST['email_opt_out'] = empty($_POST['email_opt_in']) ? 'on' : 'off'; 
Any command-line input and output is written as follows: 
/echo "0,10,20,30,40,50 * * * * cd /<path-to-sugar>; 
<path-to-php> ./scheduler.php" | crontab -u apache/  
 
New terms and important words are introduced in a bold-type font. Words that you see on the 
screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in our text like this: "clicking the Next 
button moves you to the next screen".  
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this. 
Reader Feedback 
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about this book, what 
you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for us to develop titles that you 
really get the most out of.  
To send us general feedback, simply drop an email to feedback@packtpub.com, making sure to 
mention the book title in the subject of your message. 
If there is a book that you need and would like to see us publish, please send us a note in the 
SUGGEST A TITLE form on www.packtpub.com or email suggest@packtpub.com. 
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing or contributing 
to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors. 
 
3

Preface 
Customer Support 
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to help you to get 
the most from your purchase. 
Downloading the Example Code for the Book 
Visit http://www.packtpub.com/support, and select this book from the list of titles to 
download any example code or extra resources for this book. The files available for download 
will then be displayed.  
The downloadable files contain instructions on how to use them. 
Errata 
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our contents, mistakes do happen. If 
you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in text or code—we would be grateful if 
you would report this to us. By doing this you can save other readers from frustration, and help to 
improve subsequent versions of this book. If you find any errata, report them by visiting 
http://www.packtpub.com/support, selecting your book, clicking on the Submit Errata link, and 
entering the details of your errata. Once your errata have been verified, your submission will be 
accepted and the errata added to the list of existing errata. The existing errata can be viewed by 
selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support. 
Questions 
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with some aspect of 
the book, and we will do our best to address it. 
4 

1 
Doing Business—Better 
On the face of it, you have to wonder why we do it. Why we work all the long hours, often making 
a less than comfortable income, and dealing with seemingly endless problems in all different areas 
of the business. Handling internal staffing issues, supplier problems, customer complaints, 
government paperwork, and technology challenges—some days it never seems to stop! 
Of course, we do it because we love it, because being a vital part of a small or mid-size business 
allows us to accomplish so much and to have such a significant influence on the performance of 
the business. Helping to realize a vision of a business we believe in gives us so much satisfaction 
that we are prepared to put up with everything else it entails. But we're not crazy—if we could find 
a way to reduce the pressure and workload that comes with being part of a dynamic small or 
mid-size business, we would likely embrace it. And if it helps the business grow, and makes our 
customers happier—that would be quite something.  
However—while there are many technologies that profess to deliver these benefits, typically the 
solutions and systems available are too expensive, too complicated, or too poor a match to the 
specific requirements of our business for them to deliver salvation.  
Well, not to raise your hopes unduly, I believe help is on the way. I too am a small business 
person, having bought and sold small businesses including an art gallery, a women's clothing 
store, a computer retail store, a couple of software development companies, and several computer 
manufacturing companies. I have created new businesses, and purchased and revived other 
people's businesses. I have held management positions in operations, technology, sales, and 
marketing. I have been the boss, and I have worked for bosses with a wide variety of skill sets. 
Perhaps like you, along the way I have made money, and sometimes lost it. But it has always been 
worth it to me—the tradeoff between the burden of responsibility, pressure, and stress for the 
relative freedom to pursue your own vision of how a business or a department should be operated.  
This book is about being a part of a small or mid-size business. The principal constituencies within 
a Small or Mid-Size Business (SMB) addressed by this book include senior management (an 
owner, partner, shareholder, or manager), the Information Technology group (the CTO, or an IT 
manager, specialist, or advisor), the Sales department (Sales Manager or quota-bearing sales 
executive or representative), as well as the Administration (both, the managers of finance, and 
administration, as well as the rank and file employees). The objective of this book is to 
demonstrate and explain how to improve your business processes, business performance, and 
quality of life using Customer Relationship Management (CRM) tools created specifically for 
managing small and mid-size businesses.  

Doing Business—Better 
 
6 
The Business Benefits of CRM Technology 
As someone who owned his first micro-computer (a Sol-20 from Processor Technology) in 1977,  
I have always made a point of using technology to lighten the load of managing a small business 
and with the recent advances in the field of CRM for small and mid-size businesses, so can you. 
Until recently, smaller businesses typically could not afford management tools of this type, and 
even when they could, those tools were more oriented towards larger businesses, and they found 
them impractical and unwieldy.  
Throughout the book I will endeavor as much as possible to deal with CRM from a business, not 
technical, perspective. However, the later chapters do become quite technical, explaining how to 
customize your CRM, and link your CRM to external portals and lead capture mechanisms. We 
(you and I, that is) will be using a leading open-source CRM tool, SugarCRM, a good example of 
the very capable yet affordable CRM tools that are now available now, and focus on the needs of 
smaller businesses.  
In this book we will not just discover the specifics of installing and implementing SugarCRM 
although we will cover those issues in detail. We will also explain the business context, and 
describe a broader business perspective on the generic issues of CRM implementations in smaller 
businesses. What it can do for your business. How best to implement it. And how should it be 
customized to maximize your business benefits. By the end of the book, you too will be doing 
business—better. 
Small and Mid-Size Businesses: The Good, the Bad, 
and the Ugly 
Let's just stop a moment to consider and clarify our definition of a small or mid-size business, as it 
covers a wide range of organizations. While the Gartner Group may have one definition, and the 
Meta Group another, for our purposes here a small or mid-size business falls into these categories: 
• 
Home-based business with a proprietor: The proprietor may or may not work with 
other people on a regular basis. If others are involved, they may be outsourced 
contractors, commissioned salespeople or agents, or one or more partners who also 
work from their homes. These businesses vary widely—some involving lots of 
travel, and some requiring very little. This is very relevant, as travel is a frequent 
cause of lack of good information flow within an organization, and lack of good 
communication with customers. These businesses tend to have a headcount in the 
range of 1-10 employees and partners, and annual sales under 2 Million USD. 
• 
Small services businesses: These would usually have office premises that deal 
directly with businesses and retail consumers. Perhaps in the field of financial or 
legal services, real estate, graphics services, doors and windows replacement, home 
renovation, carpet cleaning, or catering—a multitude of businesses. Often these 
businesses have mobile staff making customer site visits in company vehicles. These 
firms are often in the 5-50 range in terms of employees, with sales in the 0.5 to 10 
Million USD range. 

Chapter 1 
• 
Small-to-medium product or services businesses: These usually have shop-front 
premises that deal with businesses and consumers. This can include almost any retail 
sales and service activity with an average sale value high enough to merit tracking 
customers or clients individually. These firms are usually in the 10-100 range in 
terms of employees, with sales in the 1 to 20 Million USD range. 
If your business has more than 100 employees, you are on the verge of becoming, or have already 
become, a more sophisticated, complex, and (let's face it) wealthier organization with different 
needs and budget from those businesses described above. If your business falls under the 100 
employee level, this book is definitely for you.  
However, while businesses with less than 100 employees are classified as small or mid-size 
businesses, there is nothing small about the job of administering and managing these businesses! 
While being your own boss (of the organization, or of a department within it) often means there is 
no boss around to tell you what to do—it merely means that you have to tell yourself to do far too 
many things. In a typical small business, the owners and managers wear multiple hats—one 
minute running finance, the next minute sales, and then on to customer service and support, 
binding a proposal, arguing with the landlord, and so on. 
Running a smaller business also means having to be careful and smart with cash. Administration is 
almost always understaffed, as the lack of scale in a smaller business makes business infrastructure 
and administration relatively more expensive. Overworked book-keeping clerks and part time 
accounting resources are frequently the order of the day. All this unfortunately has also meant that 
too many businesses have, until now, been effectively disenfranchised from the club of those able 
to afford the best management tools.  
Typical Small Business Needs 
A glance at the income statements for a typical smaller business reveals a need to lower 
administrative costs. If it doesn't, that usually means the owner's quality of life is pretty low, as he 
or she is likely doing it all by themselves. Or it can indicate that administration is being very 
poorly executed. Unfortunately, even though administration costs are usually high, the 
administration resources that exist are typically overworked, and struggling to meet the workload. 
This usually doesn't get much better until the 100 employee milestone is passed.  
Another key need for those managing smaller businesses is the need to get out of the office 
more—get out of the office just to get home and spend some time with the family, to win new 
customers and service existing ones, or just to see different scenery without having the whole house 
of cards falling apart. But instead, the usual day spent managing a smaller business consists of:  
• 
An endless stream of visits from employees with questions  
• 
Shouting instructions across the open office  
• 
Dropping by the various departments for an update  
• 
Spending half the day on the phone  
• 
Firing off emails to contacts stored in Microsoft Outlook  
• 
Staying late to bring paperwork up to date  
 
7

Doing Business—Better 
 
8 
Getting out of the office often means traveling some distance on business, and this highlights 
another need—the need to get business information while traveling, on laptops and handhelds, 
offline and online. This kind of connectivity and flexibility is what it takes to compete in today's 
increasingly demanding and cost-conscious business environment—and most of the smaller 
businesses just don't have these tools. What tools they have are typically client-server based—
meaning that some software is loaded on a shared server computer, and more software is loaded 
on the PC of each person allowed to use the system. This can get expensive, with license fees 
typically being charged on the per-user model, and time consuming and potentially costly 
maintenance and updates required for each PC quite frequently. It also tends to keep people in the 
office, where the PCs with this software loaded on them are located. 
A web-based CRM, by way of contrast, has no user software to load on each PC—all that is 
needed is a browser like Internet Explorer, Mozilla Firefox, or Apple's Safari. While the server 
software is still often licensed on the per user basis, these users can be anywhere (including at 
home or traveling to see customers) and still have access to the system and all the information it 
holds. And an open-source CRM like Sugar Open Source is best of all, as it has no licensing fees 
of any sort.  
A web-based small business CRM directly addresses all the needs listed above. It lets you get out 
of the office, yet stay in touch. It lets you see your family or win more business without dropping 
you out of the organization's information loop. It reduces administrative load and costs by 
ensuring that the company and customer information only needs to be keyed in once, and is 
well-organized and easily accessible. And it is accessible not only by home PCs and road-warrior 
laptops, but even by handheld devices such as the Treo and BlackBerry, as even these smaller 
devices contain a web browser (see Chapter 6 for details of handheld information access, and 
wireless synchronization).  
What is Customer Relationship Management? 
If you are going to consider implementing a CRM, it is probably important that we first go over 
what a CRM really is, and how it compares to some tools you may already be familiar with.  
A CRM or a Customer Relationship Management System, is just that—a system that manages 
information and processes around your relationship with your customers, not only the sales aspect 
of that relationship but also the ongoing service and support aspects. The system should provide at 
least basic information about the companies you are doing business with, and the people you work 
with at those companies. Typically these are referred to as Accounts, and Contacts. Accounts can 
be your customers, but may also be your suppliers, your partners, or your sub-contractors.  
You are likely to be familiar with one or more simple contact management systems—such as 
Microsoft Outlook, ACT!, or GoldMine. Let's talk a bit about Microsoft Outlook as it is the one 
most people have seen and used. While it is used mostly as an email client, Outlook is also a 
contact manager. It keeps track of the people you know—often both personal and business 
contacts in one system. It lists for each person their phone number(s), email address(es), mailing 
address(es), and personal information such as their birthday, and anniversary. It also records the 
organization they work for as one of the data fields on their record. If you have a second person 
you know, who also works at that company, Outlook has functions that let you copy the first 
person's information, so as not to have to re-enter all the company-related information.  

Chapter 1 
Unfortunately, if that company moves, or changes its fax number, that information is duplicated 
on the contact record for everyone you know at that company, and you will have to chase them all 
individually to correct them.  
By contrast, one of the minimum features offered by a CRM is that the company, or account, has 
information kept on it as an independent entity, and then has people you know, or contacts, linked to 
it. In this way, the company information only gets changed in one place when it needs updating, and 
yet each contact record easily brings up the information of the account with which it is associated. 
Also, in Microsoft Outlook there is no attempt to automatically link upcoming meetings, telephone 
calls, or tasks with the contact or account to which these activities relate, or to keep an organized 
history of past account activity including emails and notes. Essentially any CRM can do this.  
These features (maintaining account records separate from contact records, and maintaining 
account and contact history) are two of the fundamental features you should expect to see in any 
CRM, but there are many more, including: 
• 
Sales-force automation: This includes lead capture and the promotion of leads  
to Opportunities. 
• 
Opportunity tracking: This tracks the sales stage and percentage likelihood. 
• 
Sales pipeline tracking: This uses graphical charts that offer drill-down from the bar 
or segment of the chart to the data that underlies it. 
• 
Definition of sales teams and territories: This helps in managing information 
sharing and tracking sales performance by territory. 
• 
Lead source analysis of sales and opportunities 
• 
Product catalog management: It also takes care of tracking sales inventory, 
corporate assets, and client products covered by support contracts. 
• 
Creating quotations for clients 
• 
Flexible reporting: This extracts precisely the information you want to see. 
• 
Service case tracking: There are also other service/support capabilities such as 
tracking software bugs, and managing support contract renewals.   
• 
Corporate calendar management: This can be used for arranging meetings. 
• 
Corporate directory: This can be used for contacting fellow employees. 
• 
Interface consolidation: This brings additional everyday needs into the CRM 
environment in order to make a company website that employees can live in. This 
includes news feeds, views of financial metrics, integration of external web links and 
applications, and integrated web-based email. 
• 
Document management and revision control: This helps in managing and 
retaining reference copies of important corporate documents.  
A well-conceived CRM must also have a truly outstanding user interface, as the whole purpose of 
the system is to make the organization's information accessible quickly, easily, and naturally. As 
the CRM software field has matured, many CRM systems have come to adopt similar solutions for 
navigating through the CRM. Let's have a look at what it feels like to use a CRM with a state-
of-the-art user interface, by having our first look at SugarCRM.  
 
9

Doing Business—Better 
 
10 
What is SugarCRM? 
SugarCRM is both a company, and an Open Source project. SugarCRM the company was created 
as a commercial Open Source company, and funded by Silicon Valley venture capital firms (three 
rounds of financing and 25 Million USD to date). Its business model is to not only develop an 
open-source CRM product, which will benefit from broad adoption and feedback from the user 
community, but also to develop enhanced versions of it that it can sell. The open-source product is 
called Sugar Open Source, and the commercial products are called Sugar Pro and Sugar 
Enterprise. In this book we will deal primarily with Sugar Open Source, because, as William 
Shatner was once paid to remark on a commercial for a large chain of grocery stores, "By Gosh, 
the Price is Right!".  
The SugarCRM Open Source project has its official home at http://www.sugarforge.org/. The 
SugarCRM Open Source project was established on April 23, 2004, and so is of quite recent 
vintage! But the founders of SugarCRM (both the company and the Open Source project) are 
veterans of CRM implementations at several other organizations, notably Epiphany (recently 
purchased by SSA Global), Aurum Software, Baan Software (also purchased by SSA Global), and 
BroadVision, and were able to turn their experience into a relatively fully functioned CRM system 
in a remarkably short time span. SugarCRM 1.0 was released on August 4, 2004. SugarCRM 2.0 
was released on November 3, 2004; SugarCRM 3.0 came out on April 30, 2005, and SugarCRM 
3.5 was introduced on August 15, 2005. SugarCRM 4.0 (the current revision at time of writing) 
was introduced on December 15, 2005.  
It is worth noting that the nature of Open Source is such that if one day (perish the thought), 
SugarCRM the company was no more, SugarCRM the Open Source project would carry on, with 
the same or different individuals leading the project. The two are quite separate entities in law. So 
unlike many products from smaller companies, using SugarCRM should not make you worry 
about the stability of the vendor.  
The history of the SugarCRM product is that SugarCRM 1.0 established the basic architecture 
of the product. With SugarCRM 2.0, the strong visual design was introduced. With SugarCRM 
2.5, capabilities were introduced that enabled users to customize the CRM to a significant 
extent—adding new fields, removing unnecessary fields, rearranging screen layouts, changing 
options on drop-down lists, and so on. These customization capabilities are particularly relevant 
to a CRM, as CRM systems tend to need more tuning to the business adopting them than many 
other business applications.  
In SugarCRM 3.0, the application added document management, project tracking, marketing 
campaigns, user roles, and several other new features. In 3.5 the Sugar architecture was 
strengthened significantly, enabling the addition of the Module Loader and Upgrade Wizard, 
change logs, and collapsible sub-panels. Numerous navigation enhancements as well as HTML 
email were also added at this time. SugarCRM 4.0 marked the beginning of an increasing gap 
between the Open Source and Pro versions of SugarCRM, and saw the introduction of such 
features as limited inbound email processing, limited access control capabilities, and workflow.  

Chapter 1 
In the figure below, you see the SugarCRM Home screen. It is the first thing you will see (after the 
login screen) once you start using the system:  
 
SugarCRM Home Screen 
 
11

Doing Business—Better 
 
12 
Various key elements of the screen layout overleaf have numbered highlights, as follows: 
1. Navigation Tabs: Click to choose desired module  
2. Navigation Shortcuts Box: Specific shortcuts useful within each module  
3. Last Viewed: A remarkably handy trail of recent records you have viewed  
4. Search Box: Search for a text string within all data held by SugarCRM  
5. User Management Links: The Admin link is only available to users marked  
as administrators  
6. 
Quick New Item Box: Quick data entry box to create a new item for the current module  
7. Main Screen Body: On the Home tab, this includes My Upcoming Appointments, My 
Open Tasks, My Open Cases, My Assigned Bugs, and a monthly Calendar. My Top 
Open Opportunities, My Leads, and a Pipeline graph fill out the main screen body  
In this image, the whole SugarCRM browser window is shown, including the Internet Explorer 
frame, and the SugarCRM copyright information at the bottom of the window. For all the other 
screen captures in this book, only the necessary portions of each SugarCRM screen will be shown. 
You should understand that each screen appears in a browser window like the one shown overleaf.   
Scan across the navigation tabs, and the User Management Links, to get an idea of all the 
capabilities packaged together in this system.  
The Beauty of CRM Navigation 
SugarCRM is representative of the best CRM systems available in the market for the manner in 
which the systems are used, or navigated. There are tabs across the top for accessing the different 
types of information, such as Accounts, Contacts, Documents, Cases, Opportunities, and so on. 
More important, however, is how related items of information are linked together, and how the 
user follows those links. The figure opposite shows an Accounts screen within SugarCRM. This is 
fairly representative of similar screens in other leading commercial web-based CRM systems, such 
as Salesforce.com, NetSuite, and SalesLogix:  

Chapter 1 
 
 
SugarCRM Account Detail Screen 
We see that the top block of information (typically called a panel) displays the core information 
about the account—address, contact information, website, company email address, number of 
employees, ownership, industry classification, and so on.  
The following blocks of information, or sub-panels, show information that is related to this 
account, such as ongoing account activities, a history of past account activities, contacts, leads,  
and opportunities within this account, plus ongoing cases (service issues) and projects within the 
account. Also shown are documents related to the account and any software bugs reported by the 
account (should that be relevant to your business).  
 
13

Doing Business—Better 
 
14 
The power of the system is the manner and speed with which it can be navigated. Once an account 
has been looked up and displayed, the user can click on a contact in that account to see the 
information associated with it. That contact record will include a list of related activities to be 
performed, and the user can click on those to update them. A related meeting may involve other 
contacts, and their information is listed, and the user can click on them to check current activities 
related to those contacts. Are there any ongoing cases? When was the last time we met with them? 
What products have they been buying from us?  
Each of these questions is answered with a mouse click. And as more and more of the background 
information of an account, or contact, or opportunity is revealed, the user may have more and 
more little questions that come to mind—and each of them can be answered with a mouse click 
too. Because information can be obtained so quickly and easily, and because that information is 
related and linked in a manner so similar to the way the user's mind relates those items of 
information, employees now perform their tasks with a much higher level of knowledge about 
their customers.  
One particularly handy feature of the SugarCRM user interface is Last Viewed, which is the list of 
items the user has recently accessed—making it quick and easy to return to an item after following 
links to information it relates to. 
Marshall McLuhan was quite right—the medium is the message. In this case, the medium of 
web-based business applications, with many linkages between related items of information, makes 
that information so easy to obtain that it is as if somehow the overall quality of that information 
has been improved.  
What are my CRM Options?  
Depending on whom you talk to, CRM all started somewhere between the mid 1980's and the 
early 1990's with efforts from companies such as Oracle, PeopleSoft, Siebel Systems, and SAP. 
But true CRM involving not just the accumulation of static customer databases but a genuine 
enhancement to business processes began only recently, around the turn of the millennium. This 
evolution of CRM would not have been possible without the increasing influence of the Internet 
and the development of web services for connecting multiple business systems together despite 
their being in different locations and implemented in different technologies.   
Originally, CRM systems from the big four companies named above were uniformly expensive, 
heavily customized, and unwieldy for any but the largest firms. In 2001 Siebel Systems had sales 
worth 2.1 Billion USD based on their model in which each customer spent millions of dollars. But 
their market share, and indeed gross sales, slipped in later years as the built-for-the-web generation 
of mid-size CRM systems came to market from firms such as Salesforce.com, NetSuite, Upshot, 
and SalesNet. Now Upshot has been purchased by Siebel Systems, and they seem to be somewhat 
on the upswing again.  
With the introduction of SugarCRM in 2004, history will show that there has been yet another 
revolution in CRM, as even smaller firms gained cost-effective access to the latest in CRM 
technologies. For small-to-mid-size firms, NetSuite and some of the other mid-size generation  
are also becoming a viable option financially.  

Chapter 1 
One trend easily visible above is that since about 2000, the market has been rapidly moving to 
web-based CRM tools as indeed it has in many other business application areas. The advantages 
are many—ubiquitous access, making the best use of expensive user licenses, and easier 
interfacing with other business systems via web services.  
Some of the more highly-regarded CRM solutions available for smaller business today include: 
• 
NetSuite (http://www.netsuite.com/): This firm offers both, NetSuite Small 
Business, a combination of accounting software and CRM, and NetCRM, its 
successful stand-alone CRM product. 
• 
Salesforce.com (
)
http://www.salesforce.com/ : This firm is one of the key 
champions of the software-as-a-service model. While a popular solution, the 
Salesforce.com CRM is often perceived as one of the more expensive options. 
Salesforce.com has led the field in innovations such as end-user customization, and 
Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) for business process integration. 
• 
Microsoft CRM (
)
http://www.microsoft.com/smallbusiness/products/ 
mbs/crm/detail.mspx : In spite of it not being one of the cheapest, or most highly 
regarded solutions, Microsoft CRM is still one to watch out for. It's Microsoft—
known for never giving up on becoming number one in a market. If you use 
Microsoft Exchange and Small Business Server, it is a real option, but if you don't, it 
may not make sense for your business. 
• 
SalesLogix (http://www.saleslogix.com/): Sage Software (formerly Best 
Software) produces this leading CRM for smaller businesses, as well as ACT!, the 
leading contact management software. 
Deployment Options 
In today's CRM market, there is not only a choice of vendors, but also a choice of deployment 
options. The options are:  
• 
On-Demand Model: The On-Demand model (a phrase popularized by IBM 
advertising), formerly known as the Application Service Provider (ASP) model is 
the simplest (and often, the most expensive) way to implement and adopt a CRM. 
The CRM vendor simply hosts the CRM application, and provides the customer with 
a URL (Universal Resource Locator or a web address) at which to point their 
browser. No fuss over software installation, no messy application patching and 
maintenance, but also, no data on your premises—the vendor keeps it all on its 
system, a fact that makes many customers uneasy. Recent surveys show a full 50% 
of businesses are not prepared to adopt this model. 
• 
Application Pack: The Application Pack option is the one the industry has practiced 
for years. The vendor licenses you its application software—often on an annual 
basis. You install the software on your own server, and take responsibility for your 
own data. You also take responsibility for maintaining the software as it evolves, for 
maintaining and backing up the server itself, and for the support of the network 
infrastructure to which it is attached. These are things you are not going to do 
without access to some fairly knowledgeable computer networking people—either 
on your staff, or whose services are retained on a regular basis.  
 
15

Doing Business—Better 
 
16 
• 
Hosted Application Pack: An intermediate version of these two models, which 
many businesses find attractive, involves licensing the software, but then hiring a 
hosting firm to provide and maintain the server on which it runs. Of course, the 
concerns about offsite corporate data remain.  
• 
Server Appliance: The Server Appliance option involves purchasing a server 
pre-loaded with licensed software. This reduces concerns about installation 
problems, and the capacity and performance of the server you might use yourself, but 
leaves the bother of maintaining and updating the server and its software image, as 
well as backing up your data.  
You should be aware that not every vendor supports all deployment options. Some of the best 
known mid-size vendors only support the On-Demand model, including Salesforce.com, NetSuite, 
and SalesNet. While all their talk (especially from Salesforce.com) of the 'No Software' model can 
sound attractive, you will want to balance that against costs of 65 to 130 USD per user per month, 
and having someone else holding on to all your customer data.  
That being said, network technicians are not cheap either, and backing up your data regularly is 
not something every small business is set up to do well. Different models will appeal to different 
organizations—no doubt that is why this range of choices exists! 
SugarCRM, for its part, offers Sugar Pro in all three deployment options: 239 USD per user per 
year to license the software as an application pack, US 39 USD per user per month as an 
On-Demand service, and a variety of server appliances (Sugar Cubes) at different prices. Sugar 
Enterprise is also available, at a price of 449 USD per user per year to license the software as an 
application pack, US 75 USD per user per month as an On-Demand service, and on server 
appliances of various capacities. 
CRM Customization 
If you are skimming this book thinking that CRM customization is an advanced topic and not 
applicable to you, stop right now and listen to some advice for a moment. Customization is a fact 
of life, and indeed a generally positive one, for most business applications. The negative aspect of 
it is that is can sometimes be long and involved, and frequently can be quite expensive. The 
positive side is that it takes an off-the-shelf shrink-wrapped software application, and adapts it to 
the way your business actually works.  
CRM systems are known to need customization more frequently than other business applications. 
After all, the average Sales, Purchase, and General Ledger accounting system works pretty much 
the same way for any business—just set up your structure of initial account codes, and away you 
go. CRM systems are different! 
CRM customizations fall into several classes:  
• 
Minor cosmetics: Changing color schemes, adding company logo. 
• 
Minor user interface changes: Suppressing certain features from being seen by 
certain or perhaps all users, rearranging screen layouts, adding and deleting fields 
from screens, changing field names, and editing the set of options presented on drop-
down boxes. 

Chapter 1 
• 
Major application changes: Adding whole new modules to the application, or 
making major changes to the business logic and function of existing modules. 
• 
Application integration: Linking the CRM application with other business applications 
and processes, to more thoroughly automate and integrate your business operations. 
Most advanced products make it easy to change minor cosmetics of the system. Historically, user 
interface changes were fairly difficult and expensive to perform, but all that has changed. With the 
release of the Customforce tool by Salesforce.com for customizing the user interface of its CRM, 
the bar was raised to a significant degree in this key area. Salesforce.com deserves recognition as 
an innovator in this field of technology, and it has caused nothing short of a revolution in CRM. 
Today, most important CRM vendors (including SugarCRM) offer this extremely important and 
useful capability.  
Major application changes will always require a software consulting and development firm to 
perform them, unless you happen to have those resources in house. These changes involve tailoring a 
CRM to manage aspects of a business that are not uniform across the gamut of small businesses.  
More recently, Salesforce.com has been at it again, and has introduced the Sforce API, which 
offers a well-documented and open programming interface to link other business applications to 
the Salesforce.com programs and data hosted by Salesforce.com for your business. This is creating 
a similar disruption in the CRM industry, and several firms are responding in kind. SugarCRM, 
for one, has its own (more limited) SOAP-based web service interface (using the Nusoap PHP 
library), which supports such handy capabilities as filing leads captured by forms on your public 
website into your SugarCRM lead database. 
What Will a CRM Do for my Business? 
A CRM system is to some extent a groupware application for managing your business. Groupware 
is a term used to describe computer software designed to help a group of people work together 
cooperatively. As such, a CRM helps everyone in the business (especially all those in direct 
contact with customers) to know the historical and planned activities of the business that involve a 
specific customer. This is clearly very useful to avoid miscommunications with the client resulting 
from lack of communication within the business. Everyone in the business can record all of their 
interactions with a client, helping all their co-workers understand the current state of any issues, 
sales opportunities, and so on. 
Even more importantly, a CRM records all new business leads, and keeps track of promising 
qualified leads as specific opportunities. These opportunities are recorded with an expected date 
on which the business will be closed, the current stage of the sales cycle for this opportunity, and 
the percentage likelihood of closing the business currently assigned to this opportunity.  
This information, aggregated across the business, provides a clear view of the organization's sales 
pipeline. Visual charts of this information are typically live-linked, making it easy to drill down to 
view the individual data items that were aggregated to build the chart. Classification of 
opportunities by sales person, by lead source, or by expected close date is a simple activity, easily 
performed and fantastically informative.  
 
17

Doing Business—Better 
 
18 
A properly implemented CRM used by all customer-facing staff will help you track the sales 
performance of your business more closely with less work. It will also help you see the future 
more clearly, and plan more effectively. 
Just as the customer is the focus that ties all business activities together, your CRM can be the 
business tool that ties together all your business information, particularly with custom integration 
into other business systems such as your public website, and the creation of new customer 
self-service websites for building orders, creating and reviewing service cases, and managing their 
own information profile.  
Another key area in which a CRM can help greatly is in customer communication. After all, a 
CRM knows who all your customers are, is connected to the Internet, holds all your key marketing 
documents in it, and can send (and often receive) email. There are very few tools that are as useful 
as a CRM when it comes to sending out customer newsletters on a monthly or quarterly basis, 
selecting only those customers who have purchased specific products, or keeping track of any 
customers who have indicated they do not want to receive marketing emails.  
These powerful capabilities add up to make big changes at most businesses where they are adopted: 
• 
Sales are increased: Using the new marketing communications capabilities to 
increase sales 
• 
Costs are reduced:  
o 
Typing in information only once  
o 
Automatically sharing information with everyone instantly  
o 
Everyone in the business knowing right away where to find information 
without wasting time looking for it  
• 
Customers are happier: Dealing with employees who now seem to know more 
about them and what's going on in their account is a big plus  
• 
Business is managed better:  
o 
Sales pipelines are better understood  
o 
The most productive lead sources and sales staff are clearly identified  
o 
Any business downturn is visible well before it represents a commercial risk 
to the business  
How Will This Book Help Me Get the CRM That Fits 
my Business?  
This book is structured and written the way it is, specifically to accompany you on the journey of 
discovering what Customer Relationship Management is and what it can do for your business. Issues 
such as identifying the specific CRM needs of your business, implementing and adopting a CRM, 
and customizing the CRM to optimize its use within your business are all dealt with in detail.  

Chapter 1 
As much as possible, the chapters of this book have been sequenced to mirror your own time 
sequence through the installation and adoption of SugarCRM. Some of the extended details of 
installing SugarCRM, and importing your data into it, were located in the appendices, to keep 
them from slowing down the plotline as you progress through the book.   
This book is titled Implementing SugarCRM: Introduce the leading Open Source CRM application 
into your small/mid-size business with this systematic, practical guide, and SugarCRM is the 
practical focus of all our CRM examples in the book. But despite that, generic CRM principles 
and practices are detailed and explained at each stage to help you recognize when and if 
SugarCRM is ever insufficient for your needs, or requires some customization work to fit your 
business better. 
Throughout this book we will not only refer to a specific tool, SugarCRM, but also to a specific (and 
mythical) company whose progress through the installation, adoption, and customization of a CRM 
we shall explore here. Our fictional case study will involve RayDoc Carpets, Doors, and Windows, 
and their wily fox of a leader Doc Newhart. (In actual fact, there are several real world Docs with 
whom SugarCRM was implemented throughout the writing of this book, to ensure that their real-
world problems, issues, experiences, and comments were mirrored accurately in this volume.)  
As this book progresses through the natural sequence of stages involved in the introduction of a 
CRM, at each stage the relationships between CRM theory and the practical experiences of Doc 
Newhart will be described and explained. The solution of real everyday business problems, gaps 
between CRM theory and practical benefits, and unexpected drawbacks and bonuses in live CRM 
implementations will all be dealt with in detail.  
Our Case Study: RayDoc Carpets, Doors, and 
Windows  
RayDoc Carpets, Doors, and Windows is a fairly average small business. It has slightly rundown 
commercial premises, with office space in the front, and workshops and carpet cleaning bays in 
the back. It has annual sales of about 3 Million Canadian dollars each year, and its staff is 
comprised of Doc, his wife Maureen who does the book-keeping and manages Kay the 
receptionist, a junior partner Andrew, and a staff of about 22 employees.  
The name RayDoc once celebrated the teaming of Ray and Doc to create this business, but Ray is 
long gone, and Doc now runs things by himself. Well, by himself is not quite true. Maureen 
actually runs the office, except when Doc is in one of his moods, and between them Maureen and 
Kay take care of nearly all the paperwork and administration in the company.  
Some of the services provided by RayDoc include carpet and upholstery cleaning at customers 
offices or homes, the provision of rotating supplies of clean carpet runners and boot trays for 
businesses during the Canadian winter, deep cleaning of large Indian and Persian rugs in the bays 
behind the offices, the sale and installation of replacement doors and windows, and general 
contracting and building services. RayDoc owns several vans and mini-vans, which are used by 
staff to get themselves and their equipment to jobs and to bring large carpets back to the office.  
 
19

Doing Business—Better 
 
20 
While some of RayDoc's customers have had only one transaction with RayDoc, much of their 
business is with existing customers: businesses that have their carpets cleaned on a regular basis, 
property management firms that always get their doors and windows repaired or replaced by 
RayDoc, and home owners who have come to count on RayDoc for a broad range of services over 
the sixteen years it has been in business.  
Our Hero: Doc  
Doc likes to focus on finding new business opportunities, and schmoozing new and existing 
customers. He also spends much of his time finding new suppliers of interesting new products, and 
making sure that the bigger jobs they get are always done to the customer's satisfaction.  
A street-smart individual, Doc is somewhat bored by the rather mundane nature of much of his 
business after all the years he has been doing it, and he consciously ducks a lot of the everyday 
administrative work, searching for more interesting business opportunities, or just customers to 
talk to. Doc comes from a fairly rough blue-collar background, and just as well, as a lot of the 
young men doing the carpet cleaning are pretty rough themselves.  
Doc prides himself on his business sense and to some degree on his marketing abilities. His main 
advertising expense is running an advert on the local cable TV Guide channel. As a boy, Doc 
didn't much care for academics, as he was too impatient to get on with living his life. Skilled with 
his hands, he has mastered many trades. But at 45, he knows he is doing a lot of things the hard 
way at RayDoc, and wants to get the company working smarter. Not in the least because he has 
hopes of taking more and more of a back seat in the business before too long, and he needs to put 
more business systems and processes in place before that can happen.  
Doc has been hearing about CRM systems from some of his friends and customers for a few years 
now. Recently he had a long chat in a local bar with an old friend who owns another small 
business, who was extolling the virtues of being able to get at all his business information from 
home, while out of town, and even from his fancy Treo cell phone, all because of the new CRM he 
had purchased. That was it. Doc wasn't going to have his old friend be able to say he knew more 
about running a business than Doc did. He needed to find out about this CRM stuff, and quickly! 
What Does the Future Hold for RayDoc?   
RayDoc has been holding its own for several years now, neither growing nor shrinking. Making 
reasonable, but not exciting incomes for Doc and Maureen, and showing just enough promise for 
Andrew to stick around, hoping for Doc's retirement. Part of a younger generation of 
well-educated tradesmen, Andrew has often tried to encourage Doc and Maureen to adopt newer 
business management tools, but it has been difficult, as Doc resisted change, and Andrew's 
responsibilities kept him out of the office, supervising on-site employees nearly all the time. But 
he will be a willing and supportive ally for Doc in his CRM initiative.  
An automated system that documents all of RayDoc's customers and their history with RayDoc is 
just as essential for Andrew's succession plan as it is for Doc's early retirement.  

Chapter 1 
Summary 
In this chapter we introduced the topic of Customer Relationship Management, and touched upon 
a number of important points:  
• 
CRM applications have been evolving rapidly since the late 1990's, and are now 
delivering on their promise of enhancing business profitability, improving customer 
satisfaction and levels of service, and streamlining business processes. 
• 
CRM applications, once highly priced, are now affordable even for smaller businesses. 
• 
Smaller businesses typically have an administrative staff that is overloaded with 
work, and yet there is constant pressure to cut administrative costs. 
• 
Most small businesses employ business systems that are not accessible outside the 
office, acting as a force that limits business communication with outbound workers, 
and tends to keep business managers in the office. 
• 
Web-based CRM systems can lower administrative workloads and costs, and are 
accessible from PCs, laptops, and handheld PDA/mobile phones—anywhere, anytime. 
• 
Contact management systems such as Outlook, ACT! and Goldmine are not CRMs, 
and lack many fundamental features of leading CRMs. 
• 
SugarCRM is a web-based CRM introduced in 2004, available as a free Open Source 
version, or as a commercial Pro- or Enterprise-level version.  
• 
Like many top CRMs, SugarCRM is quick and easy to use, making access to 
customer information a natural and even pleasant experience. 
• 
For the smaller business, there are many valid CRM choices: NetSuite, 
Salesforce.com, Microsoft CRM, and SalesLogix among them. We have chosen 
SugarCRM Open Source as our example CRM for this book as it is free, and 
contains most of the latest features that make CRM adoption so compelling for small 
and medium businesses. 
• 
CRMs may be deployed as On-Demand web-based services, as application 
software to be installed on your own servers, or as server appliances delivered 
pre-loaded and ready to run. The choice is yours, and involves some tradeoffs 
between cost and convenience. 
• 
To truly deliver on their promises, CRM systems typically must be customized to 
suit your business. There are several levels of complexity to this customization, and 
the most recent CRMs help you do quite a bit of it yourself, rather than paying for 
expensive computer services staff to do it for you. 
• 
CRMs can help you track the sales performance of your business more closely with 
less work, see the future more clearly, and plan more effectively. 
• 
This book will take you through the entire process of determining your CRM needs, 
implementing and installing a CRM, getting your data into the CRM, rolling it out to 
your business and training staff, and customizing the CRM to maximize your 
business benefits. 
 
21

Doing Business—Better 
 
22 
• 
Throughout this book, we will follow the experiences of Doc Newhart, and his 
fictional business, RayDoc. The tales of his experiences here are taken from the  
real-life experiences of multiple CRM installations within smaller businesses. 
In the next chapter, we will use the knowledge you have gained about CRM systems to begin to 
analyze your own business, identify its CRM needs, and understand what to look for in a CRM 
and its customization and configuration capabilities. 

2 
One Size Does Not Fit All— 
CRM Your Way 
In the first chapter you learned about the history of how CRM software developed, how its 
affordability and accessibility for smaller businesses has been improving in recent years, and how 
important it is that a CRM is easily customized to suit your business.  
You were also introduced to RayDoc Carpets, Doors, and Windows, and met Doc its proprietor. In 
this chapter, we will begin the process of analyzing the CRM needs of your specific business, and 
use our continuing RayDoc case study as an example of how to match CRM capabilities to the 
needs of a business. 
Throughout this chapter, and indeed throughout this book to the extent possible, we shall focus 
primarily on the business objectives and benefits sought from the application of a CRM, not 
simply on the mechanics of installing and using the SugarCRM system specifically.  
To that end, there are several extensive sections of this book devoted to the business analysis 
process you will need to go through in order to determine how a CRM can best benefit your 
business. This will enable you to identify the customizations you may need to make to an 
off-the-shelf CRM product in order to make it your tailored CRM solution. As the book 
progresses, the business analysis sections deal with successively more ambitious and advanced 
business functions, helping you identify your needs in these areas—as well as guiding you through 
the process of having those customizations implemented, and then introducing the CRM system 
into your business. 
This chapter contains the first such business analysis section. The goal of this section is to provide 
a broad overview of the ways in which businesses differ, helping you to position and identify your 
own business within the multi-dimensional space of all smaller businesses. Do the CRM needs of 
a three-person firm in a single office that sells to other businesses via the Internet differ from those 
of a fifty-person firm with ten regional offices that sells to consumers by making house calls? 
They certainly do, and it is issues like these that we will be dealing with shortly.  
The punch line of the old joke about how many psychiatrists it takes to change a light bulb is that 
it only takes one, but first the light bulb has to want to change. Similarly, it is not that hard to 
change your business using a CRM, but first you have to understand the CRM needs of your 
business, and who to involve in identifying them so that you make the right changes, and hence, 
ensure that the new system gains good acceptance when it is introduced.  

One Size Does Not Fit All—CRM Your Way 
 
24 
Once we have studied the varying CRM needs of different businesses, we will see how Doc 
Newhart needs to apply CRM to improve the way RayDoc operates. We will also use a CRM 
Requirements Worksheet to identify the specific CRM needs of your business.  
Lastly, we will address the practical issues of how to get your CRM customized, what sorts of 
partners to look for to help you in that process, how to document your customization requirements, 
and how to manage a customization contract. 
Identifying the CRM Needs of Your Business 
Some of the high-level characteristics of a business that cause one to have very different CRM 
requirements from another include:  
• 
The Business Model: One location or many? Franchises? Regional Sales Offices? 
Products or services? High or low unit sales value?  
• 
The Customers: Where are they? Who are they—businesses or individuals?   
• 
The Scale: How many employees—2? 25? 50? 100? 
• 
The International Needs: Multiple language support? Date format? Currency format?  
Compensating and adjusting appropriately for these varying requirements will make the difference 
between a CRM that suits your needs, and is quickly embraced and adopted, and a CRM that 
never feels like a good fit, and quickly falls into disuse and is abandoned.  
To genuinely understand why a CRM needs some measure of customization to become a truly 
effective tool within an organization, we need only examine what it is that a CRM is meant  
to accomplish:  
• 
Sales force automation including lead capture, and the promotion of leads  
to Opportunities 
• 
Opportunity tracking with sales stages and percentage likelihood 
• 
Sales pipeline tracking, with graphical charts that offer a drill-down from the bar or 
segment of the chart to the data that underlies it 
• 
Lead source analysis of sales and opportunities 
• 
Service case tracking, and other service/support capabilities such as tracking 
software bugs, and managing support contract renewals 
• 
Corporate calendar management for arranging meetings  
• 
Corporate directory for contacting fellow employees 
• 
Interface consolidation, bringing into the CRM environment, additional everyday 
needs in order to make a company website that employees can 'live in'—including 
news feeds, views of financial metrics, integration of external web links and 
applications, and integrated web-based email 
• 
Document management and revision control, for managing and retaining reference 
copies of important corporate documents.  

Chapter 2 
To be an effective tool, a CRM must perform all of these functions within an intuitive and easy-to-
use graphical interface, be available at all times, and be accessible using a wide variety of devices.  
Depending on the nature of your business, some other more advanced and useful capabilities to 
include within your CRM are: 
• 
Project tracking and management 
• 
Management of e-marketing campaigns 
• 
Advanced report generation 
• 
Definition of sales teams and territories 
• 
Integrated views of financial metrics and performance 
• 
Product catalog management, and tracking sales inventory, corporate assets, and 
client products covered by support contracts 
• 
Creation of client quotations and/or invoices 
Which Business Activities will be a Part of Your 
CRM? 
As you approach the process of implementing a CRM within your business, one of the more 
important decisions you must make is the application scope of your CRM. You must make a 
high-level choice as to your philosophy about your CRM—are you using it uniquely to manage the 
sales process, or do you see it having a major role in your overall approach to business management? 
You need to examine the lists of capabilities above, and decide which of these you will implement 
in the CRM for your business—at least for the initial implementation phase.  
To help you sort through these topics, and help you make better-informed choices, they are 
explained here in greater detail with an emphasis on the kinds of choices, customizations, and 
variations commonly seen in smaller businesses.  
Deciding which of the basic application areas to include in your CRM implementation is the first 
stage of identifying the set of customizations your CRM installation will require. Later on, in 
Chapter 6, we will discuss in detail how to actually perform some customizations to your 
SugarCRM installation, but for now our task is merely to identify the areas of the application that 
are most likely to require customization, based on the nature and needs of your business.  
Beyond the basic CRM capabilities are the more advanced functions such as project 
management, advanced report generation, e-marketing, managing product catalogs, asset 
registers, and quotes and invoice generation. While we will examine this list of more advanced 
topics in later chapters (particularly Chapters 5 and 6), let us for now go over the initial list of 
standard capabilities.  
 
25

One Size Does Not Fit All—CRM Your Way 
 
26 
Accounts and Contacts 
Fundamentally, a CRM captures information about your accounts and the contacts you have at 
those accounts. By 'accounts', we mean the complete set of other firms you do business with—
partners, suppliers, and customers. The CRM also keeps track of new business leads and once 
qualified, converts these leads into opportunities and relates these new opportunities to the 
accounts, contacts, and your own employees in charge of selling to those accounts. 
This much is true of CRM use at most businesses, but even this basic capability needs modification 
at many firms. Some firms focus much more on contacts as they sell to individuals, while others 
focus almost uniquely on accounts as they sell only to businesses. Many firms go to the extreme of 
having a CRM that only shows either accounts or contacts in the navigation system.  
To resolve these differences, it would clearly be useful for the CRM to have the ability to remove 
unwanted functions or data types from the user interface. The good news is that nowadays, most 
quality CRMs including SugarCRM provide this capability.  
Tracking Leads and Opportunities 
The next major differentiator between firms and their associated CRM implementations lies in the 
area of leads and opportunities. If you are a firm that generates, data mines, or purchases a lot of leads, 
then you are likely to want to distinguish between a lead and an opportunity—with an opportunity 
representing a lead that has been contacted and qualified as having some genuine sales potential.  
If on the other hand you are a firm that does not have a lot of new leads, and what new leads you 
get tend to be genuine opportunities, then you will prefer to dispense altogether with the concept 
of a lead, and deal simply with opportunities. 
Again, it would be useful to be able to customize the CRM user interface so as to remove any 
menus or navigation associated with leads for firms that don't need them. And again most good 
CRM solutions, including SugarCRM, provide this capability. 
Note that one key consideration for leads is that the quality of data is typically not up to the level 
you will want for opportunities and contacts. Only when the accuracy of lead data has been 
established and verified should it be considered for inclusion in opportunity and contact data. 
Different firms have many different ways of generating leads—from an Internet site, provided by 
a partner or a supplier, from advertising, by word of mouth referral, and so on. It is important to 
track what your most successful lead sources are, to gain the knowledge of where to focus your 
marketing efforts. So creating a list within the CRM software of the lead sources your firm uses is 
important. And then each new lead can be classified as to its source by simply choosing an option 
from a drop-down box on a screen form.  
Populating drop-down boxes with options that are uniquely relevant to your business is a very 
common form of CRM customization, and one that is becoming widely supported as a 'do-
it-yourself' feature by all mainstream CRM systems including SugarCRM. 
Another option that commonly needs customizing is the sales stage of an opportunity. While there 
are relatively standard industry-accepted terms for the different stages of the sales process, they 
vary quite a bit by the nature of the business involved—its size, its customers, and the length of  

Chapter 2 
the typical sales cycle. The list of stages of the sales cycle you intend to track is a customization 
you will most likely want to make to your CRM. 
Related to the sales stage is the percentage likelihood of a sale, ranging from 0% to 100%. Some 
organizations pay little attention to the percentage likelihood, and track opportunities based on 
sales stage. Other organizations do just the opposite and rank opportunities by percentage 
likelihood, paying little attention to the sales stage. And some track both. You need to decide 
which is important to you, and make sure that the list of opportunities and the charts of sales in the 
pipeline present that information, and give you the ability to filter and focus on opportunities 
based on that information.  
Sales-Force Automation 
One very important productivity tool that a CRM can provide is often referred to as sales-force 
automation. While this can include functions such as the Dashboard (dealt with in the next 
section on the sales pipeline), fundamentally, sales-force automation is an automated flow of sales 
leads into the CRM, their conversion into opportunities, and their tracking to a successful or 
unsuccessful conclusion. This includes features such as:  
• 
Lead capture from a public website, or from partners 
• 
Promotion of a lead to an opportunity when it has been qualified 
• 
Automatic email notifications to sales people when a new lead or opportunity is 
assigned to them 
• 
The tracking of current and historical account activities against both contact and 
account profiles 
• 
The association of key documents to accounts and contacts, such as proposals, 
contracts and agreements, and marketing collateral 
A key improvement in productivity comes from automated lead capture into your CRM from a 
lead form on your public website, or from leads sent to you from a supplier or other partner. If you 
have a current supply of sales leads, you should identify how to automate their entry into your 
CRM. Many CRMs, such as SugarCRM, have a SOAP-based (Simple Object Access Protocol) 
web service to which external systems can be linked in order to pass on lead data. If you do not 
have a current supply of sales leads, perhaps you should create a lead form on your public website, 
and devise a strategy for diverting traffic to your website. 
Once a lead has been qualified as a genuine sales opportunity, it needs to be re-classified as an 
opportunity within the CRM system. Most CRMs have the ability to convert a lead into an 
opportunity. You need to decide if this is how you will use your CRM to manage the transition 
from leads to opportunities. 
Your CRM server will be connected to the Internet, and will have an email system available to it. 
Because of this, it has the capability to automatically email salespeople when they are assigned a 
new lead or opportunity. Typically your CRM will let you enable or disable this automated 
notification system, and you will need to decide if your CRM will use it or not. 
 
27

One Size Does Not Fit All—CRM Your Way 
 
28 
Tracking the Sales Pipeline 
Each opportunity in a CRM system has an expected sales value, and an expected closing date. 
Adding up this information across all the opportunities in the system produces a prediction of the 
future sales of the business, known as the sales pipeline.  
The sales pipeline is a key tool for anyone managing a smaller business. Usually a smaller business 
has more limited financial resources to buffer it from a downturn in business, making it that much 
more important to be able to detect a negative sales trend at the earliest possible moment.  
Like most software designed to summarize financial activity for management personnel (known as 
Executive Information Systems—EIS or Decision Support software, or Business Intelligence 
software—BI software), most CRMs present the sales pipeline in a graphical chart form, 
frequently with the ability to highlight some portion of the chart and 'drill down' to the source data 
that underlies that portion of the chart.  
A series of charts that support sales and business management functions is often called a 
Dashboard or a Digital Dashboard and can be a powerful tool for ensuring that sales are on track 
in the coming months and diagnosing and uncovering shortcomings in the sales process, product 
features, pricing, and personnel. 
A fundamental choice that has to be made when presenting the sales pipeline is whether or not to 
discount the opportunities in the pipeline by the percentage likelihood of their closing. Should a 
100,000 USD opportunity which is 25% likely to close be counted as 25,000 USD or as 100,000 
USD? While the truth is that it will result in either no income, or 100,000 USD of income, the fact 
that the opportunity is considered only 25% likely to result in a sale may mean that you prefer to 
count this opportunity as only 25,000 USD in the pipeline. Both practices are very common, and 
only you can decide which behavior is correct for your business. 
Tracking Service Cases and Support Contracts 
Every CRM offers at least basic customer service and support features. Some of the capabilities 
typically offered are:  
• 
Case Management: A service incident, trouble ticket, or case (different systems and 
industries use different terminology) can be created with a date stamp, contact 
information for the customer reporting the issue, and a description of the nature of 
the problem. If a potentially defective product is involved, the type or model of the 
product and the serial number of the unit may be tracked.   
• 
Software Bug Tracking: If a service case involves a defect or issue in some 
customer software system then a Bug Report is created, and it will note the software 
involved, its revision, and the nature of the issue (bug or desired enhancement). It 
will also track the status of the issue, who is assigned its resolution, and will record 
the eventual disposition of the issue. This is, of course, applicable only for 
businesses involved in creating, or supporting computer programs. 
• 
Service Contract Management: Service Contracts are typically tracked using the 
model of a master agreement for each account with any number of sub-contracts per 
master agreement. Each sub-contract may be related to any number of assets being  

Chapter 2 
supported. And each sub-contract and asset will have a service incident history associated 
with it to track the case history by item of equipment and by sub-contract. A mechanism 
usually exists to remind account managers when service contracts are nearing their renewal 
dates, so that a proposal for the renewal may be prepared and sent to the customer.  
Not every business needs these service and support features. You will need to identify what your 
business requires in the service and support area, and decide if the standard features are a good fit 
for you, if some need to be hidden as they are not required, or if some extended capabilities need 
to be custom-built for you. 
Corporate Calendar Management 
A CRM is almost certainly the best place for you to enter all your appointments, meetings, 
scheduled calls, and planned tasks—in short, all the business activities that have a time and date 
associated with them. Not only does entering this information in the CRM help you to associate 
the activities with the related accounts and contacts, thereby helping to generate accurate account 
history, but it also provides a groupware environment for scheduling meetings that is aware of the 
all the scheduled activities for everyone in the company.  
Prior to adopting a CRM, most small and medium businesses use Microsoft Outlook, Outlook 
Express, or Microsoft Exchange to fulfill their corporate calendaring needs. Other popular 
solutions include Lotus Notes and many other groupware products. While Outlook is a reasonable 
solution for calendaring for an individual, and Exchange helps to link together calendars across a 
business, this solution can never help you to position these activities within the larger CRM 
context, and automatically generate and track account history.  
If all this talk of Outlook and Exchange, Lotus Notes, Outlook Express, and so on, is foreign to 
you—don't worry. They are simply other ways of addressing needs that your CRM will satisfy nicely 
and, in fact, more effectively from the perspective of managing relationships with your customers. 
My recommendation to CRM users is to stop using Outlook for calendaring—just say no! And  
if your CRM has an effective solution for both incoming and outgoing email (as I write this 
SugarCRM has just introduced limited incoming email support), then I would recommend that you 
stop using Outlook for email as well, and that Exchange should also be shown the door. You will 
need to examine your organization's requirements and decide if you are in a position to act on 
these recommendations. 
The counter argument to using a CRM for calendaring and email is that for many CRMs the 
synchronization options for linking the data in PDAs like Treo, BlackBerry, and PocketPC to your 
CRM data can be severely limited, full of software bugs, or non-existent. If mobile access to 
calendaring and email is important for your firm, check out your synchronization options before 
making the move to CRM-based email and calendaring. SugarCRM has the Sync4j option for 
mobile wireless synchronization, as you will see later on in Chapter 6.   
Corporate Directory 
If your business has only a handful of employees, then a corporate directory is likely unnecessary, 
and you may want to remove it from the user interface of your CRM system.  
 
29

One Size Does Not Fit All—CRM Your Way 
 
30 
But as a company grows, and reaches 25, 50, even a hundred employees, it gets harder and harder 
to remember everyone's extension number, their email address, their position, even their face. 
Even a smaller business will make good use of a corporate directory if it is spread out across 
multiple regional offices.  
A corporate directory is a very handy list of everyone's contact information, and often includes a 
thumbnail image of them for those situations where you just can't put a name to the face, or a face 
to the name. 
Interface Consolidation 
Interface consolidation refers to a series of tools and techniques used within a CRM to allow 
employees to spend much of their day logged in to the CRM, with few business activities not 
integrated in some way within the CRM.   
Some of the activities and features commonly integrated into a CRM just to reduce the need to 
jump out of the browser interface to perform miscellaneous business tasks include: 
• 
News feeds (RSS, Atom) 
• 
Integrated web-based email 
• 
Integration of external web links and applications 
• 
Views of financial metrics 
Clearly, by adding in news, email, commonly used external websites, and links to financial 
systems, the CRM becomes an environment that your employees can live in, one that they can log 
into in the morning, and leave up and running all day. 
You should give some thought to what news headlines sources to include, and what external 
websites to link in, within your CRM implementation.  
Document Management 
A document that is only stored on the hard drive of the PC of one of your employees is not a 
company resource. A document that has a copy stored on every hard drive in the company is not 
standardized or revision-controlled. In between these two situations is the right answer—the 
document repository within your CRM system.  
Typically, your CRM will let every employee store documents on the system, and give them a 
title, a description, a file type, a status, and a revision. Some keywords are also normally entered 
as they make it easier to find the document. Unlike your PC, a document repository usually allows 
the user to update a document with a later revision, while keeping each previous revision intact in 
case it is ever required. A document's status indicates if it is a draft document, an old archived 
document, or an approved current version. 
Web-based document management provides key benefits for any business allowing all 
important business documents—medical claim forms, HR policies and guidelines, employee 
handbook, designs, specifications, sales collateral, contracts, and so on—to be accessed and 
downloaded remotely. 

Chapter 2 
Document management is a vital capability for any business, and you need to decide which 
documents your business needs to store in your CRM, and how to organize them.  
Business Models and Their Specific Requirements 
In the previous section, we looked at the different components of the basic CRM applications, and 
identified a number of reasons why those applications might need to be customized for your 
business. In this section, we look at your business itself, and examine it for reasons why your 
CRM might need to be tuned to suit it perfectly.  
Businesses vary widely in their fundamental nature. Who do they sell to, and how? What do they 
sell—a product or a service—and how expensive is it? Where is the business itself located, and 
does it have multiple locations? Let's look at some of these distinguishing characteristics of a 
business, and see how they affect the CRM needs of a business.  
B2B or B2C? 
One of the first differentiators in CRM needs is who your customers are. Are you a B2B 
(Business to Business) or B2C (Business to Consumer) business model? Meaning, do you  
sell to individuals or to businesses? 
In a firm with a B2B business model, the typical CRM data model of accounts and contacts is 
usually a good fit. In extremes, some firms will prefer to remove menu access to contacts and 
focus on the accounts—leaving contacts only as names associated with accounts.  
But in a B2C business model many firms prefer to remove the navigation access to accounts 
leaving a focus on the contacts—the individuals with whom the firm does business. 
Products or Services? 
What is the nature of your business?  Do you make or re-sell products, anything ranging from 
ceramics to washing machines? Do you sell services, such as house painting, landscaping, or 
window cleaning? Or do you do both on a regular basis like the car mechanic who charges for his 
labor by the hour, but also sells the replacement parts he uses when making repairs? 
If you only sell products, what about the product support or warranty services? Does the product 
regularly wear out or need service on a predictable time line giving you an automatic new sales 
opportunity, for instance, a car that needs regular oil changes?  
If you have an element of product warranty or support in your business, you will want to be able 
to record which customer has what duration of support on what products. If your product needs 
regular service—such as a car dealership—you may want to record a good time to contact each of 
your customers for service. 
In a CRM, products and services are dealt with rather differently. Products are usually listed in a 
catalog and are very standardized. When they are sold, they generate a one-time income event.  
 
31

One Size Does Not Fit All—CRM Your Way 
 
32 
If your products have significant value, and have some support service sold with them (such as 
computer equipment—a PC or a printer) your CRM will need to capture the make and model 
(ideally, the serial number as well) of the product and link it to the customer record to track 
entitlement to contracted support services. Now your CRM will need to understand the concept of 
an asset in an asset register, and that of a service contract.  
If your business delivers services to its customers, and those services are delivered over a 
significant period of time, your CRM will need to be able to model a sale that is not a one-time 
income event, but rather a stream of income (and potentially costs) over time. Kelly Girl, for 
example, delivers a service—the services of temporary office staff. If a Kelly Girl temporary 
worker were placed on an assignment for three months from June to August, then the sale should 
be modeled as an income stream of X USD in June, Y USD in July, and Z USD in August. There 
will also be a corresponding cost stream over the three months of the actual salary paid by Kelly 
Girl to the worker involved.   
These sorts of sales are often modeled as a project that delivers over time, and if your business 
sells these kinds of services, your CRM will need to be able to track these 'income stream' 
opportunities, as well as the regular 'income event' opportunities.  
Average Transaction Value, Sales Cycle, and the Recurring 
Business Model 
If your business has a reasonably high average transaction value—say over 1000 USD—then it 
generally makes financial sense to track your customers, and your opportunities to sell to them—
especially if you have a sales cycle of a couple of weeks or more in which to track the opportunity. 
This is the classic CRM application—tracking accounts and contacts and the sales opportunities 
associated with them and then rolling it all up into a sales pipeline that gives you a good feel for 
how sales will go over the next couple of months. 
But what if your usual sales cycle is less than an hour? And your average transaction value is more 
like 20 USD than 1000 USD?  
If you have a business like a CD music store, a video rental store, or a specialty frozen meats store, 
then you have lots of smaller transactions, each of them bordering on impulse purchases by the 
customer. In this case, your real reason for implementing a CRM is to enhance your recurring 
business model. If you typically get these same customers coming back again and again, you will 
get great benefit from tracking those customers in your CRM for marketing purposes. Opt-in 
email marketing campaigns, membership in a discount club as a loyalty mechanism—these are 
going to be some of your key activities. And you will need a CRM that can provide the kind of 
e-marketing and loyalty marketing capabilities that will propel your business to success.  
In this case, you will still keep track of accounts and contacts, but leads and opportunities have 
much less significance. And your sales pipeline is also bordering on irrelevant. If yours is this type 
of business, recognize this fact, and understand the type of changes your CRM will need in order 
to help you and your staff focus on what is important for your business—not what would be 
important in another sort of business.  

Chapter 2 
Location, Location, Location 
Where do you sell? Do you sell from your shop? From your office? At your clients' premises? 
Over the Internet?  
Where are your staff? Are they in the office? Out servicing and selling to customers? Do they 
work from a single central office or are they spread across multiple regional offices? 
These are some of the most important variables in your CRM equation. After all, if we are trying 
to manage customer relationships, we need to know where those relationships are happening! And 
that means knowing where your customers are, and where your staff are.  
If your business only generates sales within a single location—your store or office—then clearly 
your communications challenges are not as great as a business with a dozen outbound 
international sales representatives working out of their homes.  
One of the key questions you need to answer is: when you or anyone in your business with a 
customer-facing role is in contact with customers, are they sitting at their computer and online? If 
not, you may need special CRM facilities so that they can access customer history when they need 
it, and so that they can enter updated information as it develops.  
Let's study two of the more common scenarios:  
• 
Multiple regional offices: If these are white-collar offices with primarily inbound 
staff, there is not necessarily any issue. The CRM server can be located anywhere in 
the world and staff in all the offices can access it via user name/password access—
securely and with good performance—as long as they have a fast and reliable 
connection to the Internet. Smaller businesses with multiple regional offices are 
prime candidates for CRM installations, as they are likely to benefit greatly from the 
improved communications plus accurate and up-to-date account information 
provided by the CRM.  
• 
Outbound sales people: No matter how many offices you have, these are the most 
difficult people to service well. Some of the ways in which they can use the CRM 
other than via the web browser on their home or office PC include: 
o 
Accessing their laptop on a hotel room's high speed Internet connection 
overnight to update the system with the day's activities and look up 
information in preparation for tomorrow's calls. 
o 
Connecting their laptop to the Internet at any time using high speed 
wireless data services like EDGE (Enhanced Data rates for GSM 
Evolution), available from most wireless carriers. 
o 
Using a PDA browser for handheld access to a limited subset of the  
CRM capabilities. 
o 
Using a PDA that has the appointment and contact data within its 
native applications wirelessly synchronized with CRM data. 
o 
Using their notebook with a stand-alone 'offline' installation of the 
CRM. When they return to the office, their private CRM installation 
can be synchronized to the main installation, to update any new data 
from the trip. 
 
33

One Size Does Not Fit All—CRM Your Way 
 
34 
If you recognize that your business has the need to service outbound sales people using one or 
more of the above techniques, you should take care to ensure that the CRM solution you plan to 
adopt can meet your requirements.  
Size Does Matter: Two or Two Hundred? 
The size of your business affects how you manage your CRM, the features you need from your 
CRM, and even the importance of the CRM to your organization.  
In a smaller business, employees have broader responsibilities—and these narrow as the 
organization grows. The need for continuity of business process, communication, and 
documentation becomes greater as the responsibilities get narrower. 
A business with fifty employees also has so many more employee-to-employee information 
pathways within it, compared to a business with five employees. Because of this, a CRM has even 
more to offer the larger firm.  
Also, in a larger firm where not everyone knows everyone else's business, staff turnover can create 
a real risk that sales leads and opportunities created through work paid for by the business may be 
lost when an employee leaves. With a CRM there is an element of the ISO (International 
Organization for Standardization) principle that the process should transcend the individual. 
The employee may leave but their data lives on in the CRM, and another salesperson hired in his 
or her place will have all the account history to work on. 
The larger firm also has other issues not likely found in the smaller firm. With a certain scale of 
organization, information privacy becomes important. Sales leads will not be entered into the system 
if sales people are concerned that another sales team or person may steal their leads. In a smaller 
firm, there is a tendency to have everyone know everything. If a lead is stolen, everyone will know 
who it really belonged to. But after a point, an organization becomes more compartmentalized and 
impersonal, and protecting leads and opportunity data becomes a real and valid concern. 
All of this gives rise to a complex requirement for an Access Control model, or a Permissions 
Management Infrastructure (PMI), as it is sometimes called. In this sort of system, roles are 
defined and the permission to view certain types of data and to perform certain actions is assigned 
to these roles. Then employees are assigned one or more roles, and the permissions from multiple 
roles just add to one another to give each employee their effective aggregate set of permissions.   
In a North American sales organization, for example, accounts might be split into geographical 
areas such as the West Coast, East Coast, Central USA, and Canada. Most sales people would 
only see leads and opportunities within their region, but sales managers would want to see leads, 
opportunities, and sales pipelines for broader geographies.  
Lastly, the size of a business determines what a realistic budget figure is for the acquisition and 
deployment of a CRM. In a firm of five people, a CRM implementation budget might be 3,000-
5,000 USD. In a firm of fifty people, that budget would more likely be 25,000-50,000 USD. Also, 
the smaller firm is less likely to have any internal technical support capability—and running a 
CRM server in the office may be beyond its abilities.  

Chapter 2 
You should give some thought to your firm's needs for data security and permission management, 
as well as setting an implementation budget for the CRM, and deciding if you have the internal 
capacity to manage a CRM server.  
International Needs 
If your employees live and work in multiple countries, the odds are that your CRM may need to 
support more than one language. Language support has many aspects to it, including the language 
used for any and all of the following: 
• 
Information you enter into your CRM 
• 
The user interface of the CRM application 
• 
The online help system 
• 
The written documentation for the CRM.  
You will need to decide on the language to be used for data entry into your CRM, choosing one 
that you feel most users can understand, even if it is not their first language.  
Many languages need to be able to use a set of characters and accents that do not exist in the 
English language, so your CRM will need to be able to enter, display, and print these different sets 
of characters if you need international support.  
You should find out from your CRM vendor what languages are supported for the user interface of 
the application, as well as in what languages the online help system and printable documentation 
are published.  
SugarCRM has support for nearly 20 different languages (although many languages are supported 
only via a non-validated user-created translation) at the user interface, but print-image 
documentation exists only in English, and no online help system is currently available.  
Another aspect of international support is the format in which dates are displayed. Your CRM 
should store dates in its own internal format, but display them to users in whatever format each 
user has selected as their preference. Common formats include 12.23.2006, 23.12.2006, and 
2006.12.23. SugarCRM handles all these formats just fine. 
In addition to dates, different countries have differing formats in which numbers and currency are 
presented. The decimal separator in North America is . and the thousands separator is ,—but in 
much of Europe (Germany, for example), the decimal separator is , and the thousands separator is 
.. Thus what in North America is 12,234,678.90 USD in Germany is 12.345.678,90 €. If your 
CRM needs to be able to present numbers and currency values to users in the format they are 
accustomed to use in their country, then check that your CRM is capable of supporting this 
feature. (At the time of writing, SugarCRM did not support the display of multiple international 
number and currency formats.) 
 
35

One Size Does Not Fit All—CRM Your Way 
 
36 
How Do I Make Shrink-Wrapped Software Suit My 
Business?  
As we saw in Chapter 1, CRM customizations fall into several classes:  
• 
Minor cosmetics  
• 
Minor user interface changes  
• 
Major application changes 
• 
Application integration  
Minor cosmetic changes will need the skills of someone who knows how to use computer graphics 
software, and likely some simple HTML (Hyper Text Markup Language—the code used to 
describe the appearance of web pages). If none of your employees possess these skills, you will 
need the services of a local web development and graphical design company. If you already have a 
company logo and company colors, they should not charge you more than 300-500 USD to 
customize the look of your CRM to use them.  
If your company has a logo and official color scheme, you are likely to have the logo in a high 
resolution electronic form somewhere, and also a technical description of what your company 
colors are—in terms of the Pantone color scheme, or something similar. Get this information 
ready for the web development firm before they quote you for the job, as it should lower the 
amount quoted. 
Minor User Interface (UI) changes can often be accomplished by using tools within the CRM to 
make those changes. In SugarCRM for example, the Sugar Suite administrative functions allow 
system administrators to add new fields to screens, delete unwanted fields, rename fields, or just 
move fields around. Drop-down option lists may be customized, menu options may be renamed or 
suppressed, and external websites may be linked in to new menu items.  
You can either learn to use these customization tools, and see if you can make all the minor UI 
changes you want that way, or you can hire a firm that specializes in customizing CRMs to do this 
work, as well as some of your more major customization work. There is some value in getting all 
the customizations done by one supplier, and this particular type of customization should take no 
more than a few days to do, and cost no more than 1000-2,000 USD.  
Major application changes and application integration work will always need to be developed by 
professional CRM development and customization firms. Expect to pay 300-500 USD per day of 
work involved in your project. Only proceed on this type of customization work when you have 
checked off these issues: 
• 
The original developer of your CRM recommends the services of the customization firm. 
• 
You can see that the firm is not a general web development firm, but specializes in 
CRM implementation and customization—you want a partner with more CRM 
experience and knowledge than you have, not less. 
• 
You have examined and approved sample work of similar complexity and size done 
by the customization firm. 

Chapter 2 
• 
You have written up a requirements document with rough drawings of what new 
screens should look like including details such as the tab order, values that each 
drop-down box should have, the names and data types (text, number, date, or time) 
for each field, fields that are editable, fields that are shown as columns in the list 
view, and fields that may be used to filter the list 
• 
You have a written quote from the proposed customization firm detailing how they 
will implement this requirement, how many days of effort they believe it will take, 
and quoting a fixed price for the work. The firm should also explicitly describe their 
warranty or acceptance period for the software developed and detail an acceptable 
schedule of payments that allows you to view the work as it progresses and see and 
test the final solution (possibly operating on one of their servers) before final 
installment payments are made 
You may wish to make your customizations in a step-wise fashion, to ensure each step is 
affordable, and yields measurable real-world benefits, as well as to test the supplier. Take  
care not to get into a front-loaded agreement that has you shelling out most of your budget for 
customization before you see changes that give you some level of comfort with the supplier. 
Customer-Centric Business Management 
Most of this book deals with the issue of helping you identify and implement a CRM that is 
suitable for your business. However, neither SugarCRM nor indeed any truly effective CRM deals 
only with that narrowly defined set of topics that originally constituted a CRM system.  
From product catalogs, quotes, and invoices to service contract management, and from email 
marketing campaigns to project management and resource tracking, extending your CRM into a 
customer-centric business management system is gaining increasing recognition as an appropriate 
and effective technique for small and medium businesses. (Note that a lot of what follows 
becomes less relevant for organizations whose size exceeds 200 employees. Larger organizations 
tend to need integrated solutions based around Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) tools, 
which can resemble aspects of a CRM, but are significantly more detailed and simply more 
appropriate to larger scale organizations.) 
At its heart, a CRM system is about consistently excellent communication—both inside and 
outside the business. In later chapters we will look at CRM extensions and integration, which bear 
on customer communications. For now, let's look inside the business. 
On a sheet of paper, map out the various departments within your organization, and overlay on it 
the typical paths that information takes between those departments as customer transactions are 
processed. Think about pre-sales requests for information, quotations, order processing, customer 
queries about shipments they are waiting for, shipping, and after-sales support and service. 
For each transaction think about where new information originates in your organization, and 
examine which other parts of the business need that information to perform their jobs properly.  
Jot down notes on what items of information in your industry are key to delivering an outstanding 
customer experience to your customers. Note where they enter your business or are created, and 
where they move within the business. 
 
37

One Size Does Not Fit All—CRM Your Way 
 
38 
Now examine the CRM system, and check the various relevant modules to see if they keep track 
of all the information that you need to deliver excellence to your customers, and if they model all 
the transactions that are most important for your customers. Where they do not, you are 
identifying gaps in your CRM implementation. These gaps should be addressed by extending your 
CRM to cover them, managing the information for those transactions, and ensuring that all 
appropriate employees always have access to the latest information about those transactions.  
When you have plugged all of the gaps with properly designed and integrated extensions to your 
CRM, you will have created what in essence is a customer-centric business management solution. 
And it will have eliminated the traditional islands-of-information problem that so many businesses 
(large and small) suffer from.  
In case you are unfamiliar with this problem (or are lucky enough not to have lived it!) it is a term 
used to describe the situation where a business has an operations management system (such as 
manufacturing control, or job tracking for RayDoc's carpet cleaning business for example), an 
invoicing system, a customer service database application, accounting software to manage the 
ledgers, plus contact management or CRM software—all working on separate databases. 
Customer contact information gets out of date and out of synchronization between the systems. 
Data gets re-keyed two or three times—a technique not known for improving its accuracy. And the 
business' competitive advantage, Sales General and Administration (SG&A) expenses, and 
overall quality of service all go to blazes.  
By doing your quotes and invoicing from within your CRM application and data framework, by 
managing customer support and operations from within the CRM, and by including your product 
and services catalog, marketing campaigns, and sales records within your CRM, you eliminate the 
re-keying of data, allowing each application native access to the same customer database. The 
result is also more than the sum of its parts, as now the customer service personnel can look at 
recent and projected sales history, marketing campaigns can target those customers who have ever 
had a certain product line quoted to them, and many other inter-departmental synergies will also 
develop as you go along.  
It is possible, however, to have too much of a good thing. Some of the potential drawbacks of too 
much customization of your CRM include:  
• 
You may spend more than is wise for your size of organization. 
• 
You may create so much customized software that you over-extend your vendor's 
ability to port those customizations to later revisions of the base system. 
• 
You may create a lot of software that is simply not applicable to other organizations, 
and so wind up being the only company running that software—never a good thing. 
Wherever possible, your goal should be to identify generic extensions to the CRM 
that your vendor will want to incorporate as standard—reducing your future porting 
costs, and improving the quality of the software, as more people will be running it 
and finding any bugs that may be present. 

Chapter 2 
Requirement Analysis 
In this section we analyze RayDoc's business and CRM requirements and use this knowledge to 
create your own CRM requirements worksheet. This will clarify all the theoretical and detailed 
information discussed till now and give you practical understanding and confidence when you 
decide the add-on components and customizations you will require. 
RayDoc CRM Requirements 
We begin with the analysis of the RayDoc business and its CRM requirements. To capture 
RayDoc's CRM needs, we will use a CRM worksheet:  
RayDoc 
Choices 
Notes 
Customer Model 
B2B | B2C
RayDoc sells to both businesses and consumers, so it will 
want to track both accounts and contacts in its CRM. 
Revenue Model 
Products | Services
RayDoc sells both products (such as carpets, doors, and 
windows) and services (such as installation services, and 
general contracting services). For its bigger jobs, invoices will 
be issued to the customer over a period of several months, so 
RayDoc would benefit from being able to model an opportunity 
that generates income as a stream, not as a one-time event.  
Support Services 
Yes | No
RayDoc does not sell much in the way of support services. 
The few warranty claims it gets, it will handle by looking at the 
supplier invoices. 
Transaction 
Value 
Sales Cycle 
Recurring 
Revenue 
Smaller | Larger
Shorter | Longer
Yes | No 
RayDoc does not have many transactions under 100 USD, 
and most are over 1,000 USD. Sales cycles are typically 2-4 
weeks, and more than 60% of sales go to existing customers 
(hence, the recurring business model is quite healthy). 
RayDoc will model leads and opportunities, and measure the 
sales pipeline. It will also use its CRM to improve its recurring 
revenue model, by conducting e-marketing campaigns and 
managing a customer loyalty program. 
Business 
Locations 
One or two | Many 
Outbound Sales
While RayDoc has only the one location, both sales and 
service staff travel to customer sites and offices regularly. 
RayDoc would benefit from high speed wireless data services 
for laptops, PDA browser access to the CRM, or offline CRM 
support on staff laptops.  
Business Size 
2-20 | 20-100
RayDoc has about 22 employees—pretty close to the dividing line 
between very small firms, and those beginning to gain critical 
mass. Its CRM implementation budget should be in the 10,000 
USD - 25,000 USD range, including hardware (the server), 
software (the CRM), customization, and the first year's operating 
expenses. At its size, it may need some basic data security and 
permission management capabilities in the CRM.  
Lead Tracking 
Yes | No
Doc operates more on the basis of who he knows than what he 
knows. When he gets a lead, it is typically a real opportunity and 
needs no qualification. He intends to only track opportunities 
and remove lead tracking from the user interface.  
 
 
39

One Size Does Not Fit All—CRM Your Way 
 
40 
 
RayDoc 
Choices 
Notes 
Weighted Sales 
Pipeline 
Yes | No
Doc runs RayDoc on a shoestring, and needs to be warned 
about any signs of a sales downturn. Never one to fool 
himself, Doc wants his CRM sales pipeline to weigh 
opportunities by their percentage likelihood, not just add in 
their gross amount. 
Corporate 
Calendar 
Yes | No 
Doc and his junior partner Andrew disagreed on this one. Doc 
has never used Outlook or any other calendaring system. 
Andrew persuaded him to try out the CRM calendaring 
system, especially for managing the time of service personnel.  
Corporate 
Directory 
Yes | No 
Doc chose to implement this feature, so he could keep the cell 
phone numbers for his service personnel close to hand.  
Interface 
Consolidation 
News Feeds 
Financial Views 
External Links 
Email 
Doc wasn't used to much in the way of Information 
Management, and even a basic CRM would be a big step for 
him. He decided that at least for the first phase 
implementation, he would stick with just the basic sales 
aspects of his CRM.  
Document 
Management 
Yes | No 
Integrated document management will let RayDoc keep 
quotes and contracts linked to accounts within the CRM—
something both Ray and Andrew agree will be extremely 
useful. They will also keep product brochures, basic HR 
documents and medical claim forms in the CRM, for all 
employees to access. 
International 
Users 
Yes | No
RayDoc operates only in Canada, and has no need for most 
aspects of international support—but does need the 
application to work in both English and French.  
 
When filling out the CRM requirements worksheet for your own business in the next section, you 
should expect to see some of the same principles at work as you see in the RayDoc worksheet 
above. Some choices are clear from the nature of your business, or some of the special 
requirements your business may have. Other choices are simply personal decisions based on your 
opinions and those of your advisors.  
Your CRM Requirements Worksheet 
In this section, you have an assignment. In the table below circle the choices that are appropriate 
for your business. This should give you some good indications of what components of a CRM are 
going to be most useful in your business, and what customizations you are likely to want to make.  
Your Business 
Choices 
Notes 
Customer Model 
B2B | B2C 
B2C Businesses may prefer to remove accounts and deal 
simply with contacts as customers. 
Revenue Model 
Products | 
Services 
If you sell services, you may need to be able to model an 
opportunity that generates income as a stream, not a one-time 
event. Some CRMs model this sort of opportunity as a Project, 
delivered over time.  

Chapter 2 
 
Your Business 
Choices 
Notes 
Support Services 
Yes | No 
Businesses with support services will need CRM support for an 
asset register, and service contract management capability. 
Transaction Value 
Sales Cycle 
Recurring 
Revenue 
Smaller | Larger 
Shorter | Longer 
Yes | No 
For businesses with transaction values of over 1000 USD, and 
sales cycles of two weeks or more, it makes sense to model 
leads and opportunities, and measure the sales pipeline. If you 
have a small transaction value and short sales cycle, you may 
use your CRM primarily to improve your recurring revenue 
model, by conducting e-marketing campaigns and managing a 
customer loyalty program. 
Business 
Locations 
One or two | Many
Outbound Sales 
Multiple office businesses will benefit greatly from a CRM. 
Outbound salespeople may require high speed wireless data 
services, PDA browser access to the CRM, or offline CRM 
support on their laptop.  
Business Size 
2-20 | 20-100 
Your organization's size will determine your CRM 
implementation budget (think in terms of a maximum of 500 
USD-1,000 USD per employee), and will influence your ability to 
manage an internal CRM server. Larger firms will benefit even 
more from a CRM than smaller firms, but need more 
sophisticated data security and permission management.  
Lead Tracking 
Yes | No 
Businesses with little pro-active lead generation may wish to 
only track opportunities, and remove lead tracking from the user 
interface.  
Weighted Sales 
Pipeline 
Yes | No 
Do you want your sales pipeline to weigh opportunities by their 
percentage likelihood, or just to add in their gross amount? 
Corporate 
Calendar 
Yes | No 
There is huge value to breaking the Outlook habit—will you  
do it? 
Corporate 
Directory 
Yes | No 
Only needed above perhaps 10 employees. 
Interface 
Consolidation 
News Feeds 
Financial Views 
External Links 
Email 
Choose between a simple CRM, and one that integrates a wide 
range of other information—enhancing the CRM function, 
promoting CRM adoption, and providing many intranet 
capabilities as well. 
Document 
Management 
Yes | No 
Integrated document management lets you associate 
documents to accounts and contacts, as well as keeping 
reference copies of important company resources under 
revision control.  
International Users 
Yes | No 
If you have international users, you need foreign language 
support for your CRM application, plus multiple date and 
number format options selectable by each user 
 
41

One Size Does Not Fit All—CRM Your Way 
 
42 
Summary 
In this chapter we began the business analysis process required to maximize the benefit your business 
will gain from a CRM implementation. Some of the most important topics we discussed were:  
• 
CRMs need more customization than most computer applications. Don't just  
focus on implementing a CRM—focus on implementing it in a way that suits  
your business. 
• 
Some of the characteristics that will determine the CRM features and customizations 
your business really needs are its size, the number of locations at which you do 
business, whether or not you have outbound salespeople, if your customers are 
individual consumers or businesses, if you sell products or services, your average 
unit sales value, and whether or not you need support for international capabilities. 
• 
You will need to decide if your CRM will only manage the sales pipeline, or if it will 
be a broader business management resource, used by everyone in the company. 
• 
CRMs can integrate management of the corporate calendar for all employees, and 
link activities to their related contacts and accounts. Will your CRM take over your 
corporate calendaring? 
• 
CRMs can integrate document management, keeping reference copies of important 
corporate documents under revision control, and linking documents to contacts and 
accounts with which they are involved. 
• 
Making a list of requirements. You also filled out your own CRM requirements 
worksheet, after going through one for RayDoc in detail. 
• 
You learned more about the capabilities of CRM systems in general, and especially  
what properties of your business will dictate just how your CRM is configured  
and customized. 
In the next chapter we will have a change of pace. After reading a lot in the last two chapters about 
CRMs in general, and how the CRM needs of various businesses will differ, we will finally move 
on to the specifics of getting your CRM package—SugarCRM—up and running.  

3 
CRM Deployment Options: 
Which One Is Right for You? 
In the first couple of chapters, we have had a somewhat theoretical introduction to using a CRM in 
a smaller business, and the special requirements you should expect to have depending on the 
nature of your organization and its business model and customers. Now finally, we get down to 
brass tacks—the practical reality of getting a CRM installed for your business. 
In this chapter, we will take a systematic approach to making the right deployment choices for 
your business. First, we take a detailed look at the alternatives you have for a CRM deployment, 
including On-Demand (no installation at all for you), Collocation (someone else hosting an 
install on a server that belongs to you), a conventional Self-Hosted installation where you own 
and manage your own server, and a Shared Server hosting option for small organizations.   
Having weighed the pros and cons of those deployment alternatives, if you decide that what suits you 
best is to deploy and manage your own server for SugarCRM, we then go on to detail how to do that.  
Some of the issues involved in deploying your own server are:  
• 
What server operating system should I install? What are the pros and cons between 
Windows Server and Linux? Between one Linux distribution and the next? 
• 
What computer hardware will I need? 
• 
Will some computer hardware I already have be usable for this purpose? 
• 
What about backup? Security? 
• 
How much Internet bandwidth will I need in each direction? 
• 
What else do I need to install?  
In this chapter we will deal with all of these issues in detail, making sure you know the pros and 
cons of the various choices available to you.  
When it comes down to the gory details of actually installing the various software components you 
would require to run SugarCRM on your own server, this information is to be found in 
Appendices A and B (one each for installation on Linux or on Windows Server), so that it does not 
interrupt the flow of your investigations into running SugarCRM for your business. When you 
actually need to perform the installation—refer to those Appendices for step-by-step instructions. 

CRM Deployment Options: Which One Is Right for You? 
 
44 
Deployment Alternatives  
Simply put, if you want to use SugarCRM as the CRM solution for your business, you will need to 
be able to connect to an Internet-accessible server that is running SugarCRM. You will then use it 
by typing the web address of that server into the address bar of the browser on your PC—no 
matter where your PC may be as long as it to is connected to the Internet.  
So, we need to think about whose server that will be, where it will be, who will install SugarCRM 
initially and who will take care of that installation going forward.  
You have four basic options: 
• 
On-Demand: In this situation, you rent use of the SugarCRM application by the 
month, and by the user. You do not own the server it is operating on, nor do you 
have to take care of it at all. The supplier, often called an ASP (Application Service 
Provider) backs up the server, makes sure it is always available, and makes sure that 
adequate bandwidth is available to ensure good performance. 
• 
Server Collocation: With this option, you buy your own server, or use one you 
already own. You load it up with exactly the software image you want, and then take 
it down to your local Internet Service Provider (ISP), who hosts it for a monthly 
charge. Again, the supplier backs up the server, makes sure it is always available, 
and makes sure that adequate bandwidth is available to ensure good performance. 
• 
Self-Hosted: This option should be fairly self-explanatory—you buy your own 
server or use one you already have, load up the desired software on it, and then 
connect it to the Internet connection at your office, making it externally accessible 
for use by employees at home or on the road.  
• 
Shared Server: The cheapest and lowest capacity option—you have your 
SugarCRM instance hosted on a server at an ISP, and that server is also used by the 
ISP to host the applications and websites of several more of their customers.  
Let's look at a comparison chart of these options: 
 
On-Demand 
Server Collocation 
Self-Hosted 
Shared Server 
Initial Cost 
Low 
Medium 
Medium 
Low 
Ongoing Cost 
Medium/High 
Medium 
Low 
Low 
Initial Setup 
Easy 
Somewhat Complex 
Complex 
Medium 
Your Ongoing Effort 
Low 
Medium 
Medium 
Low 
Custom Fit 
Often Poor 
Excellent 
Excellent 
Often Poor 
Data Security 
Excellent 
Excellent 
Up to You 
Excellent 
Performance 
Excellent 
Excellent 
Likely Excellent 
Low Capacity 
At the time you first set up your own server, or prepare it for delivery to an ISP for Collocation, 
your expenses will be higher than the On-Demand option. You have to buy a server, unless you 
already have a suitable server candidate available, and you may also need to buy a server  

Chapter 3 
operating system (if you choose to use Windows instead of Linux). You may also have some costs 
associated with developing a backup solution. And you need someone with at least a bit of a 
technical bent working for you to perform the software installation. 
Once you get going, however, the On-Demand service may prove to be quite expensive—often as 
much as 40 USD per user per month for SugarCRM (that is for Sugar Pro, and higher for most 
alternative commercial CRMs). Depending on your business, that may seem a good deal for 
relieving yourself of the need to buy and maintain a server, or it may not.  
The Shared-Server approach is the easiest way to get a taste of what it is like to use SugarCRM, 
and is cheap to run and fairly easy to set up, but has limitations in how much customization you 
can do, and the size of organization you can expect to run on it. As well, these installations are 
typically very light on disk space, so if you are using a lot of documents, or generating a lot of 
PDF files, or other binary attachments to notes or emails, this can make this option less viable. As 
well, these shared server offerings often have tight limits on bandwidth you may use—which will 
likely be exceeded greatly if you are uploading and downloading a lot of documents and email 
attachments. This option is typically only applicable to businesses with at most 10 employees. 
For most businesses with more than 10 employees, as should be clear from the table above, the 
choice between the deployment options is a tradeoff of cost versus complexity and effort.  
• 
Except when you write the check once a month, going with an On-Demand service 
is easy. 
• 
Hosting the system yourself will take some effort to set it up, require some funds for a 
server, and take some ongoing effort to make sure the system runs reliably and your data 
is safe and secure. But it is the cheapest option by far—at least in terms of direct costs.  
• 
Somewhere in between is the Collocation option, which takes a little effort to set up, 
none or very little to manage month to month, all at a price somewhere between the 
On-Demand and self-hosted models.  
One important point to note is that when you go with an On-Demand service, there is usually little 
accommodation for substantial customizations to the CRM software to suit your business. The 
hosted application tends to be very standardized—that is how the ISP/ASP controls the costs of 
managing multiple servers for multiple clients. In the Collocation option, you get to load the 
software on your own server, and then deliver it to the ISP—so a fully customized software image 
is no problem. It is also usually easy to update later on, without removing it from the ISP. In the 
self-hosted model, of course, your solution can be as customized as you like, and it may also be 
easier to link the CRM server to your other business systems (accounts, intranet, customer portal), 
which may reside securely behind your company's firewall.  
If you decide to go with the self-hosted option, or the Collocation option, you will need to know 
about computer server hardware, server operating systems, and the choice of the LAMP stack 
versus WAMP or WIMP. These topics are covered in the following sections.  
Even if you go with the On-Demand option, it is still useful to gain an overview level of 
understanding of these topics, as this information will make you an informed consumer of the 
product offered to you by On-Demand vendors. Will that bandwidth be enough for me? Will that 
server offer good performance and scalability? What about your backup procedures? 
 
45

CRM Deployment Options: Which One Is Right for You? 
 
46 
Server Issues for Self-Hosted and Collocated 
Deployments 
Both the Self-Hosted and the Collocated deployment options need the user to buy a server and  
set it up. There are various parameters that need to be looked into when you are in the process  
of setting up your own server. This section is devoted to these issues and is focused on dealing  
with them. 
Choosing a Server Operating System 
Just as a server may physically resemble a PC while differing from it greatly, a server operating 
system may look a lot like a desktop operating system while being in actuality very different. A 
desktop operating system, like a PC, is optimized to give good service to the user to whom is it 
dedicated. A server operating system has to be talented at getting work done for many people at 
once, while keeping them all happy. It also typically has less need for a rich, powerful graphical 
user interface, as it is frequently used and managed remotely.  
Server and network operating systems have been around for a long time. While many years ago 
Novell Netware and Banyan Vines, plus many variants of UNIX (including notably Solaris from 
Sun Microsystems) were major players in this marketplace, today the largest players in 
network/server operating systems for small to medium applications are Windows Server, and 
Linux. While UNIX still has a very large share, it is growing slowly, and relates much more to the 
high end of the market.  
While Windows Server comes only from Microsoft, Linux exists in many versions, from many 
sources. Red Hat is perhaps the best known product (or distribution, as different versions of 
Linux are called), with SUSE (originally a German Linux vendor, now owned by Novell) a close 
second. SUSE tends to be the preferred vendor in Europe, and Red Hat in the USA. Major 
commercial Linux distributions, while still mostly open source, are far from free, as they 
command substantial annual support contracts, and initial licensing costs.  
At the time of writing, Windows Server 2003 Enterprise Edition for 25 Users costs 3,999 USD. 
Support costs extra. Enterprise Linux ES from Red Hat costs 349 USD per server with one year of 
a basic level of support, or 799 USD including a year of higher level support.  Somewhat 
similarly, SUSE Linux Enterprise Server 9 costs 349 USD per server (with up to 2 CPUs) per 
year, including support. Personally, I prefer SUSE Linux to Red Hat, as I find it has a more 
approachable user interface for the average human being who knows Windows XP and little else. 
For this reason, Appendix A, which describes installing SugarCRM on Linux, uses SUSE Linux 
Enterprise Server 9 as the worked example.  
The costs involved in purchasing a server operating system are as detailed above, and the choice is 
yours. Clearly, Linux is cheaper to buy. My experience has been that both are very reliable in use. 
The choice to me comes down to spending more to get the familiar Microsoft user interface, or 
paying less, and dealing with the less familiar Linux user interface.  
The level and type of technical resources you have access to will no doubt have some influence  
on your choice as well. You will need someone local at the very least to be on call in case of 
emergencies, perhaps to come in and set things up for you in the beginning, and possibly to  

Chapter 3 
perform backups each week. There are many independent network and server support people who 
make their living working as the outsourced computer support technician for perhaps ten small 
businesses. Working with one of these people might cost you 5,000-10,000 USD per year, and 
depending on your circumstances, could well be right for you. Or is the 40 USD per user per 
month at the On-Demand supplier starting to look better now?  
Web-Based Application Platforms 
In today's computing world, there are three major web-based application development and 
delivery platforms:  
• 
Microsoft's proprietary .NET platform 
• 
Sun Microsystems's partially open Java platform 
• 
The Open Source LAMP (Linux-Apache-MySQL-PHP) platform 
Each of these environments provides a comprehensive set of tools for developers to build and test 
new web-based applications, and for users of the applications to run them.  
Microsoft's .NET platform has very good cross-language development capabilities, but is tied to 
Microsoft-proprietary products, including its operating system and other server products.  
Sun's Java platform is widely popular across many vendors (Sun, HP, IBM, and so on) as a 
scalable platform that is largely hardware and operating system independent, and non-proprietary. 
While the Java platform has world-class scalability, and an excellent security model, it has been 
recognized that it is not the most productive environment for leveraging reliable business 
applications from expensive development resources.  
Accordingly, while .NET will likely remain the platform of choice for Microsoft's partners and 
users who don't mind being irretrievably tied to Microsoft products, there has been a big need in 
the market for a non-proprietary platform with Open Source components and the practical ability 
to build applications in a particularly cost-effective manner. That platform is the LAMP stack. 
LAMP stands for Linux, Apache, MySQL, and PHP (plus Perl and Python—two other popular Open 
Source scripting languages we will not discuss further here). The LAMP stack looks like this: 
 
The LAMP Stack 
As you can see, Linux and Apache are the base on which the LAMP stack is built. And what a 
solid base—between them they are the two most successful Open Source initiatives in the world.  
 
47

CRM Deployment Options: Which One Is Right for You? 
 
48 
MySQL, a popular Open Source database was developed and released into Open Source by 
MySQL AB of Sweden and is known for speed, scalability, and reliability. It would be fair to say 
it is also known as a less sophisticated database, lacking some advanced capabilities such as stored 
procedures and triggers—features that were finally delivered in the 5.0 release of MySQL. If 
MySQL is a Ford Mustang—simple, fast, and reliable, then Oracle, the leading commercial 
database, would have to be characterized as a Bentley—smooth, slick, fast, and expensive. We 
know which one suits the smaller business.  
While the four elements of LAMP work very well together, they can be used in different 
combinations. Other than the use of alternative scripting languages, the most common change to 
LAMP is to make it WAMP, by using Windows Server underneath it, rather than Linux. Another 
possible change is to make it WIMP, by using Windows Server and Microsoft Internet 
Information Server (the Microsoft web server) underneath MySQL and PHP.  
Generally speaking, Windows Server has a much greater footprint than Linux—so WAMP will 
require the server it is installed on to have more memory than if LAMP were utilized. For an 
average 25-person business, your CRM server can get away with 2 GB of memory if you use the 
LAMP stack, but 2.5-3 GB is a safer bet if you want to use WAMP. Otherwise, there are no other 
drawbacks to running WAMP—and potential advantages as Windows Server presents a user 
interface that many more people are familiar with. 
As for WIMP, I believe the bottom line should be to just say no. To run PHP with complete 
stability on IIS requires that it be done in a way that badly limits system performance. You would 
be better off following the masses, and going with LAMP or WAMP. 
Specifying Your Server Hardware 
At home, most of us use our PCs as isolated workstations for work or play. A few may connect 
several PCs at home into a network, in much the same way they are connected at the office. When 
several PCs are connected in a network, there is often value in attaching one or more special 
computers to the network, designed to act as a shared resource for all users. These special—
typically more powerful—computers are called servers.  
Most of us are familiar enough with a home or office Personal Computer or PC. The usual product 
is a so-called three-box configuration—the system unit, the display, and the keyboard. While a 
computer server can look quite similar to a PC, it has a number of quite fundamental differences, 
as summarized in the table below:  
 
PC 
Server 
Form Factor 
Desktop, Tower 
Tower, Rack mount 
Memory Type 
Non-parity 
 ECC (Error Checking and Correcting) 
Memory Size 
512 MB-1 GB 
1-4 GB 
Hard Disk Technology 
IDE / SATA 
SCSI 
Hard Disk Speed 
5,400-10,000 RPM 
10,000-15,000 RPM 
LAN Interface 
Ethernet 10/100, Wireless  
One or more Gig-Ethernet 

Chapter 3 
 
 
PC 
Server 
Power Supply 
Single 250-400W 
Redundant 400W 
Processor (CPU) 
Single Pentium 4 / Athlon 
One or more Xeon / Opteron 
Video 
Often High Performance for Gaming 
Low Performance 
Users 
One—Local 
Many—Remote 
 
Note that there are plenty of low-end servers from the likes of HP and Dell that use non-parity 
memory, IDE or SATA disk drives, and a single power supply. They can be used for small (up to 
say a dozen users) SugarCRM installations fairly effectively. But my personal recommendations 
would always be for a higher capacity, and better level of reliability, using what I might like to call 
a proper server. Most of the differences in a proper server are there to make the server more 
reliable than a PC, and to make it better suited to handling the needs of many users at once. Going 
to a lower specification is to me a false economy; but not everyone would agree. 
ECC memory for example, has the ability to detect and correct the most common forms of errors 
that could be made by semi-conductor memory when it starts to fail. Typical PC memory, by 
contrast, will have no idea if it is starting to fail and make errors (due to the lack of a feature called 
parity), and certainly has no ability to correct those errors. The only time a PC checks to see if its 
memory actually works is at system boot time, when you turn it on. As you intend to leave your 
server on all the time, that approach clearly will not work.  
Similarly, a server power supply often has two actual power supplies connected in a redundant 
manner, so that when one fails, it is reported, but the system carries on running on the one power 
supply that remains, giving you a chance to buy a replacement power supply, and schedule down 
time to replace it.  
The SCSI (Small Computer System Interface) hard drive in a server is designed to service multiple 
requests from unrelated user activity in the most efficient way possible. Elevator seeking is just 
one feature that illustrates this point. If a SCSI drive receives multiple requests for information 
from different sources, it will service those requests as the internal drive head passes by the 
information, regardless of who made their request first. An IDE (Internal Drive Electronics) or 
SATA (Serial Advanced Technology Attachment) hard drive will service requests in the order 
they arrived, even if this means that the drive head will be scooting back and forth over the same 
area many times. Since the mechanical movement of the drive head is the main activity that makes 
a hard drive so much slower than system memory, this means that an IDE or SATA drive will 
perform worse in a server application than a SCSI drive—especially in a situation where the server 
is heavily loaded with many simultaneous users.  
The Central Processing Unit (CPU) or processor used in a server is typically an Intel Xeon or 
AMD Opteron (again—low end servers for small installations may use Intel Pentium 4 or AMD 
Athlon processors). These processors have a larger and more sophisticated on-chip cache design, 
that lets multiple users keep processing quickly, by staying mostly in the cache memory on the 
processor itself, and going out to normal system memory as seldom as possible. By contrast, an 
Intel Pentium 4, the leading desktop processor, has a caching system that when dealing with 
multiple users will more often go out to system memory, slowing down the system throughput. 
 
49

CRM Deployment Options: Which One Is Right for You? 
 
50 
System memory size is perhaps the biggest difference between a server and a PC. Most PC users 
(other than those doing graphics design and other demanding tasks) work happily with 512 MB of 
memory in their PC—or at most 1 GB. By contrast, few servers use less than 1 GB of memory, 
and most use 2 to 4 GB—or more. With more memory, the work being done for many users can 
stay in memory simultaneously as it is performed, rather than being sent temporarily out to the 
hard disk if memory gets too full. As system memory is at least 100 times faster than the hard 
disk, anything that involves the hard disk will slow down the system substantially. 
Servers are used for many tasks. A network may have a specific server to act as a database server, 
for example. That type of server would be optimized for fast and reliable disk storage and high 
memory capacity. Another server might be an application server—one on which applications are 
run, with the results being communicated to the users on the PCs using those applications. An 
application server is typically optimized with lots of memory and CPU power—to get through all 
that application processing quickly. An example of an application server is a SugarCRM server—
the SugarCRM application is actually running on the server—and multiple user PCs are just 
running web browsers that display web pages that communicate to the users what is going on in 
their particular session.  
For a business with 10 users or less, my personal recommendation for the configuration of a SugarCRM 
server to be used as a combined database and application server would be along these lines:  
• 
80-100 GB of IDE or SCSI storage  
• 
1 GB of ECC memory (or 1.5 GB if you are using Windows Server) 
• 
A single Athlon, Pentium 4, Xeon or Opteron processor running at 2 GHz or faster 
• 
A single Gig-Ethernet connection to the network 
• 
An Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) 
• 
SUSE Enterprise Linux or Windows Server 
For a business with perhaps 25 users, I would recommend a server configured along these lines:  
• 
150 GB of SCSI storage  
• 
2-3 GB of ECC memory (depending on the operating system used) 
• 
A single Xeon or Opteron processor running at 2 GHz or faster 
• 
A single Gig-Ethernet connection to the network 
• 
An Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) 
• 
SUSE Enterprise Linux or Windows Server 
For a business with 100 users, my recommendation would move up to something more like: 
• 
300 GB of SCSI disk storage 
• 
Dual Xeon or Opteron processors of 2 GHz speed or faster 
• 
4-8 GB of ECC memory, depending on the operating system selected 
• 
Dual Gig-Ethernet connections to the network 
• 
An Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) 
• 
SUSE Enterprise Linux or Windows Server 

Chapter 3 
Most ISPs and ASPs use fairly low-end hardware for their servers, and seem to charge a lot of 
money for them each month when offered as dedicated servers. If you use SugarCRM as an 
On-Demand service, you will in all likelihood not have a whole server dedicated to running 
SugarCRM for your business. Instead, your ISP/ASP will likely be using a shared server facility—
a controlled portion of the resources of a physical server—to support your business's CRM.  
If you are planning to use your CRM to house a lot of shared documents for your business, you 
should check with your On-Demand service provider what your disk space limitations are—they 
are often surprisingly low.  
Clearly if you collocate your own server at an ISP, or use it at your own premises, you will likely 
have a better hardware platform to run on, and it will offer some room for expansion, compared to 
the On-Demand situation. But Collocation can be expensive too, and managing your own server is 
not for everyone.  
In the end, you will need to make a choice balancing several factors—your access to technical 
staff (and the cost of it), how difficult it is for you to invest in a server, what price you can find for 
an On-Demand service of good quality, and how much customization you feel your installation of 
the software will require.  
One last word of warning: Most businesses have an old PC or two lying around relatively unused. 
There is a great temptation to use one of these as your SugarCRM server. This may be a fine idea 
for an initial trial installation of SugarCRM for evaluation purposes. But when you make the 
decision to put SugarCRM into production in your business, you should consider the performance, 
future expansion, and reliability factors of such a PC as compared to a modern server (see the 
comparison table above)—and unless cash is very, very tight, you should just say no. 
Backup and Security Considerations 
Backup and security are the two things that are most likely to suffer if you host your server 
yourself, compared to housing it at a professional hosting centre. If you are going to be hosting 
your own server, and have little experience with servers, backup, and network security issues, this 
is an important section for you.  
Clearly, when you have got your dream CRM up and running, you will want everyone in the 
organization to be using it, and the business to be largely run from it. With such a vital role in the 
organization, and all your business's vital data on it, you will not be able to afford to have the 
system fail and lose your data, or produce prolonged down time.  
Accordingly, you will need to devise a data backup strategy. One solution is to buy a data backup 
device—which typically will be tape-based, but could also involve network-attached disk storage. 
Most backup solutions are not cheap, but unfortunately, adopting a reliable backup plan is 
completely mandatory.  
Some inexpensive backup solutions do exist, such as connecting an external USB hard drive to 
your server, and backing up the server hard drive to the external hard drive. You can also buy a 
second drive within your server, and backup the drive that way. But files open at backup time will 
likely not be backed up by a simple operating-system level file or drive copy—so be very careful. 
 
51

CRM Deployment Options: Which One Is Right for You? 
 
52 
Whatever solution you adopt, the most likely cause of failure will be because you did not use it 
regularly, or properly—or did not test that the backups it made could be successfully restored. So 
pay more attention to the policies and procedures for backup, and testing restores, than you ever 
do to your choice of backup technology. Personally I recommend the internal tape backup unit 
with proper tape backup software, a daily incremental backup, and weekly full backup. Rotate the 
tape used in the tape drive each week, and keep 5 tapes in the rotation. And once a month, test 
your backups by identifying a document that has been recently created and checking it can be 
successfully restored from the backup.  
Server Security 
Your CRM server will be permanently accessible via the Internet, and will house your most vital 
and sensitive business information. Right away, bells should be going off in your head, warning 
you to make sure that the server is properly secure. Malicious attacks, or the attempted theft of 
your competitive information, are two among many very real threats you must plan for.  
For a start, security specialists will always tell you that nothing is completely secure. There are 
simply levels of security—each more cumbersome and expensive than the last, and you need to 
implement a level of security that is sensible and appropriate in your business context.  
Some minimal security measures you should consider include: 
• 
A UPS (Uninterruptible Power Supply) to save your server from crashing when there 
is a power outage. Windows and Linux both have utilities that can receive a message 
from the UPS notifying the server when the UPS has gone over to battery backup, so 
that the server can be shut down in a controlled manner if the power remains out for 
too long.  
• 
A locked server room, so only authorized employees can access the server, reducing 
its chances of being stolen, being damaged, or having its data compromised or stolen. 
• 
A firewall between the server and the Internet connection, with only limited and 
specific access to the web server being permitted from the Internet. 
If you are installing the SugarCRM server at your own office, you will typically position the 
server behind your firewall to the outside world, but allow external access by opening ports on the 
firewall to the web server on your SugarCRM server. From a security point of view, it would be 
even better to actually have separate web and application servers, with security rules between 
them—but this is likely not a necessary security measure for smaller firms.  
If your SugarCRM server will be collocated at an ISP, a similar networking configuration should 
be used—talk to your ISP.  
If you are using an On-Demand service—none of this will be vital to you, except insofar as you 
may wish to ask your ASP what security architecture is in place, and how it handles the web 
server and application server issues.  

Chapter 3 
Bandwidth Capacity and Reliability Considerations 
We have all been on Internet sites where we liked the information provided, but were frustrated by 
the slowness of the site. We need to make sure no one using your CRM ever feels that way about it! 
Bandwidth, or connection speed, is an important link in the chain of good performance for a 
web-based CRM.  
 
SugarCRM Internet Connection 
In the diagram above, the Outbound Traffic leaves Your Offices for the Internet at a speed called the 
uplink, or upload speed. Inbound Traffic arrives at your building at the downlink, or download 
speed. Notice that with the server at your office, for a Remote User it is important that the uplink 
speed be good, for data to get from the office to the remote user quickly.  
Usually, your employees will complain if the office download speed is slow as web browsing, or 
retrieving email from an external email service, will be slow if the office has a poor Internet 
download speed (traffic moving in the direction of the 
 in the diagram above).   
Inbound Traffic
Now we see that employees will also complain (at least the ones who access your CRM while 
away from the office) if the office's Internet connection has a slow uplink speed (traffic moving in 
the direction of the 
 in the diagram above). 
Outbound Traffic
So the conclusion we must draw is that if we intend to house our CRM server at the office, we 
need to make sure the office now has not just a good download speed on its Internet connection, 
but a good upload speed as well.  
 
53

CRM Deployment Options: Which One Is Right for You? 
 
54 
What is a good speed? Well, that depends on how much each employee has to use the Internet to 
do their work. In a software development company, the Internet bandwidth required per employee 
will likely be much greater than in a T-shirt printing firm, or for that matter, at RayDoc Carpets.  
For the average white collar business (if there is such a thing), for each 25 people in the company, 
in my personal experience I find you need something like two megabits of download bandwidth. 
With a CRM server at the office being accessed by remote employees during the day, or at night 
from home, you will likely need something like one megabit of upload or uplink speed for each 
ten concurrent remote users.  
Personally I find it's best to avoid an uplink speed lower than 768 kilobits for remote access to 
SugarCRM. It will still work on slower connections of course, but you may find the response 
becomes sluggish—and there's really no room for that in business these days! 
Many Internet connections tend to be faster in the download direction than the upload direction. 
These connections are referred to as Asymmetric. If your CRM server is located at your offices, 
your business becomes a candidate to have an Internet connection that is closer to being 
Symmetric, or balanced, in its upload and download speeds.  
When you use an On-Demand service for your CRM, or have your server collocated at an ISP, 
your server benefits from the fact that the Internet connection at the provider's location is much 
faster in both directions than it is at your offices, and as well it is more reliable. Typically, an ISP 
or ASP has multiple suppliers of its Internet connection pipes, so that if the connection provided 
by one supplier fails, those from another suppliers will automatically carry on moving traffic.  
This redundancy of an Internet connection is something that is hard to afford for the smallest 
businesses—and so you may have to accept that your level of service (reliability) for a self-hosted 
CRM won't be quite as good as if your server were professionally hosted and managed. Check out 
pricing for redundant connections in your area, and as well, check out the level of guaranteed 
availability offered by the ISPs in your area, and their reputations amongst your business associates.  
Lastly, if you choose the On-Demand or collocated server options, be sure to check out how much 
bandwidth you are allowed to consume (per user, or for your whole server) before bandwidth 
surcharges come into effect. With many suppliers the standard bandwidth allowance is very small, 
to help generate another couple of hundred dollars of income for the supplier each month from 
charges for excessive bandwidth use. 
Performing the Installation 
In order not to interrupt our CRM business analysis context with a lot of procedural instructions, 
the actual details of installing SugarCRM may be found in Appendices A and B, which cover the 
complete process of installing SugarCRM on top of SUSE Linux and Windows Server.  

Chapter 3 
Summary 
In this chapter, we covered the practical considerations of installing and running SugarCRM in 
your business. The key points included:  
• 
Comparing the advantages of an On-Demand service versus a Collocated, 
Self-Hosted, or Shared Server, we saw the up front costs of your own server were the 
alternative to paying substantial fees every month to an On-Demand service. As 
well, we explained the minimal support for customizations available with an 
On-Demand service or Shared Server.  
• 
If you choose to deploy SugarCRM on your own server, you will need to select the 
operating system and hardware configuration for your server, and also make 
decisions regarding server security and Internet connection bandwidth.  
• 
You can use Windows or Linux as the server operating system on your SugarCRM 
server. If Linux, then with the Apache Web Server, the MySQL database, and the 
PHP scripting language, the whole combination is known as the LAMP stack. With 
Windows, the combination with Apache, MySQL, and PHP is known as WAMP.  
• 
For security, you should consider a UPS (battery backup), a locked server closet, and 
a firewall to protect your server from Internet intruders. 
• 
Your offices should have an Internet connection of at least 768 Kbit for both 
download and upload speeds, and you will need about 2 Mbits of download speed for 
every 25 employees, and about 1 Mbit of upload speed for every 10 concurrent 
remote CRM users.  
• 
Appendices A and B include the procedural details of the actual installation of 
SugarCRM within the Linux and Windows Server environments respectively.  
In the next chapter, we assume you have now deployed SugarCRM, and go on to start using your 
new CRM in earnest, explaining a lot of the basic CRM terminology and concepts as we go along. 
Why is a CRM so much better than a contact manager? What are the normal navigation techniques 
for operating a CRM? How do I get my data into a CRM? All these topics and more are coming 
up next. 
 
55

 

4 
CRM Basics 
Now that we have covered some of the essentials of what a CRM offers, itemized the value to a 
smaller business of a web-based CRM such as SugarCRM, and studied the theoretical aspects of 
how CRMs need customizing to properly fit each business that uses them, it is time we made use 
of the SugarCRM server we deployed in the last chapter.  
In this chapter, we will take a guided tour of SugarCRM. Our task-oriented, systematic treatment 
will also relate the specifics of the SugarCRM system and its user interface with the general 
principles of CRM systems.  
This chapter will cover the basic CRM functions and show how they are interpreted and 
performed within SugarCRM. These basic CRM concepts include: 
• 
Common CRM processes and terminology  
• 
Creating accounts and contacts, and relating multiple contacts to a single account 
• 
Following links between related data to answer questions as quickly as your mind 
can raise them 
• 
Creating and tracking the Sales Pipeline from leads to opportunities to contacts  
and accounts 
• 
Creating and monitoring sales activities and accumulating activity history 
• 
Scheduling activities with colleagues by referring to their calendars 
In the next chapter, we will complete the exploration of how SugarCRM delivers on comprehensive 
CRM functionality by dealing with the more advanced CRM topics such as Interface Consolidation, 
Project Management, Document Management, and Customer Service Management. 
CRM Processes and Terminology 
At its fundamentals, a CRM is a system that first needs to be taught all there is to know in terms of 
the static information about your accounts and the contacts you have at those accounts. Once the 
CRM gains that knowledge, it leverages that knowledge by using it to organize and retain 
information about all your daily business activities as they relate to those accounts and contacts.  

CRM Basics 
 
58 
After just a few weeks of regular use, a quick look at the CRM can remind you about the history 
of successful and unsuccessful sales opportunities in your accounts, what each account's service 
history has been like, and what new sales opportunities are coming up in each account.  
Let us take a quick look at SugarCRM to get an initial feel of the powerful organizational and 
managerial boost it will give your business.  
Accessing the SugarCRM System 
Before you begin using the system, ensure that you have the appropriate software installed and 
configured on your system. All you will need is: 
• 
A current web browser running on your computer: SugarCRM has been tested 
with and supports a variety of browsers. The following browsers are known to work 
with SugarCRM: 
o 
Mozilla version 1.7 and higher: www.mozilla.org/mozilla1.x 
o 
Firefox version 1.0 and higher: www.mozilla.org/firefox 
o 
Konqueror version 3.2 and higher: www.konqueror.org 
o 
Microsoft Internet Explorer version 5 and higher: www.microsoft.com/ie 
You may encounter problems if you try to access SugarCRM using older web browsers 
like Internet Explorer 4 or Netscape 4.x. If you are unsure about which web browser 
version you are using, click Help | About… or similar options on the menu bar in your 
browser. The version number will be displayed. 
• 
JavaScript and cookies support enabled in your web browser: Both JavaScript and 
cookies support must be enabled in the security settings of your browser and are 
usually turned on by default. 
If you encounter problems accessing the system, check your browser configuration to 
ensure both JavaScript support and cookies support are enabled. (See Tools  | Internet 
Options | Privacy and Security tabs in Internet Explorer, or Tools | Options  | Privacy and 
Web Features tabs in Firefox.) 
• 
Network access to a server that is running the SugarCRM software: Your 
system or network administrator will be able to provide you with an Internet address 
(URL) at which the system can be accessed.  
Next, we need to log in to the system, and choose a language, and a theme (which determines how 
the application will look). If you do not provide the correct user name and password, SugarCRM 
will not allow you access to the system. 
Using the admin area within the system, your system administrator assigns log in information—a 
user name and password—to every system user. This admin area is only accessible to users with 
administrator privileges. If you haven't got your user name and password combination, contact 
your system administrator. 

Chapter 4 
To access SugarCRM, type the URL into your web browser's address bar. You should see a screen 
similar to the one below. This is the SugarCRM log in screen. If you do not see a log in screen, 
verify that you have entered the URL correctly. If you did not make a typing mistake, contact your 
system administrator to verify that you have the correct URL. 
If you click on 
, you may also choose the 
Options
Language you want to use with the system (US 
English, Franco Canadien, Espanola or others that may be available on your particular system) and 
the Theme or visual appearance you want the system to have. The theme illustrated throughout 
this guide is 
 
—a theme something like the default Sugar theme, but developed at 
High Contrast
The Long Reach
 
 Corporation specifically for this book so that the screen images in the book 
look good in print. Other themes include Links (golf theme), Shred (winter sports), Pipeline 
(surfing theme), and many more. 
 
SugarCRM Log In Screen 
Once the SugarCRM log in screen (shown above) appears, follow the following steps to log in:  
1. Type your user name in the User Name box. (Use admin for now—the examples in 
this chapter assume that you log in as 
). 
admin
2. Type your password in the Password box. (Again—use admin for now. Note that 
system passwords are case-sensitive). 
3. Select the 
 and 
Language
Theme that you want to use (if applicable).  
4. Click the 
 button. 
Login
 
59

CRM Basics 
A Quick Tour of SugarCRM 
When you log into the system, the Home tab is displayed, as shown below. Various key elements 
of the screen layout are highlighted, as follows:  
 
The Home Tab Screen: Sugar Theme 
 
60 

Chapter 4 
Navigation Tabs
1. 
: Click to choose a module to display. A drop-down menu lets you 
select other modules if you have more than 12 tabs. 
Navigation Shortcuts Box
2. 
: Specific shortcuts that are useful within each module. 
Last Viewed
3. 
: A useful trail of recent records you have viewed. 
Search Box
4. 
: Search for a text string within key data held by SugarCRM. 
System Links
5. 
: 
, 
My Account Employees, 
, and 
. The 
Logout
About
Admin link is only 
available to users defined as system administrators. 
Quick New Item Box
6. 
: Quick data-entry box to create a new item for the current module. 
Main Screen Body
7. 
: On the Home tab, this includes 
, 
, 
Cases Opportunities
Appointments, 
, 
Leads Tasks, a monthly calendar, and the sales pipeline graph. 
The screen layout in the Home tab uses the same layout as all of the other tabs. As you move 
between the tabs, the shortcuts available in the shortcuts list change according to the specific tab, 
and the main screen body displays the information indicated by the tab name. The Quick New Item 
box changes to offer quick access for creating new items based on the tab, for example, New 
Contact, 
,
New Account  New Opportunity, and so on.  
Themes 
When you were logging in, we mentioned that you could choose an alternative theme if you 
wanted to. Let us take a quick look at that before we carry on. In the System Links area of the 
screen (top right), click on the Logout link. (Note that when you are finished working with the 
system, you should always log out of the system rather than just closing your web browser. When 
you log out, the system performs several clean-up procedures, and then automatically returns the 
web browser window to the log in screen.)  
This time on the log in screen use the Options link to choose the 
 theme, and then log in.  
Links
 
61

CRM Basics 
 
The Home Tab Screen: Links Theme 
Notice how many aspects of the SugarCRM screen can be varied by changing the theme. The 
navigation tabs are no longer tabs, but a side menu system. Essentially, the shortcuts have 
switched positions with the tabs. In addition, the color scheme and graphics are very different.  
No matter what theme you use, the same CRM information is displayed. It is just laid out 
differently. Pick the theme that you prefer, or change it now and then to keep some fun in your use 
of the CRM. 
For the rest of this chapter, we will assume that when you installed SugarCRM, you also opted to 
install the sample data. (See the Populate database with demo data? checkbox on the screen 
entitled Step 3: Database Configuration within the appendices on installing SugarCRM.) Later on, 
we will quickly re-do the installation to remove the demo data, and then import your own 
organization's data, as you get closer to your live implementation. 
 
62 

Chapter 4 
CRM Navigation Basics: Accounts and Contacts 
So—here we are—SugarCRM!  
Let's get a little more familiar with using the system. First, (and I will assume you have switched 
back to the normal Sugar Theme from now on) try clicking on a few of the module tabs—such as 
 and 
Accounts
Contacts. Different sets of information are organized within different modules, and 
each module has a tab you click on to use it. The module screens are displayed within your 
browser very promptly after you click on them—SugarCRM is nice and fast! In addition, your 
browser caches certain graphical portions of the screen displays for each module, so each screen 
gets even faster after the first time you access it.  
Notice the arrow after the last tab on the right. This leads to a list of modules there was not enough 
room to display. If you have cause to use any one of those modules, it becomes sticky, and 
replaces the last module tab shown before the arrow. Sugar Open Source 4.0 contains the 
following 16 user modules:  
• 
Home 
• 
My Portal 
• 
Calendar 
• 
Activities (Meetings, Calls, Tasks, and Notes) 
• 
Contacts 
• 
Accounts 
• 
Leads  
• 
Opportunities 
• 
Cases 
• 
Bug Tracker 
• 
Documents 
• 
Emails 
• 
Campaigns (and Prospects, Prospect Lists) 
• 
Projects (and Project Tasks) 
• 
RSS 
• 
Dashboard 
Sugar Pro 4.0 adds modules for products, quotes, forecasts and reports, as well as team sales and 
workflow features.  
The system administrator can control which users will be able to see and use which modules, so 
for many users there will be no need for the arrow to link to extra modules, as they will often have 
no more than will fit comfortably on the screen. In addition, if a theme is used that lists the 
modules on the left side like a menu system (such as 
 or 
Links
Pipeline), all the modules to which a 
user has access are always displayed.  
 
63

CRM Basics 
List and Detail View Screens 
Now click on the Accounts tab. This shows you a list of all accounts in the system. Screens that 
show a list in SugarCRM are called list views. This screen is the Accounts List view. If you have 
the demo data installed, your screen should look something like this: 
 
The Accounts Module: List View 
 
64 

Chapter 4 
Let's imagine that what we are looking at is a list of RayDoc's accounts—a sample set of accounts, 
contacts, leads, opportunities, and so on for the RayDoc organization. Clearly, the names of the 
companies are made up as we cannot expose information about real companies here, but the 
sample data here has been created to demonstrate all the key capabilities of the system needed to 
make your CRM deployment a success.  
At the top right of the list of accounts, you can see some controls and information that indicate that 
there are actually 97 accounts in the system, and that you are currently looking at accounts 1 
through 20. 
 and 
Next
Previous controls are provided to step through sections of the full list of 
accounts, as well as controls to go to the overall start or end of the list.  
You can also see an 
 
Account Search panel at the top of the screen, which is useful for finding a 
specific account by the name of the account, or by other fields such as the city or phone number. It 
is important to understand that this search panel is really a filter panel—only accounts that match 
the filter criteria will be listed. More than one limiting criterion may be applied—you could look 
for all accounts that start with a, and which are in New York City, and all accounts that satisfy 
these constraints (filter conditions) will be listed. To go back to seeing the entire list of accounts, 
simply click on the 
 control in the search panel to remove all filter conditions.  
Clear
To access a more comprehensive set of filter conditions, click on the 
 control in the 
Advanced
Account Search panel.   
It is important to understand that the Accounts List shown to you by default is the entire set of accounts 
in the system. Sales people using the system may wish to focus exclusively on their own accounts, 
which they may do by selecting the Only My Items checkbox in the search panel. 
As you move your mouse pointer around within your browser window, you can see that each 
account name has a link on it. If you click on the name of an account, you will go to the detail 
view for that account. Let's do that now, and click on 2 Big Consolidation Corp. You should see 
something like this: 
 
65

CRM Basics 
 
 
The Accounts Module: Detail View 
 
66 

Chapter 4 
Main Panel and Sub-Panels 
Examining the Accounts Detail screen, we see a block of general information about the account at 
the top, and a series of blocks of information below that with related information, such as 
, 
Activities History, Contacts, Opportunities, 
, 
, and so on. 
Leads Cases
The block of general information at the top is referred to as the main panel. The blocks of related 
information below are called sub-panels—so we see a sub-panel for 
, one for 
Activities
History, 
another for Contacts, and so on. 
We also see a few buttons just above the main panel—
, 
 and 
Edit Duplicate,
Delete. These buttons 
act on this specific account record, allowing us to edit, duplicate, or delete it.  
Just above each sub-panel, we also see a number of buttons. Let's take a look at the Activities 
sub-panel as a specific example. This sub-panel offers buttons for Create Tasks, Schedule Meeting, 
Schedule Call, and Compose Email. While we will discuss these different activities in more detail 
shortly, for now it is enough to understand that these buttons allow you to add new activities into this 
detail view screen, which are automatically linked to or associated with this particular account.  
Within the Activities sub-panel, notice that there are links on the 
, 
Subject Contact, and Related to 
fields within each open activity. Clicking on these links will take us to the detail view of the activity, 
the related contact, or the related account. This is your first glimpse of the enormous power of the 
links within a CRM that speed up the navigation between related items of information.  
Still within the 
 sub-panel, to the right of each activity listed, notice the links 
 and 
Activities
edit
. These are provided to allow you to quickly edit or delete the activities.  
rem
For each of the other sub-panels, similar principals apply—buttons and links are provided to  
create new items of information related to the current account, to edit or remove those items of 
information, or to go to the full detail view of those related items of information. 
The detail view screen layout also includes the following additional handy controls: 
Hide Controls for each sub-panel
1. 
: Enabling the user to limit vertical screen 
scrolling to focus on the data that is important to them specifically, and to reduce the 
bandwidth requirements of each screen, which will increase system performance. 
Each hidden sub-panel may be restored by clicking on the Show link, which appears 
on collapsed or hidden sub-panels. Hiding a sub-panel is a sticky action—the 
sub-panel will stay hidden indefinitely until you click on the Show link.  
VCR Controls
2. 
: On each detail screen, there are 
 and 
Next
Previous links at the top 
(also known as nudge controls), which enable the user to step through records in a 
module at the detail view level, without having to return to the list view between 
each record. 
 and 
Start
End Controls are provided to go directly to the first and last 
records in a module. 
Return to List:
3. 
 This link at the top of each detail view may be used to return to the 
list view for that module.  
 
67

CRM Basics 
View Change Log
4. 
: Each module's change log tracks certain key field values on 
every record. A change log is automatically created each time any of these fields is 
changed, noting the field changed, the old and new values, the user that made the 
change, and the date of the change.  
Edit View Screens 
If you look on the left-hand side of your screen, you will see the navigation shortcuts box. From 
this menu (assuming again that you are using the standard Sugar theme), click on the Create 
Account shortcut. You will see the Account Edit view screen:  
 
The Accounts Module: Edit View 
To gain some first-hand experience we are going to create an account for RayDoc—even though 
we are imagining that this CRM contains the database for RayDoc and it is perhaps a little odd to 
have RayDoc as an account in its own CRM. 
Enter the data for the RayDoc business, as shown in the screenshot above, and then click on the 
 
68 
Save button. You will be directed to the Account Detail view screen for the RayDoc account.  
One important note at this point is that you have now saved some data within SugarCRM for the 
first time. In a browser-based system like SugarCRM, this data has not been saved on the PC or 
notebook you are using, but on the SugarCRM server instead, from which anyone in your  

Chapter 4 
company can retrieve it (if they are permitted). The beauty of this is that no matter where you are, 
if you can get access to an Internet-connected PC with a browser on it, you can access your 
SugarCRM system, and all the CRM data your company possesses. The PC you use to access the 
system does not have to have anything special installed on it—just a browser. Nor does the use of 
the system save any data on the PC used, other than a few user preferences as browser cookies.  
Now—click on the Create button in the Contacts sub-panel—we are going to add a new contact 
at RayDoc.  
 
The Contacts Module: Edit View 
Of course, that new contact can only be Doc himself! Enter his data as shown above. Note, as you 
do, that even though you started in the 
 module, the 
Accounts
Contacts tab is now highlighted and 
you are in that module as you enter the details of the new contact at RayDoc.  
Now click on the Save button to save Doc's contact record. Notice that in the Last Viewed area  
of the screen (above the shortcuts box) you are beginning to accumulate a list of the items of 
information you have been working with within the system. These are available as links, to take 
you back to any item of information you have been working with recently.  
 
69

CRM Basics 
 
 
Contact Linked to Account 
 
70 

Chapter 4 
You should now see a screen like the one opposite—showing the Account Detail view for the 
 account, with 
 
RayDoc
Doc Newhart as a contact at that account. To reinforce the ability to link 
back and forth, up and down, and sideways within SugarCRM (and any good CRM)—click on the 
contact name of Doc Newhart to link to his Contact Detail view screen. From that screen, click on 
the account name link, to come right back to the Account Detail view screen for RayDoc.  
Now—add yourself as another contact at RayDoc, repeating the process described above. You 
should now see two contacts listed in the Contacts sub-panel of the Raydoc Account Detail view 
screen. This is another important point. We have re-used all the basic account information in the 
main panel of the RayDoc account for a second contact. We did not have to type it in again. In 
addition, if any of the RayDoc account information changes, we will only have to edit the RayDoc 
account record, not the information we have about our contacts there. This is one of the key 
advantages of a CRM over a contact manager like Microsoft Outlook 2003—it understands that 
accounts and contacts are two separate types of information that are linked together, not crammed 
together into one unsatisfactory amalgam.  
Linking and Searching 
Again, to reinforce the speed and power of navigation in SugarCRM, browse to your own contact 
information. Then back to the Account Detail view. Then on to Doc's contact record. A contact 
can lead to an account, which can lead to other contacts at that account—all extremely quickly. 
Moreover, very relevant to your everyday work needs.  
Go ahead now and explore by yourself the Contact List view. Notice that you can search for a 
specific contact in the Contact Search panel above the list of contacts. Click on the small 
highlighted Advanced link (under the 
 button) to get a more comprehensive search capability.  
Clear
 
71

CRM Basics 
 
 
Contact List View with Advanced Search 
 
72 

Chapter 4 
After his installation had been completed, and he had been using the system for a few months, I 
asked Doc what he liked most about using his SugarCRM system, and his favorite feature was "I 
can search contacts for the name of someone I've only met once or twice. I only know his or her 
first name, but that is OK—it can show me everyone with the same first name in the system right 
away. I pick the one I want from the list and link to his or her detail view, from which I can call 
him or her. If he or she is out, I link to his or her account detail view, and it shows me whom else 
we know in that company and I link to one of them and call them. I do this maybe fifty times a day, 
and so it makes a huge difference to me that I can do it so quickly and so naturally. I swear this 
system thinks the same way I do!" 
Now I know Doc fairly well, and this last point may not be the best recommendation for 
SugarCRM—but I know what he means! 
The Sales Pipeline: Leads and Opportunities 
Now that you have practiced putting accounts and contacts into the system, and linking contacts  
to accounts, let's go on to learn about a few more key types of information your CRM can organize 
for you.  
Within just about all CRM systems, there exist the dual concepts of Leads and Opportunities. 
They are kept as separate items of information, even though they may sound very similar to each 
other. The generally accepted distinction between them is that a lead is a person's name, and 
company name, which have come to you in a way such that you cannot be certain they are 
interested in your products and services. An opportunity is what a lead becomes once you have 
been in touch with the person and confirmed that they do have a genuine and qualified interest in 
what your company has to offer (they have a real business problem, and the money to fix it, and 
you're talking to someone who has the power to do so). 
In CRM terms, the process of selling goods and services to your customers comes down to a series 
of steps that look something like this:  
1. Acquiring and tracking leads 
2. Qualifying them as real opportunities 
3. Quantifying these opportunities, and setting an expected closing date for them  
4. Aggregating all opportunities together into a sales pipeline to see the big picture  
5. 
Closing the opportunities as sales 
 
73

CRM Basics 
 
74 
By having an automated system that remembers all your leads, can convert them into opportunities 
once qualified, can add them all up to show a sales pipeline, and can accumulate a history of 
account activities, your business gains three big improvements.  
1. You can now see how business is shaping up over the next couple of months in a 
more tangible and quantifiable way than ever before. The sales pipeline is your 
distant early warning system—it shows you when business levels are falling off, or 
growing faster than anticipated. In a smaller business, it is your best friend when it 
comes to business planning, giving you a more detailed and distant view into the 
future, helping you to  make appropriate staffing and expenditure decisions.  
2. All your sales leads, opportunities, and account history are now formally recorded in 
a central system that the business owns. Your vulnerability to threats and blackmail 
from sales personnel, or to the sudden defection of sales personnel, is much reduced. 
If a sales person leaves the organization, you still have all the leads and opportunities 
the business paid to develop, and the account history needed to help a new sales 
person take over the account quickly and effectively.  
3. The sales person on an account is not the only person in the organization with access 
to details of activity history. Accounting and service personnel who have direct 
customer contact can now base their decisions about grey-area judgment calls in the 
account on hard information from the account history.  
How did all of this work for Doc when he first came to grips with his new system? Our initial task 
was to find all his leads. Most of them were fairly dormant in the inboxes of the sales staff—
something to do on a slow day if they felt like it.  
So Doc had to round up all the sales people and harvest all these leads. On an ongoing basis, most 
leads came to the company (generally from suppliers that RayDoc partners with) and not the 
individual sales people, and so could be entered in the system by Kay, the receptionist, in her 
spare time and then assigned to a sales person, ensuring they would be tracked. Leads that came 
directly to a sales person would have to be entered by that sales person—and this would be a 
matter for training in the near future. 
Once all the historical leads were gathered together, Kay typed them in for us. Now, let's type in 
one ourselves to get familiar with the process. Click on the Leads tab, and then on the Create New 
Lead shortcut on the left-hand side of the screen. Notice that there are shortcuts for importing 
leads in bulk, and for creating a lead from a vCard (an electronic business card, such as you may 
save from Outlook, or get beamed to you from a Palm organizer).  

Chapter 4 
 
 
Lead Edit View: Data Entry Screen 
Using the screen pictured above, enter the data for our new lead, and click on the Save button. 
You now see the Lead Detail view screen, with its main panel, and sub-panels for Open Activities 
and History. These sub-panels will let you track what your sales people are doing with the leads 
you pass on to them.  
One key field on each lead is the status field. It is set to New when a lead is first entered, and then 
to 
 when the lead is assigned to a particular sales person. It becomes 
Assigned
Converted if the lead 
is converted into an opportunity. Another key field is the Lead Source. Between these two fields 
you can track what proportion of leads that you get are converted into opportunities (and/or sales) 
and how that proportion varies according to the source of the lead. Gaining empirical knowledge 
that identifies your most effective and successful lead sources is a key business enabler. 
 
75

CRM Basics 
To continue our worked example of the lifecycle of a lead, let's imagine that Doc or one of his 
sales people calls up Mr. Namath from the lead overleaf, and after talking with him for a bit, 
decides that SPAR Aerospace is a genuine potential new account for RayDoc, and that the lead 
with Fred Namath should be converted to an opportunity. At the top of the Lead Detail view 
screen is a Convert Lead button. Click on it now, and you should see a screen like this:  
 
Lead Conversion Screen 
 
76 

Chapter 4 
As you can see, converting the lead basically turns the lead into a contact, and optionally will also 
create an account, an opportunity, and even an appointment. In the Related Records sub-panel, 
check 
 (it is checked by default), 
Create Account
Create Opportunity, and Create Appointment if 
you want to generate those items of information as well. You can even create a note or attachment 
(an uploaded file, such as a Microsoft Word or Excel file) to be linked to the 
 record.  
Account
Based on Doc's conversation with Fred, we have chosen to click on the Create Opportunity box, 
and enter data for an opportunity to sell some replacement windows. Note that you must put in an 
amount for the opportunity, and an expected close date. When you are done, click on the Save 
button to save all the new information records at once. You see a screen like this, which confirms 
the successful lead conversion:  
 
Lead Converted Successfully 
Now click on the 
 tab, and use the search panel to find the account record for 
Accounts
SPAR 
Aerospace. Click on that record to view the detail screen, which should look like this (Note that 
we have collapsed a few sub-panels to shorten the image):  
 
77

CRM Basics 
 
 
New Account, with Linked Contact and Opportunity 
Notice that in addition to the original lead, we now have an account, plus a contact and an 
opportunity linked to that account. Again, just practice navigation a little. Click on the 
opportunity. The resulting screen shows the contact. Click on the contact. That screen shows the 
account. Click on the account. We are back where we started. This is the joy of CRM—everything 
is connected, and from one small item of information, you can link to volumes of account history, 
contact history, related contacts, and related opportunities or leads.  
 
78 

Chapter 4 
Aggregating Opportunities: The Sales Pipeline 
Now that we have looked at creating accounts, contacts, and leads, and converting leads into contacts 
and opportunities and accounts, we have all of the capabilities we need to start assembling a sales 
pipeline. Now click on the Opportunities tab to see a list of all the opportunities in our demonstration 
RayDoc set of data. You should see a screen like this:  
 
Opportunities List View 
Clearly, being able to see all the opportunities we have identified for future business is very 
useful. But there are drawbacks. We can't see all of the opportunities on this screen—only 20  
 
79

CRM Basics 
of the 98 in the system. We have to page back and forth to see them all. We also see an estimated 
value for each opportunity, an estimated close date for the business, and the sales stage to indicate 
where we are in the sales process for each opportunity, but we see no percentage probability of 
closing the sale, and no automatic totaling of the opportunities. We might also like to see a total of 
the opportunities weighted by the percentage probability of closing them—to gain a more realistic 
expectation of future sales.  
First let's take a detailed look at an opportunity to understand what information is kept for an 
opportunity. We generated an opportunity in the last section, but without actually using the 
Opportunity Edit view screen. Click on the first opportunity listed to see an Opportunity Detail view 
screen, and then click on the 
 button to go to the 
 view. You should see a screen like this: 
Edit
Edit
 
Opportunity Edit View 
One key attribute of an opportunity is the sales stage. In the screen above you can see the 
drop-down box for sales stage with all the options visible. (These options can be customized if 
they do not match how you do business, of course.) 
Other important information contained in an opportunity is the estimated close date for the 
business, the next step to close the business, the percentage probability of closing the business, the 
lead source for this opportunity, and the type of business (new or existing business). We are done 
with this Opportunity Edit view. Click on the 
 button to exit the screen.  
Cancel
As useful as the Opportunities List view screen is, there are clearly a number of views and what-if 
questions not addressed by the list view screen that we would love to apply to our opportunity data: 
• 
What is our best lead source?  
• 
What is our total sales pipeline?  
• 
How does it break down by month for estimated close dates?  
• 
At which stage of the selling process do most of our opportunities come in? 
• 
Who are the most successful sales people at the moment?  
 
80 

Chapter 4 
The Dashboard  
To address the need to answer questions like this, high quality CRMs have a graphical dashboard 
that shows visual breakdowns of opportunity data, totaling them overall and sub-totaling by key 
indicators such as sales stage, lead source, and account representative.  
You may have already seen one such graphical chart on the Home tab screen, but to see the 
complete set of charts, click on the Dashboard tab. You will see a screen like this:  
 
Dashboard 
The four charts displayed are:  
 
81

CRM Basics 
The Pipeline by Sales Stage chart: This chart is the one repeated on the 
 
82 
• 
Home tab 
except that the one on your Home tab shows only your own opportunity data, not the 
entire organization's data. This chart is usually used by the owner of a small 
business, or the sales manager to gain an overall sense of the maturity of the sales 
pipeline. He or she can answer the question—"Is there enough future business to 
meet sales targets?" In addition, the stacked bar chart presentation gives a visual 
indication of which sales people have the greatest dollar value of opportunities, and 
if some of them have an undue proportion of their opportunities in the early stages. 
In Doc's case, he uses this chart to watch out for any sales person who may be 
bluffing about how much business he or she has coming in—as this normally shows 
up by a lot of opportunities, most of which are in the early sales stages.  
The Pipeline by Sales Stage chart

Chapter 4 
The Opportunities by Lead Source by Outcome chart: This chart is handy for 
giving you a quick visual indicator of which lead sources are producing the greatest 
value of opportunities, and the color-coded stacked bars show you if some lead 
sources are especially good or bad at being converted into sales. It shows Doc if his 
money is better spent advertising replacement doors and windows in a home 
improvement magazine, or on the TV Guide channel in his local market.  
• 
 
The Opportunities by Lead Source by Outcome chart
 
83

CRM Basics 
The Pipeline by Month by Outcome chart: This chart shows how your next few 
months of sales are shaping up. The stacked bars break down the opportunities 
according to whether their sales stage is closed won, closed lost, or anything else 
(meaning the opportunity has its expected close date in the month shown, but it has 
still yet to close in favor of our business, or a competitor).  
• 
 
The Pipeline by Month by Outcome chart
The All Opportunities by Lead Source chart: This chart provides a useful 
pie-chart visualization of all opportunities, breaking them down by lead source.  
• 
 
84 

Chapter 4 
 
 
The All Opportunities by Lead Source chart
Each of these charts has an edit control at the top right that allows you to set a few filters on the 
data driving the chart. Opportunities shown on the charts can be limited to those from specific 
sales people, to opportunities due to close in specific time frames, or to those opportunities with 
specific sales stages, or from specific lead sources. 
Each chart also provides you with the ability to mouse over areas of interest, to see more 
information. If on the first chart you roll your cursor over those leads in the prospecting stage, the 
area under the chart will show how many opportunities there are in this stage, and their total value. 
Lastly, and most usefully, each chart offers a facility known as drilldown. If you roll your mouse 
cursor over the opportunities at the prospecting stage in the first chart again, and this time click on 
the bar in the chart that represents those opportunities, the system will bring up the 
 
Opportunities
List screen, automatically filtered to show exactly those opportunities that are behind the chart's 
graphical representation of the data. While some people understand information more easily from 
a graphic, and some from numbers and text, this drilldown system would appear to represent the 
best of both worlds.  
Taken together, these capabilities of the dashboard should significantly improve your ability to 
know what to expect in sales for the next few months, to understand what lead generation 
strategies are working most effectively for you, and to root out problems with sales people who 
may habitually overstate the value or probability of their sales pipeline or repeatedly fail to close 
business by forecast dates.  
 
85

CRM Basics 
For the sales people themselves, this tool can act as a motivator to generate new opportunities,  
or to close business that is visibly lagging against its forecast dates, as well as a handy way to 
organize the information on their opportunities.  
Calendaring 
Being in business is a large series of small events—meetings, telephone calls, notes, emails, or 
reminders to revisit an issue in a few months. A very important aspect of any CRM is the ability  
to schedule these activities, and to associate them with the accounts and contacts they involve.  
In SugarCRM, there is a full group calendaring system that is capable of scheduling all these 
activities and helping staff schedule meetings or telephone calls at times when people are free to 
attend them. It will also make a note of these meetings and calls in the calendars of all those 
invited to take part in them.  
Click on the 
 tab now, and you should see a screen like this: 
Calendar
 
Calendar: Day View 
This is the default view for the Calendar tab—the day view for today's date. As you can see, there 
are buttons to see views for the current week, month, or even year. In addition, within each of 
these views, there are nudge controls to go to the previous or next day, week, month, or year.  
Take a moment right now to click on the 
 
86 
week, month, and year buttons, to get familiar with the 
display layouts and the navigation buttons offered by the application. Notice that on each of these 
views, you can click on the number of any day to zoom to the day view for that date.  

Chapter 4 
The day view, unlike the week, month, or year views, also shows a list of current tasks down the 
right-hand side of the screen. These tasks are specific to the user currently logged in, as are the 
activities shown on the calendar.  
To see how the calendar works, let us make ourselves an appointment for tomorrow at 
 with 
11AM
Rachel Barnes of 360 Vacations to discuss their plans for renovations. From the current screen, 
click on the Next Day link. When you see the activities for that date, click on the 11:00 AM link on 
the left-hand side of the calendar display, and you will see a little pop-up box that lets you quickly 
schedule a call or meeting. Choose the radio button for Meeting, enter a subject for the meeting, 
and click on Save.  
You now can see the detail screen for the meeting, which should look something like this:  
 
Meeting Detail View 
To invite more attendees—either employees from your company (defined as users within the 
CRM system) or customers (from contact data within the CRM)—click on the Edit button, and go 
down to the Add Invitees area at the bottom of the screen. In this case, type Rachel into the first 
name box, and click on the Search button. Your screen should look like:  
 
87

CRM Basics 
 
 
Adding Invitees 
Now just click on the Add button to the right of Rachel Barnes' name to add her to the list of 
invitees for the meeting.  
Note that the small icon to the left of both 
 and 
Rachel
Rachelle tells you that they are contacts. 
Users would have the type of icon shown for the administrator. 
While in the Edit view for the meeting, you can also add more details to the record of the meeting 
that were not available on the little pop-up box when you created the meeting. You can specify an 
account related to the meeting, tune the duration of the meeting (it is set by default to an hour), 
enter a location for the meeting, and add people to or delete people from the list of invitees.  
To illustrate some of these capabilities, let us set the meeting duration to 90 minutes, and let's 
invite 
 
88 
Selena Gould from 
, while noting that this meeting concerns the 
 
360 Vacations
360
 account. When you are done, your Meeting Detail view should look like this: 
Vacations

Chapter 4 
 
 
Meeting with New Invitees, Duration, and Account 
Again, the power of the CRM to connect all your customer information together comes into play 
here. Click on the link 360 Vacations. You see the detail screen for that account, with a number of 
open activities, including the meeting you have just added. On that activity, it shows Rachel 
Barnes as a contact. Click on the link to her detail view, and you will see the new meeting also 
listed among her open activities. Now click on the subject of that meeting, and you return to the 
detail view for the meeting.  
This gives you an initial overview of the calendaring capabilities within SugarCRM. In the next 
section we will learn more about the various activities that users of the system can create and 
track—and we will learn more about the calendar then as well. 
 
89

CRM Basics 
 
90 
Sales Activities 
While we learned about the calendar in the previous section, we also learned something about the 
activities that may be defined and tracked within SugarCRM. The five different types of activities 
are Meetings, Calls, Tasks, Notes, and Emails. Let us now look at these activities in more detail. 
All five kinds of activities may be created and viewed within the Activities tab of the SugarCRM 
system. Click on the Activities tab now, and have a close look at the list of shortcuts available 
within this module. There are shortcuts to go to the list view for each of the five kinds of activities, 
or to create an activity of any kind except an email (for which you must go to the Emails tab). The 
Calls List view is the default screen you see when entering the Activities tab—and that is an 
example of something you might do differently for your business. Perhaps most of your 
employees would prefer to see a list of meetings or tasks as the initial screen.  
The email activities are something of a special case within SugarCRM, as they have their own tab 
in addition to their presence within the activities tab. You will notice that when you click on any 
of the email-related shortcuts, the Emails tab lights up to show that you are in the emails module.  
In a somewhat similar fashion, you will notice that if you click on any of the call-related or 
meeting-related shortcuts, the Calendar tab lights up to indicate that you are now within the Calendar 
module. So in effect, only tasks and notes are contained completely within the activities module.  
Activities are important within a CRM for two different reasons. Firstly, they are important to help 
everyone schedule their activities, and remind them of when they are coming up. The Home tab 
makes a point of highlighting My Upcoming Appointments, and My Open Tasks, to remind users 
when they log in of impending activities. Secondly, it is very important that each user's activities 
be scheduled within the CRM (as opposed to Outlook or the like), as when the activities have been 
completed, they still perform a very useful function by adding to the activity history for contacts 
and accounts. This activity history is vital to assist sales managers and general managers, as well 
as any sales personnel who inherit accounts from a previous sales person, in gaining a quick and 
comprehensive understanding of the status of an account. 
Let us look at the activities for 360 Vacations in a little more detail. Click on the last viewed entry 
for this account to get you there quickly—or click on the Account tab and then look them up. The 
top part of the screen should resemble this: 

Chapter 4 
 
 
Account Activity History 
Each activity has a small icon to the left showing whether it is a meeting, call, note, email, or task. 
In the Activities sub-panel, you will only see meetings, calls, and tasks. Emails and notes, as well 
as closed meetings, calls, and tasks, are all listed under the History sub-panel.  
 
91

CRM Basics 
We see our upcoming meeting listed in open activities, with Rachel Barnes linked to it, and a 
status showing Planned. To illustrate how account history works, let us pretend we have held that 
meeting, and click on the close box for that meeting—shown as an X. You get a chance to add any 
notes you might like to the record of the meeting, and then click on Save. Now the meeting is 
shown under the 
 
92 
History sub-panel, with a Held Status. 
Once your CRM has been in operation for a few months, with everyone in the company 
scheduling their activities in the system and gradually accumulating activity history for all 
accounts, your business will have acquired a remarkably valuable resource it has never had. 
Namely, a history for every account and contact that is searchable at any time of the day from any 
PC in the world, and will not go away when the sales person concerned leaves the firm.  
Creating a Note 
Let us explore some more types of activities, starting with notes.  
Imagine that when we met with 360 Vacations they discussed a significant renovation of their 
premises—including new doors, windows, and carpets. Rachel Barnes actually went through a 
PowerPoint slide show of the renovations that had artists' drawings of the resulting building, and a 
breakdown of the numbers and sizes of new doors and windows, and square footage of the new 
carpets needed.  
To make sure that anyone who is in contact with this account has access to this detailed 
information, let us make a note on the detail view of this account, and attach the PowerPoint slide 
show. In the History sub-panel, click on the 
 
 button. The 
Create Note or Attachment
Account Name 
is pre-filled. Select the contact, enter a subject for the note, and some documentation in the Note 
field for people reading the note, and then click on the Browse button to select a file to upload as 
an attachment to the note. Once you have selected a file, click on the Save button. The file will be 
uploaded, and the note will be saved, producing a screen that resembles this one:  
 
Note with Attachment 

Chapter 4 
Using the Last Viewed link, go back to the history sub-panel of the 360 Vacations detail view, and 
you can see the new note now included as part of the account history. Notice the little paperclip 
that indicates an attached file.  
Creating a Task 
Now that we have had a meeting, and added notes to the account history, we really need to assign 
ourselves a task to prepare a quotation for Rachel at 360 Vacations. From the Account Detail 
screen, go to the 
 sub-panel and click on the 
Activities
Create Task button. You will see the Task 
Edit view, which looks like this:  
 
Task Edit View 
As shown above, type in a 
, then select a 
Subject
Due Date & Time by clicking off the None 
checkbox at the end of the due date, and then selecting a date using the calendar pop-up. Within 
the calendar pop-up, you can move forward or backward through the calendar by month or year 
with the controls provided, and then click on the day you want, in order to select it.  
You can also set the Priority of the task, assign it a 
 (
Status Not Started, In Progress, Completed, 
, or 
Pending Input
Deferred), and enter a Description for the task.  
Press the Save button once you are done and, you are back on the Account Detail view for 360 
Vacations, with a new task in the 
 sub-panel. Now click on the 
Activities
Home tab, and you should 
see this task listed in your My Open Tasks area. As well, if you go to the Activities tab, and click 
on Tasks in the shortcut bar, you should see all your tasks listed out, including this one.   
 
93

CRM Basics 
Scheduling a Call or Meeting 
A few days pass, and Doc completes his proposal for Rachel before the due date he set himself. He 
then marks the task as completed, and wants to email the proposal to Rachel, and then call Rachel 
to talk about it. He emails the proposal to Rachel (see the section on managing emails coming up 
next), asking her when would be a good time for a call. She mails back with a time and date, and 
Ray needs to book that call into his calendar. He clicks on the 
 tab, and then on the 
Activities
 shortcut. He is presented with a screen like this: 
Schedule Call
 
Schedule a Call 
He starts entering the call by typing in a 
, and then setting a 
Subject
Date (using the calendar 
pop-up) and Time, and selecting an Account. Then he looks lower down on the screen, and realizes 
he has a problem. The start and stop time for his phone call are marked on the timeline of his day 
with a dark colored block. Unfortunately, there is a blue segment of his day marking a pre-existing 
commitment, and this call is on top of it. In this case, he emails Rachel and asks her if a little later 
at 13:00 the same day would work for her.  
 
94 

Chapter 4 
Your CRM lets you book calls and meetings that involve multiple employees and customer 
contacts by adding their names as Invitees at the bottom of the screen. Enter their first or last 
name, look them up, and add them to the call or meeting. To avoid scheduling conflicts, all 
employees have their free/busy status displayed in the same way Doc's was displayed.  
What is the point of adding customers as invitees, if you cannot see their calendar of commitments? 
Because the Send Invites button at the top of the screen lets you automatically email all attendees 
(employees or external contacts) so they know about the meeting and can accept it or reject it. As 
well, any employee invited to calls or meetings will see these activities scheduled on their home tab, 
where they have controls to accept them, accept them tentatively, or decline them. 
The following information is included in the email an invitee receives when the Send Invites 
button is used:   
• 
Who has issued the invite? 
• 
Is it for a meeting or a call? 
• 
What is the subject of the meeting or call? (In this case it would show as SugarCRM 
Call—Discuss Proposal) 
• 
What is the status of the meeting or call? 
• 
When does it start, and what is the duration? 
Three links are provided, to enable the recipient of the email to accept, tentatively accept, or 
decline the invitation.  
Note that at the time of writing the mechanism of accepting (or not) an invitation is not functional. 
SugarCRM intends to correct this shortcoming in a future release.  
Managing Emails 
In the last section, when Doc needed to email Rachel with the proposal, he was able to do the whole 
thing within SugarCRM. This is because SugarCRM includes its own ability to send outgoing 
emails, and then automatically link those emails to the account and contact records they involve.  
Let us go over how Doc would have sent his email. If it is still visible, click on the 
 
Last Viewed link 
to the 
 Account Detail view, or look up the account from within the 
360 Vacations
Accounts tab.  
Within the 
 sub-panel for that account, locate the 
Activities
Compose Email button, and click on it. 
You will see the Compose Email screen, which, when completed by Doc would have looked much 
like this:  
 
95

CRM Basics 
 
 
Compose Email 
Notice that Doc has used the Browse button to attach the proposal to the email. When he clicked 
on the Select button to choose whom to send it to, a short list of contacts at 360 Vacations popped 
up for Doc to choose.  
When Doc clicks on the Send button to send this email to Rachel, he will get a confirmation that 
the message has been sent. He can then link back to the 360 Vacations Account Detail record, and 
see that the email is now included in the History sub-panel for the account for the reference of 
anyone else at RayDoc who comes into contact with people from that account. 
As ever, the email activity is listed in the History sub-panel along with its related contact and 
account—making it easy to quickly navigate between the email, the related account and contact, 
and any other items of information that are in turn related to that contact or account.  
 
96 

Chapter 4 
Let us learn a little more about the email capabilities of SugarCRM. Click on the Emails tab, and 
then the All Emails shortcut within that module and you will see the list view screen for emails as 
shown below:  
 
Emails List View 
 
97

CRM Basics 
 
98 
In the list of emails, observe that each email is assigned a type—Draft, Archived, or Sent. Examine 
the shortcuts list closely—notice that you can compose an email, use All Drafts to see a list of only 
draft emails, choose All Emails to see the full Email List view, choose Email Templates to see a list 
of available email templates, create a new email template, or create an archived email.  
Within the Compose Email screen, as you can see a couple of pages back, you can compose an 
email and save it for now, without sending it. You use the Save Draft button at the top of the 
Compose Email screen to do that. Once you have saved a draft email, it can be displayed with all 
other draft emails by clicking on the My Drafts shortcut. To send the draft email, click on its 
subject from the list view screen, and when on the detail view screen, click on the Send button at 
the top of the screen. 
It is now clear what the Draft and Sent types of email are, but what is an Archived email? This is 
an email that you have received in your regular email reader, and want to file in the CRM system 
as part of account or contact history.  
To file an archived email, copy the text of the email from your email reader, and then click on 
Create Archived Email. You then select the To: and CC: recipients, type in the subject, paste in the 
main body of the email that you had copied, choose what Account, Bug, Opportunity, Case, Lead, 
Project, or Project Task to relate to the email, and click on the Save button.  
With the introduction of Sugar Open Source 4.0, a group of shortcuts was added that deals with 
your personal SugarCRM email inbox, your sent email, your draft emails, and your group inbox. 
Your Group Inbox allows you to belong to a group of users (such as a technical support group, a 
sales territory group, or an inside sales group) that jointly subscribe to a company email box (such 
as info@company.com, or support@company.com) and can move email between the group box and 
their personal email box, as well as other useful workflow functions. The system administrator 
creates and defines subscription to group email inboxes. 
Email Templates 
Email templates are referenced when composing an email (notice the Use Templates field on 
the Compose Email screen above). When you create an email template, you can insert variable 
placeholders for information such as first Name, Last Name, Address, or Email. The saved 
template can then be applied, and the variable placeholders filled with real data, when composing 
an email for one or more individuals, or in an emailing campaign for bulk marketing (dealt with 
later in this book).  

Chapter 4 
 
 
Email Template 
Advanced User Interface Features 
Before we leave this introductory chapter, we need to address some important SugarCRM 
user-interface features.  
 
99

CRM Basics 
Printing Information 
Most of the list view and detail view screens in the CRM have a print icon in the top right of the 
main body of the screen. Click on this icon to change the screen content to a more printer-friendly 
version of the same information, and then use the browser print button. The following image 
shows an 
 
 view screen transformed for printing: 
Account List
 
Account List View: Print Layout 
 
100 

Chapter 4 
Getting Help 
As with the 
 icon, most SugarCRM list and detail view screens contain a 
Print
Help icon in the top 
right of the main screen body. Click on the help icon to see this screen:  
 
Help Screen 
It is not really a normal help screen, but from this screen, you can link to many different 
documentation resources that can help resolve your questions or concerns.  
Exporting Information 
Essentially all list view screens within SugarCRM have a highlighted Export link at the top left 
and bottom left corners of the list of entries. (Note that not only the displayed items, but also the 
currently selected list are exported. You might have 200 accounts, with 35 selected because they 
are in the same state and with only 20 of those 35 shown on the current screen. Export will export 
35 account records in this case.)  
Use the 
 link to export your account information to a Comma Separated Values (CSV)
Export
 
format file (which may be easily read by Microsoft Excel). Try it—and open the exported file 
from your desktop using Excel to see what is in it. Here is a sample:  
 101

CRM Basics 
 
 
Exported account data in Excel 
 
102 

Chapter 4 
Updating Several Records at Once 
Each list view screen in SugarCRM has a feature that involves a checkbox at the left of each item 
in the list, and Update and Delete buttons (often accompanied by several fields) below the list.  
• 
The checkboxes are used to select entries in the list, and the buttons and fields at the 
bottom of the screen (often referred to as the Mass Update
 
 panel) are to enable you 
to either delete multiple entries at once, or to update multiple entries at once.  
• 
If we use the Account List view screen as an example, multiple accounts could be 
reassigned to another user, or assigned a new industry classification or type. Simply 
select a new account type, such as Customer, select several accounts via their 
checkboxes, and then click on the Update button.  
• 
Note that if the list has multiple pages of entries, only entries from the current page 
may be checked—once you navigate to the next page of entries, any checks on the 
previous page are forgotten.  
Input Business Card 
One of the best-kept secrets in SugarCRM is the Enter Business Card shortcut. It is available on 
the Home tab, and on the Contacts tab. This feature allows users to enter a new contact, but as 
seen below, also provides the option to create a new account, opportunity, and follow-up meeting, 
all in the same screen.  
 
Enter Business Card 
 103

CRM Basics 
Create from vCard 
On the 
 tab is a shortcut called 
Contacts
Create from vCard. This feature lets you create a contact 
very quickly if you already have a vCard from your contact. Many people these days have taken to 
attaching a vCard with their emails, so this can be a really quick and handy form of data entry for 
new contacts.  
If you have the vCard for a new contact on your desktop, for example, just click on the Create 
from vCard shortcut, and you will see the screen shown below. Then click on the Browse button, 
and from the pop-up file finder dialog box that comes up, find the vCard you want and select it. 
Then you arrive back at the SugarCRM screen—click on the 
 
Import vCard button, and voilà! You 
are done. 
 
Import Contact from vCard 
Quick New Item 
Just about every tab in SugarCRM has a Quick New Item box on the lower left side. This box will 
vary according to the module or tab you are in, in order to create a new item of the type 
appropriate to the tab, for instance, 
, 
, 
 
104 
New Contact New Account New Opportunity, and so on.  
It does not have all the fields possible to include in the new item, but all the mandatory fields are 
there, allowing you to quickly add a new item of information. A bit like a handy sticky note—it is 
there when you need it, and it keeps track of the new information so you don't lose it.  

Chapter 4 
Summary 
In this chapter, we covered the basics of using a CRM—entering information into the system, and 
navigating quickly through the linkages between related items of information. Some of the key 
topics dealt with included:  
• 
How to access the CRM. How to use different themes to brighten up the user 
interface, and the major components of the screen layout. 
• 
How to navigate the CRM, use the different module tabs, and the list, detail, and edit 
view screens for each module. 
• 
How to enter accounts and contacts, and the linkages between them. 
• 
What the structure of a main panel and related sub-panels of information on each 
detail view screen looks like. 
• 
How Leads become Opportunities, and Opportunities are aggregated to form the 
sales pipeline. 
• 
How Dashboard helps you visually interpret your sales pipeline, breaks it down by 
month and by sales person, and provides a distant early warning system for business 
upturns and downturns. 
• 
How to use the SugarCRM calendar to plan your business days, check for schedule 
conflicts, and consult your colleagues' calendars. 
• 
How to enter business activities within SugarCRM, and the value of accumulating 
activity history for all your accounts and contacts. 
• 
A number of special user-interface features designed to speed data entry and ease the 
execution of several common tasks. 
In the next chapter, we will erase the sample data in the CRM, import your own data, and then 
explore a number of the more advanced ways in which CRMs can assume a broader role within 
your business. 
 105

 

5 
Extending Your CRM's  
Business Role 
In the last chapter, we introduced the CRM basics of accounts, contacts, leads, opportunities, and 
the sales pipeline—as well as group calendaring of activities including meetings, calls, and tasks.  
In this chapter, we deal with the expansion of the role of your CRM system within your business 
beyond that of basic CRM functions. We will cover a number of other related applications that are 
commonly found in better CRM systems. These applications are frequently added to a CRM system 
to take advantage of the fact that the CRM system is in use by most people at a company and already 
contains all the information there is to know about the business's customers, partners, and suppliers. 
These advanced CRM topics include: 
• 
Marketing campaigns: Creating and running email marketing campaigns.  
• 
Document management: Filing version-controlled documents in a repository of 
operational, sales, and administrative reference material.  
• 
Project management: Tracking what projects are active, who is working on them, 
what tasks they involve, and how they are performing. 
• 
Customer service management: Tracking services cases and software bugs by 
account, creating an account service history.    
• 
Email reminders: As a part of the overall system workflow and function, automated 
email reminders may be sent to users when tasks are assigned to them.  
• 
Employee directory: A handy list of all employees, with their contact information, job 
title, department, etc. 
• 
Interface consolidation: Adding commonly needed but potentially unrelated 
capabilities into the CRM to create a single system that employees will want to remain 
connected to all day—a virtual focal point for your business. Capabilities such as an RSS 
News Reader and My Portal (Linking to External Sites) are discussed in this chapter.  
• 
Assessing Changes: Assessing the changes you need to make to your CRM to make 
it a better fit for your business. 
• 
Tuning your current CRM implementation: Using the Sugar Studio to define new 
fields, alter screen layouts, define new options on drop-down lists (and indeed, whole 
new drop-down lists), and altering what tabs within the system are seen by each user. 

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
 
108 
We will also go through the process of removing the sample data from your CRM installation, and 
importing your own account and contact data.   
In Chapter 6, we will complete our exploration of the capabilities of the SugarCRM software 
family by working through a number of business scenarios using the extended features provided 
by Sugar Pro (the commercial version of SugarCRM) as well as features of other SugarCRM 
commercial and open-source add-on modules.  
Importing your Data 
To start off this chapter, let's first get rid of the sample data in your SugarCRM installation. 
Throughout this chapter, we will be showing a number of worked examples of entering data into 
the system, and using data already in the system. However, it is time you start working with your 
own data in the CRM. So, while we will show examples of Doc working with his data in the 
system, you should be working with your own data so that activities meaningful to your own 
business are taking shape in the system.  
The first step is to re-install SugarCRM without the sample data. Then you will need to import 
your own data into the system.  
Depending on which operating system you have chosen for your SugarCRM server—Windows or 
Linux—refer now to Appendix A or Appendix B, which deal with the mechanics of installing 
SugarCRM.  
In Appendix A, for Linux, refer to the Install SugarCRM section and start at step 6, where you run 
install.php. You will have to refer to the section entitled Re-running the Installation to re-enable 
the ability to run the installer. 
For Windows Server installations, refer to Appendix B. You will need to re-enable the ability to 
run the installer. Refer to the section on Re-running the Installation. 
In either case, once the installer has been re-enabled, rerun the installation, but this time in the 
database configuration step do not check Create Database or Create User, do check Drop and 
Re-create Existing SugarCRM Tables, and do not check Populate Database with Demo Data. The 
fields for Database Name, User Name for SugarCRM, and Password for SugarCRM should all fill 
in automatically. Then just carry on with the installation until you complete all the steps. Then you 
can proceed to log back into SugarCRM—this time with no data.  
Now read through Appendix C, and import your account data, and then your contact data, into the 
SugarCRM system. The appendix also gives you instructions for exporting your account and 
contact data from your current contact manager (using Microsoft Outlook as an example), to feed 
the process of importing that data into SugarCRM.  
If you like, you can also import leads and opportunities into SugarCRM from Salesforce.com, or 
from a custom comma- or tab-delimited file. 
Once you have imported your own account and contact data, feel free to start adding in opportunities 
as well, so that the dashboard begins to reflect the true state of your business.  

Chapter 5 
Marketing Campaigns 
So far, we have seen how a CRM like SugarCRM can be useful at managing customer-related 
information and history, as well as tracking opportunities and a sales pipeline. Now, let's begin to 
explore how effective it can be to broaden the scope of a CRM—applying the detailed customer 
knowledge to tasks other than those within a narrowly defined CRM, and integrating other 
high-traffic applications to create an organizational nexus. Let's start with email marketing.  
A particularly powerful and potentially very profitable aspect of a CRM is the ability to conduct 
email marketing campaigns. At first sight, I suppose we should not be at all surprised at the idea of 
an email marketing campaign being developed in a CRM. After all, the CRM keeps track of leads 
and contacts, and has access to sending email. Let's study an email marketing campaign in detail, 
and see if it really is such a natural fit for a CRM. 
To illustrate how a marketing campaign is developed, managed, performed, and then tracked for 
success, we will develop a sample marketing campaign for RayDoc. While you follow the 
example in this book, you may wish to develop one for your own business in parallel. 
Targets versus Leads and Contacts 
To start, we need to understand a little new terminology. A new type of information is involved in 
creating a marketing campaign—the Target. Here's a quick overview of targets, and how they 
relate to leads and contacts.  
• 
Targets feed into a marketing campaign. Targets can come from rented lists, web 
registration forms, trade shows, your leads, or your contacts. You may or may not 
have an existing business relationship with the person. Let's say you create a 
campaign called My July Email Campaign and email a newsletter to a list of 12,000 
targets—comprising 10,000 email addresses you purchase as well as 2,000 existing 
customers who meet your target criteria. 
• 
Leads are the result of a campaign. They are people who respond to a campaign, but 
are not necessarily somebody you are selling to yet. A campaign can be an on-going 
inbound campaign like your standard website registration form. Alternatively, the 
campaign could be an outbound email campaign. Let's say you get 200 people who 
follow the link to the special website registration form for your My July Email 
Campaign, and complete and submit the form. These 200 people who just registered 
are now leads inside of Sugar with a lead source of the My July Email Campaign you 
initiated out of Sugar. 
• 
Now you start a lead qualification process by analyzing the information you 
collected about these leads. You find that 50 of these leads fit your target 
qualification criteria. You now assign these 50 leads to the appropriate sales people. 
• 
The sales people attempt to contact the leads and initiate a selling process. Let's say Doc 
speaks to one of these leads and the lead expresses an interest in learning more about the 
product. Doc will now convert this lead into a contact and create an opportunity.  
 109

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
To summarize, targets feed into campaigns, leads are the results of campaigns, and contacts are 
qualified leads that are interested in buying or have bought. Then leads, contacts, or any other list 
of names become the input material for you to assemble the target list for your next campaign. 
Now that you understand the theory, let's get some practice. Click on the Campaigns tab—you 
should see something like this:  
 
The Campaigns Screen 
In SugarCRM, you create a marketing campaign to manage an outbound email campaign, and the 
targets that you create and assign to that campaign. You can add targets to the target list for a 
campaign either by selecting them from contacts or leads, or by importing them in bulk from 
either Comma Separated Values (CSV) or Tab Separated Values (TSV) files.  
Let's start by creating a campaign for RayDoc.  
 
110 

Chapter 5 
Doc has just started to get supply of a new type of laminate wood flooring called Superflor that he 
is excited about. It has an excellent look and manufacturing quality to it, comes from one of his 
key suppliers, and he gets it at a very competitive price. He wants to get word out on it, and get 
some early sales to show to his supplier. 
To create a Superflor campaign, we click on the Create Campaign shortcut, and fill in the basic 
details for the campaign, like this:  
 
Creating a Campaign 
 111

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
When you are done, click on the Save button. You should see the Campaign details, which should 
resemble the following:  
 
Campaign Detail View 
Creating an Email Template 
There are many types of marketing campaigns. These include Telesales, Mail, Print, Web, Radio, 
and Television. For this campaign, we have chosen an Email campaign.  
To execute an email marketing campaign, Doc will need an email template. To create one, go to 
the Emails tab, and click on the Create Email Template shortcut. Fill it in like this:  
 
112 

Chapter 5 
 
 
Superflor Email Template 
Notice how variable fields were inserted in the text, using the controls to select fields from accounts 
or contacts, and the Insert button. This lets you customize the email for each target automatically.  
Creating an Email Marketing Program 
Next, go back to the Campaigns tab, and click on the Superflor Campaign. Although we have 
already indicated this is an email marketing campaign, we must click on the Create button in the 
Email Marketing subpanel, and fill in more details about the specific email marketing program 
within this overall campaign, like this:  
 
Create Email Campaign Details 
 113

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
Notice that you have to reference an email template, which is why it is easier to create it first—
although there is an option to create the template from inside this screen. You will also have  
to reference a User Mailbox. This will have to be configured beforehand by your system 
administrator as a mailbox with Bounce Handling as a permitted action. Now click on Save,  
and you should see the beginnings of your email campaign:  
Superflor Email Campaign Taking Shape 
Adding Targets to the Campaign 
Now we need to see some targets for this email marketing campaign. First, let's create a target list 
to hold all the target prospects we identify for this campaign. Click on the Create Target List 
shortcut, and fill in the name Superflor Targets and description for the list, and save it.   
 
114 

Chapter 5 
Next, you need to import, or type in, the data for some target prospects using the Import shortcut, 
or the Create Target shortcut. Here is the list view screen for targets, with the first target added in:  
Targets List View 
Next, you need to select some targets from the general list of targets above, as well as any leads 
and contacts that you would like to include in the campaign, and add all of these people to the 
Superflor Targets list. You do that by opening up the detail view of the Superflor Targets list, and 
in turn, clicking on the Select button for each of Targets, Contacts, Leads, and even Users—and 
selecting whomever you wish from those lists. This will produce a detail view for the Superflor 
Targets list that resembles this:  
 115

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
 
 
Superflor Targets List
Now that we have selected some targets (in practice, of course, you would select many more) we 
need to add them into the Superflor marketing campaign. So click on the Campaigns tab, choose 
this particular campaign, and then in the Targets List subpanel, click on the Select button to select 
the list we just prepared. Note that you can add more than one target list here—so if you have 
them separated out by geography or some other criterion, you can include several lists here to 
make up the full campaign.  
Here is the Superflor campaign with its email marketing programs subpanel, and its reference to 
the Superflor email template, and the Target List subpanel filled out as well.  
 
116 

Chapter 5 
 
Superflor Marketing Campaign with Targets 
The Mass Emailing Queue 
Now that we have edited the email template to be used, created the overall marketing campaign, 
and attached the email marketing program information and a targets list, how do we send the 
actual emails? On the Campaign Detail view screen, click on the Schedule button. This will place 
all the emails from this campaign into the Mass Email Queue. When the day and time comes that  
is specified in the email-marketing subpanel, the status of the email-marketing program will 
automatically become In Progress (it is initially set to In Queue). It will be changed to Sent once 
all the emails have been sent. If you have administrative access for the system, look in the Mass 
Email Manager section within Admin and you will see something like this showing the mass 
email queue:  
 117

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
 
Mass Email Marketing within Administration 
On this screen the administrator can observe the action of the mass email queue mechanism, and 
also delete any emails as desired.  
Tracking a Campaign 
You will have noticed, at the bottom of the main panel for a marketing campaign, these two fields:  
• 
Tracker Link Text: This is the text to be displayed for the hyperlink to that page on 
his public website—something that is more presentable than the actual address itself. 
• 
Tracker Re-Direct URL: This contains a hyperlink to which the SugarCRM campaign 
tracker software will redirect the user, once it has counted his or her click for the 
purposes of campaign tracking. In our example, if Doc wants his targets to click on a 
link in the email and wind up at a page on his public website, then the address of that 
page on his public website should be entered into the Tracker Re-Direct URL field. 
Document Management 
I think we can all remember promises of the paperless office—always just a few years around the 
corner. By now, most of us have come to accept that in reality, one thing any business simply 
cannot do without is paper, whether it is for hard copies of presentations, for business proposals 
and quotations, or for financial transactions. However, we can still try to cut down on it. 
 
118 

Chapter 5 
SugarCRM has the ability to manage and maintain a repository of revision-controlled documents 
within it. This ensures that anyone in the business with system access, no matter where they are or 
what time of the day it is, can instantly access electronic copies of the business's important 
documents and know that they are getting the correct version of these documents as well.  
Just knowing that everyone in the company is looking at the most recent employee handbook, has 
all the latest medical insurance claim forms, and has access to all the latest sales collateral, is a 
huge step for the typical small business. Knowing that they can access these documents anytime, 
anywhere—Priceless! 
Knowing that your sales people can remotely pick up brochures and presentations they did not 
think they would need for a customer they are out visiting—just this one thing—how much could 
it make your company this year? 
With luck, you now agree that there is significant business value in being able to access key 
business documents via the CRM. Now the question is how do we do it? To begin, let's click on 
the Documents tab, and put one of Doc's new Superflor brochures into the CRM.  
Document List View 
This is what the document list view looks like. Notice the shortcuts to Create a Document, or to 
see the Documents List, as well as to Mail Merge. Let's add a new document by clicking on the 
Create Document shortcut.  
 119

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
 
Creating a New Document 
In the above screen, simply type in the Document Name and Revision, select the Category, 
Subcategory, and Status, set a publish date (defaults to today anyway), and then click on the 
Browse button to find the file you want to upload to the SugarCRM server. Once you find the file 
you want, and the rest of the fields on the screen above have been filled in, click on the Save 
button. The document will be uploaded (there may be a lengthy pause, depending on the size of 
the document and the speed of your Internet connection) and you will see the document details:  
 
120 

Chapter 5 
 
Document Detail View 
Notice in the figure above that by adding in one document, the system has created a main panel for 
that document, as well as a subpanel containing a list of revisions for it—with the initial revision 
at the top.  
 121

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
In a few months' time, if Superflor comes out with a few new colors and styles, and Doc needs to 
put a newer version of this brochure up into his CRM, he can simply click on the Create button in 
the Document Revisions subpanel, and add in a revision, calling it presumably something like 2.0. 
He will simply have to browse to the newer file, enter a new revision, and optionally add in a 
descriptive phrase for the Change Log—what is new or different in this revision? Here is what the 
document details look like when a second revision has been uploaded to the SugarCRM server:  
Document Revision 
Notice that the Download File link at the bottom of the main panel always offers the most recent 
revision of the document for download. If for some special reason the user needs an older revision 
of the document, clicking on the miniature icon at the left of each revision (showing the file type 
of the document) will give access to those older revisions.  
Now—go back to the document list. Click on the Advanced link in the Search panel to see the 
expanded search capabilities.  
 
122 

Chapter 5 
 
Document List View with Advanced Search 
As you see in the figure above, the publishing date of our new document as well as the date and 
time on which it was revised are now shown in the list. Again, you have the miniature icon with 
which to download the document.  
Looking at the Document Search panel, you can see the importance of the category and 
subcategory fields. Without having them filter your view of the list of documents, it might take 
longer finding a document in here than it would in the office! The document name is useful as 
well, as you can match a document with just the first few letters of the document name.  
However, there are limitations to the document searching capabilities you should be aware of. You 
can't find a document using a word or text, say flor, in the middle of the document name unless 
you use the % character in front of the search text. Therefore, %flor in the Document Name field of 
the search panel will successfully find the document in the example above.  
Neither can you search for a document by filtering to just the right type of document—such as a 
Microsoft Word file, or an Acrobat PDF file.  
Nor can you search for a document based on certain keywords associated with the file as metadata 
(data about data). In the case of this document, keywords might have included laminate, flooring, 
superflor, durable. Then a search for all documents concerning durable flooring or laminate 
flooring would have brought up this document and others like it.  
The biggest limitations in SugarCRM's document capabilities however, are:  
• 
You can't associate a document with an account, contact, lead, opportunity, project, 
or case. 
• 
You can't attach a document to an outgoing email without downloading it first. 
 123

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
As with all things, however, SugarCRM is making quick progress, and there is good reason to 
hope that these issues will be addressed in new releases of SugarCRM coming out shortly.  
Project Management 
If we look at the way a sales opportunity is modeled within SugarCRM (and most other CRMs), 
we see an assumption of a one-time event. While in a product sales model that is typically 
correct—when the sale comes, the product is shipped, an invoice is produced, and the opportunity 
has been fulfilled—that is not true of a services sales model.  
While later in this chapter we look at service and support issues (which also have income streams, 
not blips), right now, let's deal with the management of a project. A project can be an internal 
project or one being delivered for a customer.  
First, click on the Projects tab. You will see a screen layout that resembles the following 
screenshot. (Note that I have shown the sample data here, even though you will have erased it by 
the time you get here. Not to worry—you will soon have created plenty of your own project data.)  
Project List View 
Notice that there are shortcuts to create a new project, to list all projects (the default view), to 
create a new project task, and to list all project tasks. We see in the list view that each project has a 
name, and keeps track of estimated and actual hours of effort expended on the project.  
Now, click on the Setup Booth at Tradeshow project, and let's examine the makeup of a project. 
 
124 

Chapter 5 
 
Project Detail View 
 125

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
In the figure overleaf, we can see that like most other items within SugarCRM, a project is modeled 
with a main panel containing basic descriptive overview information about the project, as well as  
a number of subpanels linking in related information. In this case, we see a number of common 
subpanels—such as Open Activities, History, Contacts, Accounts, and Opportunities—but also a 
brand-new subpanel entitled Project Tasks. Note that project tasks are different from the tasks we 
have seen previously, as they include fields of information such as Progress %, Order, Milestones, 
Depends On, Utilization%, Estimated Effort, and Actual Effort that are better suited for tasks within  
a project. A very handy feature is that the total estimated and actual hours of effort fields (which  
are read-only) within the main panel auto-total the relevant fields from all the project tasks within  
the project. 
Now that we have had a quick look at how projects are organized and what information they keep 
track of, let's work through an exercise in building a project for Doc's forthcoming remodeling of 
the offices at 360 Vacations.  
First, click on the shortcut to create a new project. Type in a name (Remodeling of 360 Vacations) 
and description for the project and then click on Save.  
Next click on the Create button in the Project Tasks subpanel, to add the first new project task.  
Adding a Project Task 
 
126 

Chapter 5 
As you can see in the figure opposite, most of the fields are optional, and are simply text fields—
just type in the information you would like to keep track of. Click on the Save button to save this 
project task and you will see it listed in the subpanel for project tasks within the remodeling 
Project Detail view.  
We can go on adding the various tasks involved in this project until we feel that we have the work 
well represented, so that it can be tracked to ensure a timely and organized completion, while 
monitoring cost variance via ongoing level-of-effort totals. 
As this stage, one would begin to add the smaller tactical activities to the project—the calls, 
meetings, and regular tasks, that would be part of the Open Activities subpanel, and which when 
completed would join the History subpanel. You should also be aware that even when a project 
task is completed, it does not become part of the project's activity history, but stays within the 
Project Task subpanel.  
Then add in the contacts you will be dealing with on the project—this makes for a very handy list 
of just the people you will be working with on the project.  
Once complete, our project will look something like this:  
 127

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
 
 
Completed Renovation Project 
 
128 

Chapter 5 
Now, Doc can keep track of all the projects, including this one, that are going on at RayDoc, 
quickly and efficiently, at any time of day, from anywhere including his home or a hotel room. He 
can watch the actual versus estimated level of effort as an indicator of how the project is going, 
and plan his billing accordingly. It doesn't quite model and forecast income and costs for the 
project neither does it integrate that information with the conventional product sales income on the 
dashboard, but it is a very good start.  
Customer Service Management 
Anyone running a smaller business knows very well that customer interactions are not limited to 
the sales activities. In fact, there is a good reason for maintaining that you only really get to know 
a supplier, partner, or customer well, when the chips are down and there is an issue to be dealt 
with. I know in my own experience that many customers make a point of sticking with the 
suppliers who have proven that they are caring and efficient when there is a problem to overcome. 
They are sophisticated enough to understand that there will inevitably be some problems, and that 
the real issue is how they are handled.  
Within SugarCRM, the Cases module keeps track of customer issues. Let's click on that tab now 
to see what the system offers:  
Cases List View 
You can see some of the basics in this view—each case has a case Number, a Subject, an 
associated Account Name, a Priority, a Status, and a User to which it is assigned.  
Now, click on the Create Case shortcut. In our example, let us imagine that RayDoc is working on 
the renovations at 360 Vacations and someone in the office at 360 Vacations phones in with a 
problem with one of the newly installed windows. The figure overleaf shows an example of 
entering the data for this case. 
 129

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
 
 
Creating a New Case 
Once the data has been entered, clicking on the Save button will result in the detail view.  
 
Case Detail View 
 
130 

Chapter 5 
As you can see opposite, each case can have related Contacts, Activities, and History, as well as 
associated software Bugs (if relevant to the business you are in).   
During the lifecycle of a case, its status can be edited to reflect progress—standard values are 
New, Assigned, Closed, Pending Input, Rejected, and Duplicate. 
Ideally, one would analyze case data to understand the effectiveness of your service 
organization—looking for metrics such as on average, how long a case remains open, how many 
open cases there are, and how many cases are reported per month. Unfortunately, SugarCRM 
Open Source edition has no reporting capabilities, and there are no dashboard charts available to 
show this sort of derived information.  
While one can reasonably expect these sorts of developments in the not too distant future, for now, 
the best practice is simply to open the Case List view screen, and filter it by status or priority to 
gain a feel of the quality of your customer service. 
Software Bug Tracking 
One aspect of customer service management within SugarCRM Open Source is the software bug 
tracker. While this is clearly not relevant to many smaller businesses, for those businesses that 
create, resell, or support software products, it can be an excellent tool.  
Click on the Bug Tracker tab for a quick look at this module:  
Bug Tracker List View 
 131

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
A few sample bugs have been entered for the figure overleaf to give you some idea of the 
information this module keeps track of. As with cases, there are no metrics on bugs available to 
you yet within SugarCRM, but using filters on the Bug Tracker List view screen can tell you a 
great deal about what is going on with your various major software products.  
Each bug report can have associated activities and history, contacts, accounts, and cases. The edit 
view of a bug report looks like this:  
Bug Tracker Edit View 
One key element of bug reports is typically the release or version of software in which they are 
found. Within the administration area of the system there is a function to maintain a list of release 
numbers, which may be referenced within a bug report.  
Email Notifications 
Something that SugarCRM does really very well is to take advantage of its ability to send email. 
Aside from the marketing email campaign capability, SugarCRM can also send notification emails 
to users (and in some instances, contacts outside the business) when they are assigned new tasks, 
when they are invited to meetings, when they get new leads, and so on. Note that these notification 
emails are not sent when a user enters the data themself—only when a user creates the 
information, and assigns it to someone else.  
 
132 

Chapter 5 
When these notification emails arrive, they usually have a form similar to this lead notification:  
From: SugarCRM  
To: kay@raydoc.com
Subject: SugarCRM: Lead—Bruce Levis 
doc has assigned a Lead to Kay Holland. 
 
Name: Bruce Levis 
Lead Source:  
Status: New 
Description:  
 
You may review this Lead at: 
<http://www.raydoc.net/index.php?module=Leads&action=DetailView&record=b197529
5-223a-5f58-3ef1-42e8ca818273> 
There are several administrative settings that must all be set correctly for the email notification 
features to work correctly, including:  
• 
The notifications must be enabled throughout the system. 
• 
Each user's notification can be enabled or disabled individually, and a default can be 
set to determine if new users are set on or off by default. 
• 
The information must be entered to specify how the SugarCRM server should access 
email, using what standards, and using what name and address to say whom the 
email is from. 
Email notifications are sent when another user assigns any of the following types of data to you:  
• 
Task 
• 
Lead 
• 
Contact 
• 
Opportunity 
• 
Project 
• 
Case 
• 
Bug report 
Clearly, there are some very useful workflow advantages to having an email sent proactively to 
you to notify you of new information, rather than having the system wait for you to log in and find 
the information yourself. Especially for things like leads, bugs, and cases where there may be a 
real sense of urgency about the information, this is an extremely valuable business tool. When 
combined with the use of a push email device such as a BlackBerry, these emails can improve 
customer response times remarkably, improving both customer satisfaction and the bottom line.  
Interface Consolidation 
To understand the value of interface consolidation, let's picture Kay—Doc's receptionist—as she 
goes through a typical business day. Sometime in the morning, she has her first occasion to refer 
to the CRM, and she fires up a browser session, and logs in to the CRM. She then tends to try to 
keep that window open for the rest of the day—although sometimes she closes it by mistake, and  
 133

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
sometimes the active browser session is used when she clicks on a link emailed to her, and the 
browser goes to some unrelated page.  
Meanwhile—what else is she doing on her PC? She has Microsoft Outlook 2003 running as a 
local application. A sociable girl—she is logged on to MSN messenger to keep in touch with her 
friends, family, and a few favorite customers and coworkers. She also has a few other browser 
windows open—reading the news of the day, visiting some supplier sites for contact and product 
information, and checking on local weather and weekend entertainment options.  
While Kay has good mental agility, even she has some difficulty managing the PC with all these 
windows open. Sometimes she closes the SugarCRM window by mistake, sometimes she has 
trouble finding it, and other times it just seems to disappear all by itself.   
To cut down on all this desktop juggling, and to help ensure that a CRM session stays open on the 
desktop of most employees all day long, many CRMs integrate the ability to access other websites 
from within them, as well as RSS news feeds. While the information access this integrates has 
little or nothing to do with the subject of CRM, it has everything to do with simplifying the 
desktop for employees like Kay, as well as improving their efficiency, and encouraging them to 
always keep a browser window open to the CRM.  
RSS News Feeds 
Let's look at RSS news feeds first.  
Click on the SugarCRM tab for RSS. You should see something like this:  
Initial RSS Screen 
By default when you enter it, this module shows the user My RSS News Feeds—information 
feeds that have been selected by the user. Each user of the system has a different set of feeds 
stored in their user profile. By default, each user is started off with one entry in their My RSS 
News Feeds profile—a feed giving information on the SugarCRM open-source project. Let us 
assume this is not a feed you wish to keep, and delete it.  
Do this now, by clicking on the miniature icon on the far right of the news feed—right after the up 
and down arrows.  
 
134 

Chapter 5 
Now let's add some feeds of particular personal interest. As I can't ask you for yours, I will use a 
few of mine as an example here—but why don't you pick a number of your own favorite news 
sources as we go through the example?  
To do this, click on the shortcut for All RSS News Feeds. You should see a screen like this:  
All RSS News Feeds 
SugarCRM ships with hundreds of popular news feeds pre-programmed into it. Scroll through the 
entire list, clicking on the + sign to the right of each feed that you wish to include on your custom 
news page. When you are done, simply click on the shortcut to My RSS News Feeds, and you 
should see a page like this:  
 135

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
 
Customized MY RSS News Feeds 
You can reorder the feeds however you like, by using the up and down arrows at the top right of 
each feed. Each feed typically has the five latest headlines for that feed displayed. For each feed, 
you can click on the title of the feed at the top to visit the related website or on one of the 
headlines to bring up the full related story in a new browser window.  
If there is an RSS news feed available that you want to include, but it is not in the SugarCRM 
preprogrammed list of feeds, you can add it manually by using the New RSS News Feed box.  
 
136 

Chapter 5 
By now you can see that the RSS News Feeds page is a very handy way to focus the latest news 
from all your favorite sites onto one list of headlines on a single web page. Visiting here once a 
day should get you up to date on all your personal and professional interests, as well as national 
and international events quickly and effectively, without leaving the friendly confines of the CRM.  
Linking in External Websites 
The My Portal module is used to link pages from external websites into the CRM so that they can 
be referenced without the user leaving the CRM.  
Click on the My Portal tab now—you should see a screen like this:  
My Portal: Initial View 
Let's add a few links to sites that would be of interest to Doc, and the employees at RayDoc 
Carpets. Click on the Add Site shortcut.  
Add New Site Screen 
You will see a screen like the figure above, prompting you for a site name and the website URL. You 
can click to select if you want the site to be currently visible or not—as you might want to hide some 
shortcuts without deleting them from the list. You can also select whether the shortcut displays in the 
shortcut list on the My Portal screen, as a tab on the tab menu, or both. Administrators can select 
whether the site is Personal (for the current user), or Global (for all users).  
The example data in the screen above will be used to add a new site for Masland Carpets—one of 
Doc's carpet suppliers, which has a site showing all the colors available for its broadloom carpets. 
The site will be visible, and available to all users via the shortcut list in the My Portal tab. Once we  
 137

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
click on Save, the site is added to the shortcut list. We can click on the site name in the shortcut 
list to see the site—like this:  
My Portal Site: Masland Carpets 
Notice the shortcut for the site in the list to the left.  
 
138 

Chapter 5 
Linking in a Security Camera 
After adding a few more sites of global use to all RayDoc employees, Doc goes on to add a special 
site to his own shortcut list—a link to a web-based surveillance camera. In this example, we set up 
a LinkSys WVC-54G wireless Internet video camera as a site. 
 
LinkSys Wireless Internet Video Camera 
Retailing for about 250 USD, this wireless video camera is quite sophisticated, and contains its 
own web server, and its own 802.11g (the high-speed 54-megabit wireless standard) network 
interface. Simply plug it in to a power outlet, configure it briefly, and then see what it sees by 
viewing a particular web address. In this case, defining a new site called Security Camera, with a 
website of http://192.168.1.115/img/image.cgi?next_file=main_fs.htm will do the trick. 
Note that you must currently use Internet Explorer as your browser to do this, as viewing the video 
feed requires the installation of an ActiveX control—only supported by Internet Explorer.  
 139

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
Here is a sample of the browser screen viewing My Portal with Security Camera selected as the 
current site:  
Viewing Security Camera via My Portal 
As you can see above—hardly an application you might anticipate as part of a CRM application, but 
a very handy feature for owners of smaller businesses—and somehow all a part of keeping an eye on 
your business! Doc finds it a good way to relax at home, knowing that all is in order at the office. He 
has a visual check of the premises from home when the alarm system goes off. He can even use 
multiple cameras to get comprehensive coverage of the offices as well as the warehouse area.  
 
140 

Chapter 5 
Assessing your CRM Customization Needs  
As we saw in Chapters 1 and 2, CRM customizations tend to fall into the categories of cosmetics, 
minor user interface changes, major application changes and additions, and application integration. 
While we are looking at ways to extend your CRM's business role, it makes sense to look at the 
modifications you can make yourself to better adapt your CRM to the precise way that you do business.  
In terms of user interface changes some common changes are: 
• 
Changing the names of modules to better match the terminology used in your 
business (such as changing Contact to Customer, Tenant, or Investor) 
• 
Changing the values used in a drop-down list, such as for Account Type, or Lead Source 
• 
Adding or removing fields on a Detail or Edit screen 
• 
Rearranging the layout of Detail and Edit screens to group fields differently  
• 
Renaming fields on Detail and Edit screens 
Early in your CRM adoption process, you should methodically go through all the modules of your 
CRM system and examine all the terminology, and all the field names and sets of drop-down 
values, to identify all the tasks of this sort that would make your CRM a better fit for your 
business. Write down the full set of tasks you identify, and keep good track of them until they 
have all been addressed. Consult with your peers on the CRM implementation team to make sure 
everyone agrees.  
Making Changes to your Existing CRM Modules  
Once you have identified the user interface changes you would like to make, you will want to have a 
look at the tools that Sugar makes available for you to be able to address a number of them yourself.  
This section describes the various Sugar Studio functions, which collectively enable 
administrative users to perform a broad range of user interface customization tasks, significantly 
reducing the need for custom software development. To access it, you need to go to the 
Administrator area of your SugarCRM installation and look under Sugar Studio. 
Field Layout Editor 
The Layout Editor lets you rearrange the fields and panels on most of the screens available within 
Sugar Open Source, to customize them to fit your needs.  
Begin by selecting the name of the file (actually a specific view from one of the system's modules, 
either the list view, detail view, or edit view) that you want to customize. Choose the file name 
from the drop-down box provided, and then click on the Select File button. If you're not sure what 
file to edit you can select the Edit in Place checkbox; this will add an edit icon 
 to all the 
editable screens throughout Sugar Open Source. Now go to the screen you want to edit, click on 
the 
 icon, and you will enter the screen layout editor to customize that screen layout.  
 141

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
 
Using the Screen Layout Editor to Edit Account Detail Screen 
Within the field layout function, there are three very special shortcuts available in the Shortcuts 
Box (not all are available at all times):  
• 
Select File: Sends you to the screen first seen when entering the field layout 
function, to select a file to edit. If you select this shortcut when you are in the middle 
of editing a screen, edits on that screen are lost if not already saved.   
• 
Edit Layout: Within the Layout Editor, Edit Layout is a mode that lets you drag and 
rearrange individual fields or their labels within the details panel. Select the item 
handle (the little square grey box) next to the field or label you want to move, and 
then click on the item handle where you want the field or label located. This will 
move the item from its previous location to its new location. If there was already a 
field or label at the destination the two items will swap positions. Edit Layout also 
lets you move sub-panels. Moving sub-panels is the same as moving fields; select the 
source sub-panel handle and then click on the destination sub-panel handle, and the 
two will switch locations.  
• 
Edit Rows: Within the Layout Editor, Edit Rows is a mode that allows the addition 
and removal of rows in the details panel. Pressing the 
 adds a row below the one 
currently selected, and pressing the 
 removes the row currently selected. 
 
142 

Chapter 5 
• 
Edit Labels: Within the Layout Editor, the Edit Labels mode displays in the toolbox 
area all the field labels on the page. Displayed in edit boxes, you may edit one or 
more labels, and then Save.  
The Toolbox provides a workspace to add new fields and labels to a screen, to temporarily hold items 
that have been removed from a screen, and to discard items that are not needed. Its functions include: 
• 
Add Custom Field: Opens a dialog box, which lets you specify the type of field you 
want to add and its name label. Click on the Add button to put your new field and its 
label in the Toolbox workspace, and close the dialog box. Next, to move your new 
field from the Toolbox to the screen select its item handle and then click on the item 
handle where you want the field located. 
• 
Display HTML Code: To test this feature, select this checkbox and then move your 
cursor around the screen being edited. As the cursor passes over each field or label in 
the screen you will see the HTML that creates it displayed as 'Alt' text in a floating 
box below the cursor. Note that while this function can be informative it is very CPU 
intensive, and should only be used when necessary. 
• 
Removing an item is accomplished by selecting its handle and dragging it to the 
Staging Area (drag and drop items here) area within the Toolbox. This will deposit 
the selected item in the Toolbox workspace. 
Use the Save Layout button to save changes while in the Layout Editor. To discard changes 
simply choose the Select File shortcut to work on another file, or exit the Layout Editor entirely. 
Remember to un-check the Edit in Place checkbox before you leave the field layout function, or all 
your screens will still have the 
 icon on them. 
Dropdown Editor 
The Dropdown Editor is a very valuable tool for the Administrator. It permits the values in all of 
the drop-down boxes in the system to be edited. The options presented to the user may be edited, 
existing options may be eliminated, and new options may be added. For example, when defining a 
new Account, in the Account Type field, the user must normally choose from a set of drop-down 
options, including Analyst, Competitor, Customer, Integrator, Investor, Partner, Press, Prospect, 
Reseller, and Other. By using the Dropdown Editor, this option set may be altered, with more or 
less options, and different option values.  
To use the Dropdown Editor, select a name of a drop-down list, from the drop-down list of their 
names (if that is not too confusing a statement!). For example, account_type_dom is the second 
option on this list. If you select that option, and then choose the language US English (only those 
language packs that have been installed on your system will be available as choices), and click on 
the Select button, you will see a list of the Account Type options.  
 143

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
 
 
Using the Dropdown Editor to Edit Account Type Option List 
On each line of the list, you will see a number of controls on the right hand side. The up and down 
arrows controls allow you to promote or demote an option, to a higher or lower position on the 
list. The Edit and Del controls allow you to edit or delete the drop-down options, respectively. The 
Ins control will add a new drop-down option into the list above the item on the line you click on. 
 
144 

Chapter 5 
Edit Custom Fields 
You can add custom fields to any module in Sugar Open Source. First, select the module in which 
you want to add or edit custom fields. Then you can define the field using Field Name, Field Label 
(the label displayed on the screen within the module), Data Type, Max Size, Required Field 
(indicated by asterisks for users), and Default Value. After saving a new field, you can view and edit 
information about the field in the Custom Fields list for the module. In Field Layout, you can place 
the custom field on the module page by dragging it to the new location, just like any other field. 
 
Editing Custom Fields in the Accounts Module 
A good exercise for you right now would be to work through an example of making changes to the 
Accounts Detail and Edit screens, with new drop-down fields, making some changes to the layout, 
adding some new fields, and dropping some existing fields. Do it on a trial installation of Sugar 
Open Source that you can remove or over-install it afterwards.   
 145

Extending Your CRM's Business Role 
 
146 
Summary 
In this chapter, we covered a number of more advanced CRM capabilities—ones that extend the 
role of your CRM system beyond the narrow confines of pure CRM functions into a somewhat 
broader business management role. Some of the key topics discussed in this chapter included:  
• 
The business analysis required to identify pinch-points in your system, which will 
yield the best return on investment for customization efforts 
• 
Getting rid of the sample data we experimented with at first, and importing your live data 
• 
Marketing Campaigns: how to create email templates that enable each target to get a 
personalized email, how to assemble lists of targets for email marketing programs, 
how to control the mass email queue within SugarCRM, and how to automatically 
track the click-through rate of success of an email campaign 
• 
Integrating a revision-controlled document repository to contain the latest versions of 
key company documents such as sales and marketing materials, HR policies and 
employee handbooks, and so on 
• 
Managing a project within SugarCRM—including tracking planned and actual hours 
of effort, monitoring status of all project tasks, and keeping all project contacts and 
activity history conveniently in one place 
• 
Managing customer service cases and software bugs, and tracking their status  
and severity 
• 
Automated email notifications when new opportunities, tasks, projects, contacts, 
cases, or bugs are assigned to you 
• 
Integrating an RSS news headline page—customized for each user—into the CRM 
system, to keep users inside the CRM system for more of their day 
• 
Integrating external websites into the CRM system—and even how to link live video 
surveillance into your system for building security 
• 
The use of Sugar Studio to make minor changes to your CRM installation 
In the following chapter, we will see even more examples of advanced CRM system capabilities, 
features that are not included currently in the standard SugarCRM Open Source product. 
Exploring the additional CRM modules available in the commercial Sugar Pro product or 
elsewhere, you can get a good sense that there are few limits to the business management abilities 
that can be or have been integrated into the SugarCRM framework.  

6 
Commercial and Open Source 
Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
In the last two chapters you have read about the basic CRM functions provided by the SugarCRM 
system. We have also seen a number of extended capabilities the standard system can perform, 
which take it beyond pure CRM into a broader business management role.  
In this chapter we will explore a number of commercial and open-source add-ons to Sugar Open 
Source that can extend it even further in myriad directions.  
These add-ons can be categorized as shown below:  
• 
Free Add-Ons 
o 
Role management extension: Access control within Sugar Open 
Source 4.0 is a welcome addition, but limited in scope. This 
long-standing weakness of SugarCRM (the fact that all users can see 
and change all data in the system, if they are to share data with others) 
has spawned a series of open-source add-ons that address the need very 
well. Here, we examine one free patch that allows you to create teams 
that can share data, super users who can see all data, and even users 
with read-only access. You can control access rights down to every 
sub-panel of every module in the system, and you can prevent the 
unauthorized importing and exporting of data.  
o 
Photographic company directory: This free patch for Sugar Open 
Source (version 3.5 or later) provides a photographic company 
directory, complete with thumbnail and business card views, a 
red/green online indicator for each user, and links to send users email 
or text messages.  
o 
Wireless synchronization: For many businesses, their CRM needs to 
be a constant traveling companion. The Sync4j open-source project lets 
you synchronize SugarCRM with your PocketPC, Palm or BlackBerry 
mobile device.  

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
 
148 
• 
Commercial Open Source Add-Ons 
o 
Human Resources management: This commercial add-on module  
(for Sugar Open Source version 3.5 or later) provides a human resources 
management system. It includes the ability to track an employee's vacation 
and sick days, links to HR documents such as résumés, performance 
evaluations, and warnings, and keeps additional HR information such as 
emergency contact number, dependants, salary, and so on. 
o 
Service contract management: This commercial add-on module (for 
Sugar Open Source version 3.5 or later) provides the ability to track 
products on service contracts and subcontracts, link them to the related 
accounts, and list their service case history.  
o 
Receiving POP email: While Sugar Open Source 4.0 offers limited 
incoming email support for company mailboxes (such as 
support@company.com, info@company.com), this commercial add-on 
module for version 3.5 or later extends the Emails module to include the 
ability to receive email from one or more POP3 accounts per user. Emails 
are filed in the user's inbox, and automatically linked to related contact 
and account records. This automatically builds account and contact 
history. Each user can also define personal folders for filing email.  
• 
Sugar Pro Add-Ons 
o 
Product catalog and products module: These two modules within 
Sugar Pro provide a product catalog defining the products handled by 
your business, and a products module that lists physical products in 
your inventory, on order, or sold to clients.  
o 
Quotes module: This Sugar Pro module uses data from the product 
catalog module above to prepare customer quotations.  
o 
Forecasting: This module within Sugar Pro provides the ability to 
generate individual and roll-up sales forecasts.  
o 
Standard and custom reporting: Reporting is likely the single most 
important feature that differentiates Sugar Pro from the Open Source 
version. The reporting module in Sugar Pro gets better with each 
release, and is now a very capable system.  
o 
Sales Teams: A key feature of Sugar Pro, Sales Teams provides you 
with the ability to create teams of users who can share data between 
themselves, which other users may not access. Combined with the 
Access Control Lists from release 4.0, they provide a good solution to 
data security.  
o 
Sugar Wireless: Part of Sugar Pro, Sugar Wireless is a separate 
application (sharing the same database), which provides a sub-set of Sugar 
functions for small form-factor wireless devices with browser support.  
At the end of this chapter we also have a section about the SugarCRM web presence, and its 
online forums, as they are a great place to find more extensions for Sugar Open Source.  

Chapter 6 
Let's dive right in to these many and varied extensions to the Sugar Open Source feature set. By 
the time we're done, I think you will be surprised and impressed at the range and capability of the 
features available to you, some free and some commercial, to grow your Sugar Open Source 
system to meet your evolving business needs.  
As we go through the various add-ons, we will see how they relate to a small business such as 
RayDoc, and what real business value they bring to the table.  
Free Add-Ons 
I think most people in small or mid-size businesses will feel that free is the sort of price they 
would like to see more often. These three free options for Sugar Open Source are just a few 
examples of the many free add-ons you can find on SugarForge. And in many cases, although they 
may be free, these add-ons provide important new capabilities for your CRM. In particular, check 
out the many free add-ons from Marcelo Leite (also known as Mr. Milk, with AnySoft Informatica 
in Brazil)—their name usually starts with 
. 
CallRooM
Role Management Extension 
This patch may be freely downloaded from the forums at http://www.sugarcrm.com and applied 
to your Sugar Open Source system. Once you download and apply this patch, your system will 
behave as described below.  
Different patches have been developed for different versions of Sugar Open Source as the 
SugarCRM architecture has evolved and begun to offer some access control capabilities of its 
own. In addition to the patch presented here, another called Team Security from Marcelo Leite 
(known in SugarCRM circles as Mr. Milk) is a valuable contribution, and you should have a look 
at it too, on SugarForge (http://www.sugarforge.org). And as the Sugar world moves so 
quickly, by the time you read this, there will no doubt be others to choose from. 
The principal business problem this patch addresses is a fundamental issue with the basic Sugar 
Open Source—everyone can see everybody else's data if they are to share data with anyone. In a 
sales environment this is frequently not a viable approach—sales people can be very protective of 
their contacts, as they generate their livelihood. While in Sugar Open Source 4.0 some access 
control capabilities have been added, they still do not offer the ability to define teams that can 
share data, while not exposing data to all users of the system. 
Even in an organization the size of RayDoc this was an issue, and the availability of this patch 
stimulated much broader adoption of the system in that business. As lack of adoption is the most 
common cause for the failure of a CRM implementation, this is a critical issue.  
With this patch installed, Roles within Sugar Open Source serve a dual purpose—however both 
are associated with limiting the access of certain users within the system. When you select the 
 option within the administration area, you will see the 
Role Management
Roles List view screen. It 
lists the roles defined within the system, and also offers shortcuts to create a new role, or define 
the system's default access restrictions.  
 149

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
 
Roles List View 
You can define roles for groups of users to specify which modules those users should have access 
to. For example, sales staff will want access to the Opportunities and Dashboard modules, 
marketing staff will want access to the Campaigns module but not all staff will need access to 
these modules. As you can see in the figure opposite, each role defines the tabs that will be visible 
to the users assigned to the role.  
 
150 

Chapter 6 
 
 
Role Detail View 
 151

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
 
152 
To create a role, click the Create Role shortcut, type a name for the role, select the modules to 
include for the role from the Edit Modules sub-panel, and then save the role. To assign users to a 
role, go to the detail view for that role. In the Users sub-panel, click the Select button to display a 
list of users. You can check the user names that you want to assign to this role. Note that when a 
module is excluded from a role, access is also removed to the sub-panels in other modules that 
relate to the excluded module. 
Next we need to describe the more fine-grained access restrictions that the system uses, what their 
default settings are, and how to associate different restrictions with a role. In the first place, you 
should know that users with system administration capability can see all data in the system. For all 
other users, access restrictions are initially controlled by the default restrictions defined for the 
system, and then managed by additional system roles. These additional roles must have names 
exactly the same as a user name, or as a department name (user name roles take precedence). Note 
that you should not use these roles for the purposes of hiding tabs like the roles we discussed earlier.  
For example, if we define a role called management, and two users Michael and Dave both have 
their department set to management (upper and lower case matters), and are both assigned to the 
management role, then both of them can see all data which is assigned to either Michael or Dave. 
If we then define a role called Michael, and we assign another user, Steve, to that role, then 
Michael can also see all the data assigned to Steve. (Note that Steve cannot see Michael's data in 
this example.) 
Click on the Default Restrictions shortcut. You will see a list of the default restrictions, formatted 
much like the Restrictions sub-panel shown in the figure overleaf. In the Name column are the 
names of all the principal modules in the Info At Hand commercial superset of Sugar Open 
Source. Click on a module name to edit the default restrictions for that module.  

Chapter 6 
 
Default Restrictions—Accounts 
What the above screen means is that by default, until you change the default access restrictions, 
access to Account List View data, Account Details View screens, or Account Edit View screens 
(and a few other items we will discuss in a moment) are restricted to those users with permission 
to see them. The sub-panel settings mean that even when looking at an Account Details screen to 
which you have permission, the information shown on all the associated sub-panels will also be 
limited to information, to which you have permission. This patch is shipped as standard with the 
default restrictions set to 
for all modules and all sub-panels. 
Restricted 
If you would prefer not to have any restrictions on who can see what data within your Sugar 
Open Source installation, simply edit the default restrictions, and set every setting for every 
module to 
.  
Public
When your system is new, all users have access permissions as determined by the default 
restrictions. These restrictions will continue to be in effect for any users not assigned to any other 
roles that may be defined.  
 153

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
 
154 
When a new role is defined, all permissions are set to Default. This means that this role inherits 
whatever the setting is in the default restrictions. Set a permission to Public or Restricted to 
over-ride the default setting.  
This is what the various restriction settings mean for each module: 
• 
List: If this is set to Public, all records for the module will be shown on the list views 
for any user. This has the effect of disabling the security for this module (only for the 
list view). If it is set to Restricted, the module will show list view records respecting 
the security scheme. 
• 
Details: If this is set to Public, all users will be permitted to access the detail view for 
any record in the module. If it is set to Restricted, the module will show detail view 
records respecting the security scheme. While in theory, setting list view to 
Restricted and detail view to Public would make the record inaccessible, this is not 
actually the case since the user can access the detail view via an explicit link or via a 
sub-panel link in another module. Setting detail view to Restricted will block 
unwanted access even through links on the other sub-panels. 
• 
Edit: If this is set to Public, all users may edit, delete and duplicate any record in the 
module. If it is set to Restricted, unwanted users will be unable to click on those buttons 
that are found on the detail view. This will also get rid of the list view checkboxes and 
disable the mass-update mechanism for restricted records. Therefore you can set up a 
Public List view and Restricted Edit view to allow read-only access to certain users. 
• 
Assign User: If this is set to Restricted, the drop-down list of users displayed on the 
Assigned To field on the edit view of this module will have only those users whose 
data you are permitted to see. If it is set to Public, the drop-down list will show all 
users. Setting to Restricted is valuable, so that a sensitive item of information cannot 
be mistakenly assigned to a user outside of a controlled group.  
• 
Filter User: Filter User is similar to Assign User, but relates to the drop-down list of 
users presented in the Search/Filter panel at the top of the list view in most modules.  
• 
Import: If Import is set to Restricted for a module, then only a user with 
administrator permissions can import data into this module.  
• 
Export: If Export is set to Restricted, then only a user with administrator 
permissions can export data from this module. If it is set to Public, then any user can 
export the data to which they have access.  
• 
Sub-panels: There is a setting for each sub-panel on the detail view of each module. 
If it is set to Restricted, data shown in the sub-panel will be limited to data to which 
the user is permitted access. If it is set to Public, the sub-panel will show all related 
data without respecting any restrictions. 
Photographic Company Directory 
This patch for Sugar Open Source (derived from the Info At Hand commercial superset of Sugar 
Open Source) replaces the Employees module with a photographic company directory, complete 
with thumbnail and business card views. It also includes a red/green online LED indicator for each  

Chapter 6 
user, plus links to send users email or text messages. This patch provides a handy way to 
recognize and contact all the employees in a business.  
The business benefits of this patch are in the same area as the Interface Consolidation features 
discussed in Chapter 5. It helps keep people within the system, and gives them one more reason to 
always keep a browser window to their SugarCRM system open on their PC desktop.  
The rest of this section describes a Sugar Open Source system that has had this patch applied.  
To view the directory, click the Directory link that appears at the top right of your screen whenever 
you are logged in to the system. Note that the Admin link just next to it is only displayed for users 
with administrator capability.  
The figure below shows the Directory Thumbnail View screen. To see more information about a 
specific employee, simply click on the image of the employee within the Thumbnail View, to bring 
up their Business Card View. There are also shortcuts to choose 
 or 
Thumbnail
Business Card View 
for all selected employees. 
 
The Directory, Thumbnail View 
Like most of the modules within Sugar Open Source, the Directory provides 
 (Print  and 
)
 
(Help) icons on the title bar at the top of the main screen, followed by a search capability, and a 
list of all or selected employees. Those employees with no photo in their profile will have a 
standard no photo image displayed. Camera-shy employees are encouraged to personalize this no 
photo image for submission.  
 155

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
 
 
The Directory, Business Card View 
The employees list may be filtered using the search controls, to see only those employees in a 
given department for example—or to find people by first or last name. 
As well, the Directory Thumbnail View also has a red/green indicator light for each employee, to 
show if they are online within the Sugar Open Source system. Note that when employees do not 
log out of the system (but simply close their browser), they may be incorrectly shown as online 
until their session times out—usually about 10 minutes or so.  
The employee list is paginated if it contains more items than can be listed on the display and 
controls are provided to go to the start or end of the list, or step to the next or previous page. 
Clicking on an email or SMS address for any employee in the list brings up your email client to 
send either an email or a text message to that employee. 
Constant Availability 
Clearly, not all employees of any business spend all day together in the same office. Some staff 
travel to make sales and to provide customer services. Others may be spread out over multiple 
offices. Having more than one office is not a problem for a web-based system. Wherever the 
server may be, all employees can access it via the Internet, as long as their location has Internet 
access, and they have a PC, Mac, or laptop connected to the Internet.  
But when employees range outside the office, a solution often needs to be found to ensure they 
stay in reach of the data in the CRM system.  
 
156 

Chapter 6 
Overnight travel is not usually an issue any more. Employees slated for this type of work are 
issued company laptops, and most hotels now offer high-speed Internet access—often wireless 
access as well. If sales persons organize themselves well, they can usually access all the client 
information they need before leaving the room in the morning, and update new information to the 
system upon their return at night.  
But what about unforeseen needs during the day for access to CRM data for both sales and service 
personnel? One solution is to carry a mobile device with a small format web browser, and then 
make sure that SugarCRM supports this type of small browser. This approach has been developed 
by SugarCRM as Sugar Wireless, a part of Sugar Pro, and we will discuss it later in this chapter. 
The alternative is to permit wireless synchronization from an Internet-capable handheld device 
directly to the SugarCRM server.  
While you may wish to explore both avenues, my personal choice is the synchronization route. 
This is because handheld web access is so desperately slow—both the data transmission, and the 
screen navigation on the device. With a sync solution, once the data is on your device, you are 
using the regular calendar and contact applications within your device, at their regular speed. And 
as they reside in local firmware, that speed is normally extremely responsive.  
Your choice may depend somewhat on your balance of remote data lookup versus remote data 
entry. For users who are mostly doing remote data lookup, the sync solution is likely to be far 
more satisfactory.  
The Sync4j Open Source Project 
To address the need for a direct wireless synchronization capability, there is a third-party solution 
available for SugarCRM (both Open Source and Pro) from an open source group called Sync4j. Its 
website is at www.sync4j.funambol.com (Funambol is the principal corporate sponsor of the 
Sync4j project).  
Sync4j is a certified implementation of the Open Mobile Alliance Data Synchronization and 
Device Management protocols (OMA DS and DM, formerly known as SyncML). Sync4j is 
supported by one of the very largest communities of mobile developers. 
The full Sync4j system consists of these components:  
Sync4j server: A Java-based mobile application server with connectors to SQL 
relational databases, Microsoft Exchange, Lotus Domino, and SugarCRM.  
• 
Sync4j clients: Applications for Outlook, Windows Mobile PocketPC, BlackBerry, 
Palm, and iPod that you can use to synchronize your PIM data (address book and 
calendar) with the Sync4j server. Many Java phones have native support. 
• 
Sync4j email gateway: A POP, IMAP, and SMTP gateway, to support mobile email.  
• 
Sync4j software development kit: Tools to develop (in Java—J2SE and J2ME—
and C++) sometimes-connected mobile applications. 
• 
Sync4j device management: An OMA DM (Device Management) server to 
remotely manage mobile devices.  
• 
 157

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
The protocol framework behind OMA DS & DM works like this:  
Sync4j Framework (Courtesy: Stefano Fornari, Funambol CTO) 
What we see is that Internet-connected mobile devices connect to the Sync4j server via the OMA 
DM protocols, which are either built into the devices (such as many Java phones) or available for 
free download at the Sync4j website (Palm, iPod, Outlook, BlackBerry). Note that not every 
device can synchronize all possible data. Some are limited to synchronizing contacts and calendar 
data, while others are able to synchronize notes, tasks, and even files. 
How does that Sync4j server have your SugarCRM data available to it? Via the OMA DS (Data 
Synchronization) protocols, with which it connects to the SugarCRM server and synchronizes data—
with each server passing data modifications to the other, and conflicts being resolved jointly.  
Now while Sync4j is built using Java, and SugarCRM is built using PHP, the two servers can 
peacefully co-exist on the same server messaging each other happily. So when a user away from 
the office uses Treo or BlackBerry to perform a sync back to the SugarCRM server, they are in 
fact connecting via the Internet to the Sync4j server, which then performs the synchronization with 
the SugarCRM server. Given that the two servers will usually reside within the same physical 
server, the distinction is perhaps moot.  
 
158 

Chapter 6 
Some representative phones that offer native support for OMA DS/DM include (check online at 
the Sync4j project to see the latest list):  
• 
Alcatel: One Touch 715 
• 
Ericcson: T39, T68 
• 
Motorola: V300, V400, V500 
• 
Nokia: 3300, 3595, 3650, 6108, 62xx, 6600, 6800/20, 7200/50/50i/70/80, 7650, 
9500, N-Gage, … 
• 
Panasonic: X70 
• 
Siemens: M55, M56, S55, SL56, C65, SX1 
• 
Sony Ericcson: P800, P900, 700, 700i, T68i, T610, T618, T630, Z600, Z1010 
On the Sync4j site there are a number of documents that describe the installation and management 
of the Sync4j DS server, and the administration of the DM functionality. I recommend you to have 
a look at this project, which is currently at the 2.3Beta 4 release. 
Commercial Open Source Add-Ons 
Just as SugarCRM offers three versions of its software, two of which have commercial licenses 
attached, so there are many more commercial products that are built to add on to Sugar Open Source. 
Some of these commercial products (like our own Info At Hand at The Long Reach Corporation, and 
like Sugar Pro itself) are complete pre-configured CRM systems built on top of the base Sugar Open 
Source, with extended capabilities. Others, like the modules presented here, and other notable 
products such as the ZuckerDocs document management client, and the JRabbit Outlook plug-in, are 
designed to add on to Sugar Open Source to provide exciting new capabilities.  
Human Resources Management 
One aspect of business management that has not been explored by Sugar Open Source or Pro is 
Human Resources
 
 Management. In many states and countries around the world, businesses—
even quite small ones—have a statutory responsibility to securely maintain records on their 
employees. The required data includes information such as health benefits information, emergency 
contact name and number, dependants, salary history, performance evaluations, and official 
warnings. In addition, a CRM system is a fairly convenient place to track information like 
attendance and sick days.  
The Human Resources Management patch adds a link in the top right hand of the screen, near the 
links for My Account and 
. Like the 
Logout
Administrator link, it only displays for users who have 
been given permission to access HR data.  
 159

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
Upon first entering the 
 module, a list of employees is displayed:  
HR
 
HR: Employee List View 
There is no shortcut to create a new employee. Employee records are automatically created for all 
users in the system, and they are created in the user management section of the 
 area.  
Administrator
 
160 

Chapter 6 
To view an employee's records, you simply click on their name in the list shown in the figure opposite.  
HR: Employee Detail View 
 161

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
To edit an employee's data, you can either click on the Edit button at the top of the screen to edit data 
in the top panel, or click on the 
 button in the 
 
162 
Edit
Employee Leave sub-panel to edit leave data.  
 
HR: Employee Leave Data 

Chapter 6 
The leave data shown on the detail view is calculated from the data seen in the edit view. Annual 
vacation days are accrued at the appropriate rate each month, and start from the number of 
vacation days carried over from last year. Then any vacation days actually taken in each month are 
subtracted, always showing the vacation entitlement going forward.  
Sick days are calculated in a similar way, and for each, the numbers are displayed in red when 
they go negative.  
Service Contract Management 
For businesses with an emphasis on customer service and support, the capabilities of Sugar Open 
Source (or Pro for that matter) are somewhat lacking. Many businesses have a help desk, or a 
customer service desk, at which customer calls are received and questions or complaints are 
received and dealt with. In addition, these calls frequently concern a product the business has sold, 
which may have a warranty or service contract in place. 
Since the way the call needs to be handled will differ if there is, or is not, a service contract in 
effect, the customer service staff needs a quick way to determine the support status of the product 
in question.  
To meet this requirement, Sugar needs a product catalog capability to describe the products the 
company is selling, and a Products module to keep track of the specific items it has sold, plus their 
serial numbers, details of who bought them, and their service history.  
Also required is a Service Contract Management module, which keeps track of a master service 
contract for each account in the system, plus multiple service subcontracts for each master 
contract, and multiple products that are linked to each subcontract.  
The patch that provides all these needs adds tabs for Products and Service Contracts, plus 
product catalog management functions in the Admin area. It also beefs up the Cases module 
somewhat, optionally linking each service case to the specific defective product and the service 
contract involved.  
To explore this patch, let's look at the Service 
 module.  
Contracts
 163

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
 
Service Module: List View 
Each master service contract has an automatically generated name—such as A0001 in this case—
indicating that the account name begins with A, and that this was the first such account to open a 
service contract (contracts for accounts beginning with non-alphabetic characters get Z as their first 
letter). Each contract also has a status indicator LED, showing the status of all the subcontracts under 
it. Green means they are up to date, yellow means one or more are within a month of expiry, and red 
shows that one or more have expired. Accounts that you know have expired, but which might still be 
renewed one day, may be suspended so that their LED status is not sampled. 
There are shortcuts available to create a new service contract, to look at a list of the types of 
service contracts available, or to define a new type of service contract.  
To see the subcontracts linked to a master service contract, and to view the details of the master 
service contract, simply click on the name of the master contract.  
 
164 

Chapter 6 
 
Service Contract: Detail View 
To view the details of a specific subcontract, and to see the products that are under contract (and 
whose values sum to the totals shown), the user simply clicks on the name of a subcontract.  
 165

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
 
Subcontract Detail View 
At this level we see the individual products, or assets, that are under contract, as well as their 
value. We also see the full service case history for all of the products on this subcontract.  
In use, when a service technician receives a service call, they typically ask for the serial number of 
the unit (after first trying the simple solutions to avoid recording a service case).  
Using this system, they would search for the serial number on the Products module, and when 
found the product would show its associated service subcontract and account.  
The technician then typically checks if the service subcontract is active (and not expired), and can 
review the service history. A new case can then be entered for that product if need be—and it will 
automatically join the service history for both the product and the service subcontract.  
 
166 

Chapter 6 
Receiving POP Email 
While the Emails module in Sugar Open Source is very handy for sending the occasional email 
that you want to be saved in account, contact, or opportunity history, and while the email 
marketing campaign capability is extremely useful, many businesses have complained that they 
wanted to be able to receive email within the system as well.  
With the release of Sugar 4.0 some inbound email capability has been added, but to date only to 
support company email boxes of the form support@company.com, or info@company.com, and 
the associated workflow allowing a group of employees to share the responsibility of processing 
these emails. 
In terms of interface consolidation considerations, inbound email for general user emails has the 
potential to have very positive effects on the number of employees who have the CRM system up 
in a browser on their notebook or PC all the time.  
As well, it has a special bonus. Each incoming mail can have the sender's address matched against 
the email addresses for all contacts in the system, and an association automatically made if it is 
found. And if a related contact is found, then if that contact is related to an account, then the email 
is also automatically associated to the account too. The net effect of this is that contact and 
account history is automatically generated by the incoming email—just as it now is by the 
outgoing emails.  
Throw in the fact that if you do your email inside the Sugar CRM you can now throw away 
Microsoft Outlook and the Exchange server (as all calendaring, contact management, and email 
services are now provided by Sugar), and you can see that the potential business benefits from this 
add-on are significant.  
In addition to the patch described here, you should also have a look at the ZuckerMail module, a 
free open-source module that provides many of the same capabilities.  
Once you apply the patch to receive POP Email, the Emails module display changes, and as well, 
the My Account screen gains a sub-panel for entering the information for the POP email accounts 
you want checked for email.  
 167

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
 
Email Inbox List View 
Notice that in the shortcuts area, there are now shortcuts for the four standard folders—Inbox, 
, 
 
168 
Sent Drafts, and Trash. Clicking on any one of them shows the list view of all emails in that 
folder. When the module is first entered, all the emails are displayed. An email may be moved 
from folder to folder for filing by selecting it using the checkboxes to the left of each email,  

Chapter 6 
selecting a new folder on the drop-down control within the mass-update panel at the bottom, and 
then clicking on the Update button within the mass-update panel at the bottom. Notice that even 
the email in the Inbox has already been linked to the contacts and accounts to which it relates.  
There are also shortcuts to create personal email folders. These are viewed on the Folders list view 
screen, and created by using the Create Folder shortcut:  
Email: Create New Folder 
Email Folders List View 
To read an incoming email from your Inbox, simply click on the subject of the email. This displays 
the email detail screen, which now includes buttons to Delete, Forward, or Reply to the email. 
Note that HTML email is displayed complete with rich fonts and graphics.  
 169

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
 
Email Detail View 
If the incoming email has any attachments, they are shown and accessed just below the text of 
the email.  
There is a known problem with many web-based email systems, caused by Microsoft 
Outlook when it sends attachments as part of rich email (such as HTML email). 
Receiving those emails (and especially their attachments) with Outlook is not an issue, 
but it does often cause problems for web-based email systems. Hotmail for example 
suffers from this problem, whereas Google's Gmail takes care of it properly. If you 
receive a file attachment with the generated name winmail.dat, which you cannot open, 
you are witnessing the problem. This Outlook issue is taken care of properly by this email 
patch for Sugar.  
 
170 

Chapter 6 
Users specify the email boxes to be polled for email by using the My Admin page. Only POP3 
email transfer is supported at the time of writing, not IMAP for instance.  
My Admin Screen: New POP3 Sub-panel 
To add a POP3 email account to be polled for email, simply click on the Add POP3 account 
button, and fill out the information required, as shown in the figure below:  
Adding a POP3 Email Account 
The Sugar CRM system actually receives email for all users by periodically running a task that 
looks for email for every user in the system, for all of their POP3 email accounts they have listed. 
This scheduled task (or Cron job in Unix terminology) is set up in a similar manner to the mass 
emailer used in marketing campaigns. It typically runs every 5 minutes, to make sure everyone has 
their email available to them in a timely fashion. 
Sugar Pro Add-Ons 
SugarCRM is not your average open-source project, backed as it is by a Silicon Valley business 
with over 25 Million USD in funding. One thing we all know about venture capital firms—they 
need to see how the money they put in will produce more money coming back to them. For some 
commercial open-source businesses, that means making money providing support services for  
 171

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
 
172 
their software. But increasingly, and certainly true in SugarCRM's case, the commercial open 
source model includes some extended commercial versions of the software.  
SugarCRM produces Sugar Pro and Enterprise versions, which cost 239 and 449 USD per user per 
year to license, respectively. These are products that offer significantly increased capabilities over 
those of the Open Source version—and several of those capabilities are discussed in this section.   
Product Catalog and Products Module 
CRM systems like Sugar Open Source, Saleforce.com, or NetSuite are all referred to as 
front-office applications. The front of the business is the customer facing part of the business, and 
it is run by applications such as these.  
The back-office applications are those that interface with internal operations and suppliers, and 
which prepare financial statements and results.  
Integrating front- and back-office operations into one application is the goal of expensive ERP 
systems for large enterprises (such as SAP). These solutions typically cost millions of dollars. 
Arguably, NetSuite (the name of the company and also the name of its premium product) is the 
best of the systems targeted at smaller businesses in terms of being able to integrate front- and 
back-office activities into a single system—but even it is quite expensive, and only available as an 
on-demand solution!  
Personally, I believe that a smaller business can gain most of the benefits of an integrated system by 
simply adding the most frequently and broadly used aspects of the back-end activities into the 
front-end application—having it also cover what we might perhaps call the middle. By the middle, I 
mean activities such as preparing customer quotations, invoices, and sales orders—and potentially 
even order processing. If your CRM can help you do this, then the wide parts of your company—the 
customer-facing and customer-affecting parts—have been made much more efficient.  
If you have such an extended CRM system (now covering front and middle), and link the resulting 
invoice or sales order data to your accounting system (by data export, or by web-service linkages 
to online systems), you can create a very effective solution at a bargain price.  
You can also create a situation where only a limited number of user licenses are required for the 
accounting software. Only the real accounting people who are posting transactions to ledgers need 
licenses—which is not the case with an integrated system. This approach also relegates the 
accounting function truly to the back office—minimizing that part of the business which has no 
direct involvement with the customer or profit creation. 
Sugar Open Source has none of these back-office (or perhaps, middle-office) capabilities, but 
Sugar Pro does have some initial modules that support this approach. And there are plans to add 
more of these capabilities in future releases.  
The initial two modules of this type within Sugar Pro are the Product Catalog and the Products 
module. The Product Catalog is in the Administrator area of the system, and keeps track of what types 
of products you have available for sale, and the quantity in stock. The Products module then keeps track 
of the movements of those products—any units that have been quoted, ordered, or shipped to customers. 
If you license Sugar Pro, these two modules are included, and function as described next.  

Chapter 6 
Product Catalog 
There are four product catalog administration functions, which are used for maintaining the items 
in the Product Catalog, as well as the product categories, product types, and manufacturers to be 
used when defining items in the Product Catalog.  
• 
The Product Catalog administration option displays a list view of all current items in 
the product catalog. You can choose to click on the name of an item in the list to see 
the detail view for that item, and potentially edit it. Or you may use the shortcuts 
menu to create a new item in the Product Catalog, or switch to viewing 
manufacturers, product categories, or product types. You may also import product 
items from Salesforce.com or via a custom field mapping.  
 
The Product Catalog List View 
 173

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
Note that product type is a high-level classification of items within the product catalog, and 
product category is a lower-level classification. One might have a product type for the broad area 
of software, and a product category for a more narrow area such as spreadsheet, word processor, 
or CRM Software. With version 3.5, a tree structure was introduced for the category organization 
of products, allowing for a much more detailed breakdown of products in the catalog, making the 
type field largely useless.  
When creating a new catalog item, or editing an existing item, you enter data including the item 
name, associated URL, tax class, availability, the supplier, category and type, as well as the cost, 
list and purchase prices, and their currency. There is also a default pricing formula, which may be 
set to 
 
174 
Fixed Price, Profit Margin, Markup over Cost, Discount from List, or Same as List.  
The Product Catalog Edit View 
• 
The Product Types administration option lets you maintain the product types that are 
available for the classification of items in the product catalog. Each product type 
consists of a name and a description, as well as the order in which the entry is to 
appear in the drop-down list.  
• 
The Product Categories administration option lets you maintain the product 
categories that are available for the classification of items in the product catalog. 
Each product category consists of a category name, the name of the parent category, 
and a description, as well as the order in which the entry is to appear in the 
drop-down list (largely irrelevant now with the category tree). 

Chapter 6 
• 
The Manufacturers administration option lets you maintain the manufacturers that are 
available as selections within the Products module. Each manufacturer entry consists 
of a name and a status (Active or Inactive, where inactive will remove it from the 
drop-down list for manufacturer), as well as the order in which the entry is to appear 
in the drop-down list.  
Products Module 
The Products module keeps track of products that have been quoted, ordered, or shipped—as 
defined within the as yet somewhat limited order management framework of Sugar Pro.  
Take care not to confuse the Products module with the product catalog functions within the 
 area, which define the products that are available to be sold.  
Administration
A product may be created from an item in the product catalog, or may be custom-created by 
simply entering any name desired as the product name.  
Products List View 
By checking the list of products, employees can determine the activity for products—what quotes, 
orders, and shipments have been taking place.  
Quotes Module 
The Quotes module is another feature of Sugar Pro that broadens the reach of the CRM towards 
back-office type capability. This module uses data from the 
 
Product Catalog module described 
above to prepare customer quotations.  
 175

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
 
Quotes List View 
Upon entering the 
 module, you see the 
Quotes
Quote List view screen—showing all quotes 
currently in the system. You can click on a quote to see the details of the quote, and further click 
on the detail view to edit the quote.  
Preparing a quote is simple. Click on the 
 
Create Quote shortcut, and on the screen that comes up, 
enter a subject for the quote, the date to which the quote is valid, and select the Bill to and Ship to 
accounts (with a handy button to copy one to the other if they are the same).  
 
176 

Chapter 6 
 
 
Creating a Quote 
 177

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
Then simply click on the Add Group button to define the initial product grouping on the quote, and then 
click on the Add Row button to add items to that group. On each row, use the Select button to select a 
product from the catalog—then set the quantity and if you need to, edit the unit price from the default.  
You can create additional groups to organize sections of your quotation, because they address 
different needs, are to be delivered on different schedules, or for a variety of other reasons.  
When you are done, simply click on Save. The quote may now be used to create an opportunity  
(if the request for a quote came out of the blue), or a PDF may be generated from the quote—
presented either as a proposal, or as an invoice. Standard PDF templates are provided with Sugar 
Pro, which may be edited to include your company logo and address details.  
 
Acrobat PDF Generated from Standard Quote Template 
 
178 

Chapter 6 
Forecasting 
Sales people (account executives, account managers, sales representatives, whatever the preferred 
title of the day may be) who work in organizations with a substantial sales group that is overseen by 
a sales manager or VP of Sales, are generally all too familiar with the phrase—"What is your commit 
number?" And missing your commit number is getting all too close to being a shooting offense!  
While Sugar Open Source has opportunities and pipelines from which to estimate sales in a 
coming month, or the current quarter, Sugar Pro has a mechanism that allows the sales manager to 
formalize the commit number for each sales person, and roll them up to the regional or 
organizational level. These commit numbers are known by their polite name—the forecast. 
The forecasting process begins with the definition of the forecasting periods—typically, financial 
quarters, or months. This is done in the Administrator area of the system. 
 
Administration of Forecast Time Periods 
Once the forecasting periods have been defined, each sales person can set their forecast commitments 
by using the Forecasts tab. Upon entry, this module shows the forecast history. This displays a list of 
the time periods available to the user, and all historical commitments that the user has made for those 
time periods.  
 179

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
 
Forecast History 
On the screen above, for example, we can see that the user once had a forecast for Q4 of only 500 
USD—but that it has now been raised to 50,000 USD—on the basis of three opportunities whose 
weighted values total $58,750 USD.  
Entering a Forecast Commitment 
 
180 

Chapter 6 
That forecast was entered on a forecast worksheet, accessed from the Forecast History shortcut. 
On it, the user selects the time period to be forecast, and all opportunities for that period are 
automatically displayed, with their weighted value. The Commit button is used to enter a new 
commitment for the forecast time period. Note that a history of prior commitments for that time 
period is also displayed.  
If the user supervises any other sales people (each user's profile has a setting for Reports To, 
which defines their supervisor) then they see a variant of the above screen that allows them to see 
a forecast roll-up of their own forecast plus that of all their direct reports. The radio button at the 
top allows the user to select between My Forecasts (which shows a screen like the previous 
figure), or My Team's Forecasts, which displays a screen like the figure below:  
Viewing Team Commitments 
This system provides a good hard commitment record for sales forecasting, and a solid, undeniable 
audit trail! As well, the roll-up system provides a practical and quick way to scale sales forecasting 
even to quite large organizations.  
Standard and Custom Reporting 
There are several important weaknesses in SugarCRM Open Source—and the complete lack of 
reporting is probably the biggest of all. In its absence, users of the Open Source system must 
manage by using the list views in each module, and the Dashboard. For smaller companies, this is 
just about acceptable. But as organizations get larger and the data becomes more complex, 
reporting becomes mandatory and not just a nice-to-have feature.  
 181

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
Some of the simple reports you might want from a CRM would include:  
List
 
182 
• 
 of Accounts
 
: Filtered by, say, account type—just customers, just partners, just 
suppliers, and so on 
List
• 
 of Contacts
 
: Filtered by, say, the user to whom they are assigned 
List
• 
 of Opportunities
 
: Filtered and sorted by such criteria as sales stage, probability 
percentage, the user they are assigned to, and the estimated closing date (so you can 
report by the month or quarter) 
Typically, reporting capabilities within business systems fall into two categories: standard reports 
and custom reporting. Standard reports are just as they sound—a series of pre-defined reports that 
the creators of the system are certain will be relevant to you—at least from time-to-time.  
Custom reporting systems are more difficult to create (especially good ones!), and they provide the 
ability for the user to define their own reports. In the case of Sugar Open Source or Pro the user 
would want at minimum the ability to specify the module from which reporting information is to be 
drawn, the columns of data to be presented, and if any columns are numeric and need totaling,  
Historically this is just about exactly what Sugar Pro's custom reporting could do. But with versions 
3.5 and 4.0 of the Pro product, more advanced reporting capabilities have been made available.  
When you first click on the Reports module in Sugar Pro, you see a list view of all the published 
reports in the system. So what is a published report? In Sugar Pro, the system is supplied with very 
few (in fact, 6) standard reports—as shown in the figure below. All other reports begin their lives 
as custom reports. Once you design, save, and run a custom report, and you like it, you may 
choose to publish that report so that it is made available to others in the company.  
 
Published Reports List View 

Chapter 6 
To get a feel of this process, let's see what it is like to build a custom report, and then publish it.  
To start off with, you should notice that the Reports module has a long set of shortcuts in it. Each 
shortcut displays a list of the published reports of that particular type—reports on accounts, 
opportunities, contacts, and so on. All the reports shown opposite happen to be opportunity reports.  
For our sample report, we will build a very useful report that lists all the accounts in the system 
that are classified as customers, and then within each of those accounts, lists the name and contact 
information for each contact at that account. 
So to build this report, first we click on the Create Custom Report button.  
 
Create Custom Report: 'Report On' Tab 
We see a screen with five tabs, Report On, Filter, Group, Choose Display Columns, and Chart 
Options. In the first tab we specify the module(s) we wish to report from, and the report name, and 
choose if this is a summation report or a rows and columns report. Since we will be listing 
contacts grouped by their account, this is classified as a summation report.  
Even though it is the contacts that we are most interested in for this report, we must start with 
the Accounts module information, as the first thing we do is limit ourselves to those accounts 
that are marked as customers. So we choose Accounts as our first module, and Contacts as  
the related module.  
If we now click on the Filter tab, we see a system for filtering which accounts are to be included  
in the report, and we simply specify that the Type field should hold the value Customer.  
 183

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
 
 
Create Custom Report: 'Filter' Tab 
As we proceed to the Group tab, we see that we can group contacts together that have the same 
account name.  
 
Create Custom Report: 'Group' Tab 
On the Choose Display Columns tab, we actually assemble the real information of the report.  
 
184 

Chapter 6 
 
 
Create Custom Report: 'Choose Display Columns' Tab 
In the figure above, we specify that on the summary line for each account, we will display the 
account name and the count of the number of related contacts, and that under each account group, 
we will display the details of the contacts for each account. (It would not be much of a report if we 
did not—as we would only list the names of the customer-type accounts, but no contacts!)  
Then underneath that, we specify the fields from the Contacts module that we want to have listed 
in the report. There are controls on the left to change the order of those fields as you prefer. And 
when you click on a field in the list on the left, you may type in a name below for the label to be 
used for that column of the report.  
On the fifth tab, Chart Options, we can choose the chart type to be displayed and the data series to 
be plotted on that chart, as well as entering the description for the chart. In our example, Count is 
the only data series which may be plotted on the chart.  
 185

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
Note that a summation report with a group-by column and one summary column is required within 
a report definition before an associated chart may be rendered.  
 
Create Custom Report: 'Chart Options' Tab 
When you have completed the last tab, click on Save or Run Report, and the report is executed, 
and displayed like this (only the beginning of the report is shown in the figure opposite):  
 
186 

Chapter 6 
 
 
Sample Custom Report 
Notice the option to print the report as an Acrobat PDF file, which is extremely useful.  
 187

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
If the user now clicks on the shortcut for Account Reports, the system shows a new report there, 
like this:  
Account Reports 
Note that the new report is classified under My Account Reports. By clicking on the publish link to 
the right of that report, the report may be published and made available for everyone in the 
company to run. Once that is done, the new report is displayed in the list of all published reports 
view which is the default view upon entering the reports module.  
Sales Teams 
As noted in the section about the role management extension, SugarCRM Open Source has a 
significant weakness in the areas of permission management and data security. To address this 
weakness, in Sugar Pro SugarCRM chose to define teams for information sharing.  
Each data item in the system has its structure changed, to include a field that says which team 
owns the data—much like an extension of the field that assigns the data to a user. Note that the 
Assigned To field still exists as well.  
 
188 

Chapter 6 
In the Administrator area there is a team management feature added, in which teams are defined.  
Team List View 
Users may be assigned to one or more teams, giving them the ability (say as a Sales Manager) to 
see sales opportunities and customer information from perhaps the Western, Central, and Eastern 
regions, if there were a team defined for each region. 
A team may also be defined with the same name as a user, to create a team that private or personal 
information may safely be assigned to.  
The rules for data access are very simple—you can see data if you are on the team to which that 
data is assigned. If data is assigned to a team to which all employees belong—then everyone can 
see that information. One drawback of this system is that if you can see a data item, you can also 
edit it or delete it—there is no grey-scale of permissions, such as read-only access. With Release 
4.0 of Sugar Pro, this drawback was addressed with the enhancement of the role management 
system—more on this shortly.  
 189

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
 
 
Team Detail View 
One very handy function associated with teams is the creation and display of team notices. On the 
Home tab within Sugar Pro, a new section is created that shows an animated rolling display of 
team notices:  
 
Home Page with Team Notices Section 
 
190 

Chapter 6 
There is also a shortcut available to create team notices. Clicking on this shortcut shows a list of 
all existing team notices, plus a form to create a new notice. Notices can be created with a start 
and stop date, and may also link to a URL for more details.  
 
Team Notices 
Enhanced Role Management: Access Control Lists 
Role Management within Sugar Open Source, up to and including release 3.5, was a rather weak 
function—simply allowing the system administrator to create roles that could limit which tabs 
each user could access within the system based upon the roles to which each user was assigned.  
With the release 4.0 of Sugar Open Source and Pro, role management was expanded significantly, 
and addresses the lack of a rich permission management or access control system within Sugar. In 
the case of Sugar Open Source (which lacks the teams feature of Sugar Pro) this enhanced role 
management feature was an improvement, but still not complete. But within Sugar Pro it combines 
with the teams feature to produce a very effective access control system.  
The Access Control List (ACL) mechanism manages the actions (Read, Write, Delete, Update, 
Import, and Export) that a user can perform within each module. Each user may be assigned to one 
or more roles, and when they have multiple roles the most restrictive permissions will determine 
their actual capabilities. The following screen shows the role of a Junior Administrator who can 
read, write, and update, but cannot delete, import, or export, the data from any module. 
 191

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
 
Access Control List 
Sugar Wireless 
Sugar Wireless is a separate application (sharing the same database) that provides a sub-set of the 
Sugar capabilities, but with screen layouts that are formatted for small form-factor wireless 
devices with web browsers.  
 
192 

Chapter 6 
The value of this sort of application is quite clear—the ability to access Sugar data when you are 
not near an Internet-connected PC. You can access data for contacts, leads, accounts, 
opportunities, calls, and meetings.  
With a device such as a Treo 650, PocketPC, or BlackBerry, you can browse to a web address that 
is a little different from your usual CRM access address, and see small, unadorned screens with 
simple Sugar layouts. Try the demo at http://demo.sugarondemand.com/wireless/, preferably 
from your handheld, and see it for yourself. 
Like the regular Sugar CRM, you will first need to log in to the system. You use the same 
username and password as you do for the usual system.  
 
Wireless Login and Menu 
Then you see the abbreviated menu, with the options available to you in the wireless version. You 
just click on a link (or roll the wheel to select and then click on a BlackBerry) to choose one of the 
modules. If you choose Contacts, for example, you will see this:  
 193

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
 
 
Wireless Contact List View 
Eight contacts are listed with their details. Previous and Next buttons are provided to go to the next 
or previous page of contact data. If you have a lot of contacts, this won't be very productive, so a 
search capability is also provided:  
 
194 

Chapter 6 
 
 
Wireless Search 
Only you can decide which you prefer—handheld browser access to your Sugar data, or handheld 
wireless Sync of your data from the handheld back to your server.  I find that applications native 
to the handheld device operate so much more responsively, and make so much better use of the 
screen layout, that I almost always prefer to do the Sync, and then use the local applications.  
Moreover, speed is an issue. Between poor wireless bandwidth, and poor processing power on the 
handheld creating a slow browsing experience, I have not generally enjoyed using Sugar Wireless 
nearly as much as I had hoped to.  
 195

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
 
196 
Add-on Summary Table 
Name 
Author and Availability 
Sugar OS Support 
Role 
Management 
Originally written by Badarinath Medendravu, (known in the 
SugarCRM online forums as Mr. Baddy), this patch was later 
revised and extended by Marcelo Leite (also known as Mr. Milk, 
of AnySoft—www.anysoft.com.br), to utilize the Roles 
management capability added in Sugar Open Source v3.0. An 
extension of this patch to include a full user interface within a 
heavily modified Role Management module (which also 
eliminated Mr. Baddy's original Hierarchical security approach) 
was developed by The Long Reach Corporation 
(www.thelongreach.com). You can find this patch at 
SugarForge.org or in the Sugar Forums. 
3.0C & later 
Team Security 
Created by Mr. Milk—Marcello Leite—this patch is available from 
www.sugarforge.org. 
3.5 & later 
Project GANTT 
Charts 
Created by Mr. Milk—Marcello Leite—this patch is available from 
www.sugarforge.org. 
 
Organization 
Charts 
Created by Mr. Milk—Marcello Leite—this patch is available from 
www.sugarforge.org. 
 
Company 
Directory 
Created by The Long Reach Corporation for its Info At Hand 
commercial product, this module is available at 
www.thelongreach.com. 
3.5 & later 
Products 
Part of Sugar Pro 
2.0 & later 
Quotes 
Part of Sugar Pro  
2.0 & later 
Forecasting 
Part of Sugar Pro 
3.0 & later 
Reporting 
Part of Sugar Pro 
2.0 & later 
ZuckerReports 
ZuckerReports is an open-source reporting solution that may be 
of interest to businesses that don't wish to purchase Sugar Pro. 
See www.sugarforge.org. 
3.01B & later 
Sales Teams 
Part of Sugar Pro 
2.0 & later 
Sugar Wireless 
Part of Sugar Pro 
3.0 & later 
Service Contracts 
Created by The Long Reach Corporation for its Info At Hand 
commercial product, this module is available commercially at 
www.thelongreach.com.  
3.5 & later 
Human 
Resources 
Created by The Long Reach Corporation for its Info At Hand 
commercial product, this module is available commercially at 
www.thelongreach.com. 
3.5 & later 
Sync4j Wireless 
Synchronization 
Created by Funambol, this software is available at 
www.sync4j.com.  
3.5 & later 

Chapter 6 
 
Name 
Author and Availability 
Sugar OS Support 
3.5 & later 
Receiving POP 
Email 
Created by The Long Reach Corporation for its Info At Hand 
commercial product, this module is available commercially at 
www.thelongreach.com. 
3.5 & later 
ZuckerMail 
ZuckerMail is an open-source email add-on solution that may be 
of interest to businesses that don't wish to purchase a 
commercial add-on. See www.sugarforge.org.  
Participating in the Sugar Online Community 
Now that you have seen some examples of the extensions available for Sugar Open Source, it is 
useful to know where to look for more of them. On the Internet, the SugarCRM project all starts at 
http://www.sugarcrm.com. This is the home of the open-source CRM business, SugarCRM Inc., 
which is based in Cupertino California. While the early days of the open-source project were lived 
out at http://sourceforge.net, and SugarCRM still maintains an open-source project on this site, 
it is no longer the best place to find current information about the SugarCRM open-source project.  
One of the best places to look these days for Sugar info, tips, and add-on modules is on the 
SugarCRM forums (accessible from the menu system at http://www.sugarcrm.com, or directly at 
http://www.sugarcrm.com/forums/.   
A very useful index of all the Sugar sites is held at http://sugarcrm.net. As explained on this 
site, the various Sugar-related sites and their characterizations are as follows: 
• 
SugarCRM.com (http://www.sugarcrm.com): Home of the SugarCRM business. 
• 
SugarForge.org (http://www.sugarforge.org): Home of open-source add-on 
downloads for SugarCRM—themes, modules, and various widgets and gadgets that 
bolt onto SugarCRM—as well as a home for a number of projects for Sugar add-ons 
whose development is ongoing. 
• 
Demo (http://demo.sugarondemand.com/sugarcrm): This is where you want to go 
for a demo of the latest version of Sugar Pro. Use /sugarcrm_os for the Open Source 
demo, and /sugarcrm_ent for the Enterprise version, which began with version 3.5.  
• 
Downloads (http://downloads.sugarforge.org): This is the basic download site 
for Sugar Open Source, and its related themes, documentation, installers, and 
language packs.  
• 
Forums (http://forums.sugarcrm.com): Home of the Sugar user forums, where you 
can give and get hints and tips from the thousands of Sugar users in the community.  
• 
Store (http://store.sugarcrm.com): This is where you go to buy Sugar Pro or 
Enterprise, as well as the various Sugar On-Demand services.   
 197

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
 
 
The Sugar Network Site 
 
198 

Chapter 6 
Sugar User Forums 
The Sugar forums are frequented by both experienced and technically knowledgeable users, as 
well as those who are new and bewildered. Within the Open Source forums (there are Pro forums 
as well, which only become visible to customers of Sugar Pro or Enterprise), there are major 
sections dealing with:  
• 
Announcements 
• 
General Discussion 
• 
Feature Requests 
• 
Developers 
• 
Translators 
• 
Downloads 
• 
Classifieds 
• 
Help 
There are also specific forums for business-oriented discussions on a range of topics, and for users 
in specific foreign languages.  
New users typically frequent the General Discussion and Help areas within the Open Source 
forums. Once you get a little better grounded, the Feature Requests and Downloads areas become 
very useful and interesting as well. The Developers and Translators areas are rather specialized as 
indicated by their names. And the Classifieds area is one way to look for a CRM partner—
although typically it is frequented by people in the technology business looking for Sugar-skilled 
sub-contractors.  
While you may read forum posts without registering as a member, to make posts of your own you 
must register. You can provide a minimum of personal information, or add a photo, signature file, 
and other personal data to help other people know who they are interacting with. The figure 
overleaf shows how to log in to the forum if you are already registered, and also the link to use to 
register on your first visit.  
 199

Commercial and Open Source Add-Ons for SugarCRM 
 
 
The Sugar Forums 
Summary 
In this chapter we have looked at over a dozen popular commercial and open-source add-ons to 
Sugar Open Source. Each of them extends the system in a direction that enhances the value of the 
Sugar Open Source CRM system to your business.  
• 
The Role Management patch lets groups or teams share data, rather than all data 
being visible to and editable by all users, making the system much more popular with 
sales representatives and their managers. 
 
200 

Chapter 6 
• 
The Company Directory patch provides a photographic company directory, always at 
your fingertips.  
• 
Direct wireless synchronization of handheld devices such as Palms, BlackBerrys, 
Pocket PCs, and SyncML-compliant mobile phones to the SugarCRM database—
permitting sales and service personnel out of the office to access updated 
information, and to update account, contact , case and other information back to the 
SugarCRM system for all employees to share. 
• 
The Human Resources module lets your company securely track employee details 
online—their salaries, their dependants, their emergency contacts, their résumés, and 
performance reviews, as well as their vacation and sick day history.  
• 
The Service Contracts module allows businesses to support their service desk by 
tracking products sold against service subcontracts and main contracts, as well as 
linking all service case histories to both the products and service contracts involved. 
• 
The POP Email add-on allows incoming email to be received by all users in Sugar 
Open Source, and automatically adds incoming mail to account and contact history. 
Attachments are handled automatically, and users may create personal email folders 
for filing. 
• 
The Product Catalog and Products Module let you keep track of the products you have 
available for sale, as well as how many are in stock, on order, or sold to customers.  
• 
The Quotes module let you prepare customer quotations using data from the Product 
Catalog, and even generates Acrobat PDFs from them.  
• 
The Forecasting module allows each sales person to enter a hard commit number for 
each forecasting period, and these forecast commitments roll up through reporting 
lines to create forecasts at the region and organization levels.  
• 
The reporting module allows custom reports to be designed and run—with Sugar Pro 
3.5 onwards these reports can be quite complex. Reports may also be published in 
order to be available to all users. 
• 
Sales Teams are a mechanism in Sugar Pro that allows data to be shared within 
teams, secure from other users.  
• 
Sugar Wireless is an add-on that lets users access a sub-set of Sugar data wirelessly 
using a browser on their mobile phone or PDA. 
We also introduced the various SugarCRM websites—a great place to keep up with the Sugar 
online community and get more free SugarCRM add-ons—and learned how to use the User 
forums. The forums can help you find others with similar customization and extension needs with 
whom to compare notes, and even free open-source solutions developed by other users.  
In the following chapter, we shall look at the critical issue of introducing your new CRM to its users, 
and making sure that the system is received as an easy-to-use, capable, and valuable addition to your 
business management process. For any CRM system to improve your business efficiency people 
have to use it, and there are a number of techniques available to ensure that they do. 
 201

 

7 
Managing Your 
 CRM Implementation 
So far, this book has dealt with the topics of introducing CRM concepts, understanding why CRM 
requirements differ from one organization to the next, and then studying CRM in detail by 
installing and using Sugar Open Source (and an array of add-ons) as a candidate CRM solution for 
your small or mid-size business. 
In this chapter, now that you have a good background in CRM terminology and capabilities, we will 
study some of the real-world challenges of introducing a new CRM solution into an organization. 
The goal of this chapter is to leave you with a good understanding of how to approach and structure 
your own CRM implementation project, with a focus on these important topics: 
• 
The key steps to a successful CRM implementation 
• 
Some common pitfalls 
• 
It takes a team to win (Getting the whole company on board) 
• 
Setting project goals and specifications 
• 
Selecting a CRM development partner 
• 
System development 
• 
Pilot testing 
• 
The CRM training process—awareness, familiarity and buy-in 
• 
CRM training materials (the content for a CRM training slideshow is included) 
• 
Going live: Stepwise introduction—evolution, not revolution 
• 
Continuous feedback and enhancement 
As you will discover, one of the keys to a successful CRM implementation is to approach it in  
a stepwise manner. A great way to get the CRM ball rolling is a first phase implementation that 
minimizes disruption and re-training requirements, and maximizes perceived benefits for all  
key stakeholders.  

Managing Your CRM Implementation 
 
204 
In the following chapter, we will be discussing some fairly complex but important CRM issues, 
such as integrating your CRM system with your public website and with a customer self-service 
portal. These are not typical goals of the first phase of a CRM introduction. As such, you may 
choose to regard the topics that follow this chapter as an overview to those business processes that 
you may address with future phases of your CRM implementation program.  
Key Steps to a Successful CRM Implementation 
As you undertake your CRM implementation, before we get into a lot of specifics, you should 
understand that there is one overriding attribute to any successful CRM implementation. This 
common factor is open and frequent communication and collaboration.  
The typical groups that are going to be significantly affected by a new CRM system, and therefore 
will need to be involved in its selection, development, and delivery are the following:  
• 
Executive sponsor 
• 
Project manager 
• 
Implementation team 
• 
Lead trainer 
• 
Internal or external network administration and MIS 
• 
Finance management 
• 
Sales management 
• 
Sales general staff 
• 
Administration management 
• 
Administration general staff 
This group will be your CRM implementation team.  
Successful CRM implementations share another important factor. The implementation team should 
manage the project relatively conservatively—set realistic goals, phase the implementation in modest 
steps, and view the entire process as one of continual improvement and not as a one-time event. To 
quote Clint Oram (a co-founder of SugarCRM) "Think big, start small, and move quickly."  
Another critical factor in any successful CRM implementation is to review the different user 
groups—especially the last five groups listed above—and make sure that in your first 
implementation each of these groups perceives some value to them personally in making the effort 
and commitment to support the development and to use the system once it is implemented.  
For example—sales general staff may be motivated if the system calculates commission reports—
and will be receptive to the argument that the numbers will only be correct if all opportunities and 
closed sales are in the system.  

Chapter 7 
Planning the Implementation 
Now that we have these very important principles in the front of your mind—let's plan your 
implementation.  
First—you need to look at the list opposite, and translate it into the right people, and the right 
number of people, in your organization. Clearly, the size of the group and the planning effort 
should be appropriate to the size of the business. For a ten-person organization, it is likely that 
3-4 people need to be involved in the implementation. For a company the size of RayDoc—
about 25 people—probably 6 or so people have a role to play. This quickly tapers off, and in a 
200-person business you will need no more than 10-12 people to be involved in the CRM 
implementation process.  
Your two most important players are the executive sponsor, and the project manager. Your project 
manager will provide the drive to ensure the project is executed successfully, and your sponsor 
will provide the encouragement and resources to all other participants to play their part as well.  
Commonly, the executive sponsor may be the President or owner, the finance chief, or sometimes 
the sales manager. If you have an in-house MIS group, the sponsor should not be someone from 
that group. You need the business and people part of this equation to work out properly, as well as 
the technology—and frankly, the technology part is not the biggest risk. You need to be sure that 
the CRM implementation is being undertaken because of perceived business process shortcomings, 
and that the chosen solution will be selected because it best addresses them. Your project should 
not be driven by a technology push, but by a business pull.  
Your project manager needs to be someone inside your organization, not someone contracted for 
the job. They can work closely with their opposite number on a vendor's implementation team, but 
they need to be someone that all the stakeholders know and trust. As well as being a person known 
for being very competent and detail-oriented, you need someone who is also known for 
communicating openly, taking suggestions, and not being overly political. If the people 
participating in the implementation team feel they are just window dressing, and not really 
involved in the process, they will quickly turn negative. If the solution feels imposed, staff will 
react with cynicism, resistance, and at best low commitment.  
Your project manager needs to be your champion—someone with the people skills to get 
employees throughout the organization excited about the new CRM system. And as the 
implementation will require a lot of work from your project manager, you need to address their 
normal workload to make room for the CRM-related work. 
Like any initiative, it is best to work from something other than a blank sheet of paper. While you 
do not want to present the CRM implementation team with a fait accompli at the first meeting, 
neither do you want to simply ask them "What you think should be done? What are the goals? 
What are the potential technology solutions?"  
In order to focus and manage the process of agreeing upon a specific set of goals, a specific 
technology solution, and a particular vendor for customization, it would be advisable for the 
project manager and the executive sponsor to prepare an initial briefing note for the first 
meeting—stating what some of the key perceived shortcomings are in the current business 
processes, some of the potential solutions, the make-up of the CRM implementation team, the 
proposed timeline, and candidates for the technology to be used.  
 205

Managing Your CRM Implementation 
 
206 
In terms of the technology candidates, it is best if all solutions on the short list of candidate 
systems have demo versions available for members of the team to try out. Clearly, from the title of 
this book, I feel that for smaller businesses, Sugar Open Source is a very good cost-effective 
candidate for that technology. By now, with luck, so do you. But it is essential that other opinions 
on the subject be heard.  
By having the CRM implementation team meet regularly for a few weeks, and do offline 
investigation and preparation between meetings, you should quickly get to a set of business goals, 
as well as an agreed-upon technology base and specifications for customization. These 
specifications can be as simple as printed copies of screen layouts with changes marked on them.  
This is where you need to get to before you talk to anyone outside your company.  
As a checklist, here is what your planning needs to achieve:  
• 
Executive sponsor identified 
• 
Project manager identified 
• 
Members of the CRM implementation team agreed 
• 
Initial briefing note generated for the first team meeting 
• 
First meeting held 
• 
Responsibilities assigned for investigation and team briefing on key topics—these 
topics include:  
o 
Business processes needing improvement 
o 
Suggested improvements  
o 
Identifying the top three goals for the implementation 
o 
Base technology to be used  
o 
Candidates for vendor to perform implementation and customization  
o 
Suggested goals for phase one of the implementation  
o 
Suggested implementation schedule for multiple phases 
o 
Approach to data migration 
o 
Approach to training 
o 
Approach to stepwise introduction within the organization 
• 
Briefings delivered at later meetings, and key decisions made on the topics above 
Clearly, a larger organization will perform a more comprehensive and slower version of the 
process above, and a smaller one will have a more abbreviated and faster process. 
Some Common Pitfalls 
Just to underscore the points made in the section above, and to highlight the importance of 
planning and communications to the CRM implementation process, here is a list of some of the 
classic mistakes we unfortunately see at more client sites than not: 

Chapter 7 
• 
Failure to get someone to take ownership of the process from start to finish. 
• 
Failure to involve your stakeholders, especially the end users, right from the 
requirements gathering stage. 
• 
Not having a focus on the current business process, the intended business process 
improvements, and the specifications for a system that will effect that change. 
• 
Thinking that implementing a CRM means buying CRM software, installing it on a 
server, and then telling the people who need to use it. 
• 
Not making a particular and continuing effort throughout the project to communicate 
the benefits specific to each user and stakeholder, to ensure their buy-in. 
• 
Biting off too big an initial project phase, or simply proceeding as if phases are for 
sissies. This will load too much expenditure up front, delay implementation, and make 
the gap in time between initial good will and early project successes too great to bridge.  
• 
Pursuing too rigid a development process. CRM systems are more about people than 
they are about technology. A process such as Agile Programming (Google will 
show you a nice article on the topic by Martin Fowler) is the sort of approach that 
you should use. In this approach early prototypes are used to generate feedback, and 
successive iterations of the user interface ensure that users feel involved, 
empowered, and happy. Few business users can picture every last detail of a system 
or screen at the outset. And few system architects know exactly what users want. Get 
fairly close, then try it out, and make adjustments. Repeat if necessary. 
• 
Not training your trainer early enough, not giving them enough resources to train all 
users thoroughly, and not planning the roll-out to allow for sufficient training time. 
• 
Failing to define what a successful implementation looks like at the beginning of 
the project. 
• 
Failing to institute a periodic review of the CRM system, and continuing phases of 
development, to further improve business processes and user satisfaction. 
It Takes a Team to Win 
As we saw above, a CRM implementation needs the involvement of a whole team of participants. 
Yes, the executive sponsor and the project manager are of particular importance, but each person 
or group represented on the team is important, and must be continually involved in the process 
from beginning to end.  
This continual involvement, and the ongoing effective and frequent communications between all 
team members, is the one thing all successful CRM implementations have in common.  
Like the introduction of any new business initiative, people know when they are truly involved, or 
just being invited to meetings guided by an elite few in an attempt to win their cooperation.  
The team members that are in management positions should typically be involved in the odd pre-
meeting-meeting to ensure they are familiar with a specific CRM system, or a solution to a 
business problem, in advance, so that they can back it up in front of the whole group, or help make 
a change before it goes to the whole group. 
 207

Managing Your CRM Implementation 
 
208 
One of the most common errors seen on CRM implementations is not paying enough attention in 
the team collaboration process to input from general sales, operations, and admin staff. The whole 
nature of a CRM system is that management will have no data to analyze if these people do not 
use the system regularly. These people need to be onboard for two very good reasons. One is the 
functional reason that they can best determine what an efficient data entry process is and what list 
views and reports are needed for everyday use. The second is the human element—the 
implementation needs to win these people over, and everyone reacts more positively when they 
are involved and have their input heeded, than when a solution is imposed on them.  
Some of the techniques you may wish to use in managing the CRM implementation team 
(depending on the size of your business) will include:  
• 
Define email groups to keep the entire team up to date—psychologically it makes 
everyone on the team a peer. 
• 
Have the team meet physically once a week throughout the requirements definition 
process, and have the entire team physically sign off on the requirements.  
• 
During development, the team can meet once every two weeks to review progress 
against the schedule, and to review any escalated issues. 
• 
Once the first pass of development has been completed, the team should again meet 
once each week. Continue this until the entire organization has been deployed.  
• 
Assuming there are no critical issues, have the team meet again a month after deployment 
has been completed, to review initial feedback, and make or plan adjustments.  
• 
Meet again, three months and six months after initial deployment, to perform 
further reviews.   
Setting Project Goals and Specifications 
In the initial briefing note presented at the first meeting of the CRM Implementation team, you 
should include suggested project goals, couched in terms of current business processes and the 
manner in which they should be improved. If required, you should also suggest timelines and 
phases to the implementation process. 
After some initial discussion, and depending on the scale of your business and the CRM 
implementation, one or more team members should be given the task of documenting in detail the 
suggested project goals. These can be presented and agreed at later meetings.  
It will help to first simply agree upon the manner in which each business process can be improved, 
and not focus on any specific CRM technology.  
This approach enables the team to first address the business requirements, and then assign one or 
more members to identifying a suggested shortlist of candidates for the core CRM technology to 
be used for the project.  
That shortlist should then be presented to the entire team, and a winning candidate agreed, 
that appears best suited to satisfying the agreed business requirements, and which also has 
credible references.  

Chapter 7 
Then the team can generate and choose some sketches and specifications of suggested screen 
layouts for list, detail, and edit view screens. These may only be minor variants of the existing 
CRM screens, or they may require heavy customization. The overall project timeline and phases 
foreseen to complete it should also be discussed and agreed at this stage.  
Once the team has developed and agreed upon a set of detailed project business goals, identified 
the desired project timeline and phases, agreed a core CRM technology, and developed detailed 
drawings and specifications, it is time to look for the CRM development partner who will put your 
CRM all together for you, and will in effect join the (previously internal members only) CRM 
implementation team.  
Selecting a CRM Development Partner 
If you think you can do this without external help—think again. Ask yourself these questions: 
• 
Have I worked through dozens of CRM implementations and gained insights into 
what can go wrong and why?  
• 
Have I got experience in data import and massaging techniques gained from years of 
CRM implementations? 
• 
Am I comfortable with my ability to interpret a business process into software 
workflow and screen designs? 
• 
Will I inspire the confidence internally that an external domain expert can? 
Your first task in the process of finding the right partner is to assemble a short list of candidate firms. 
Look in the yellow pages under Customer Relationship Management, by all means, to get started.  
One of your best sources of good information is your peers who are running their own 
businesses—ask your professional colleagues if they have any positive recommendations of firms 
focused on this type of work.  
Another way to find potential partners is to look on the website of the CRM software you intend to 
implement, and look for its approved development partners. Make sure you find a partner focused 
not just on selling or hosting the software, but also on the development of custom enhancements to 
the standard software—as you will need some without doubt.  
SugarCRM, for example, on www.sugarcrm.com, has a list of its partners organized by country, 
with links back to the homes pages of each of those organizations. Note that you shouldn't 
necessarily rule out a partner because they are not in your city or country.  
A final suggestion for building your shortlist of candidates to become your CRM development 
partner is to simply search for the name of the CRM you intend to use, on Google, and look at the 
advertisements on the right, as well as the links on the left.  
Once a member of the team has the shortlist of candidate firms assembled (about 3-4 is the most 
you want), then they should bring the list back to the CRM implementation team to be approved, 
and to assign the evaluation work.  
 209

Managing Your CRM Implementation 
 
210 
Do not split up the evaluations—the same one or two people should speak to all candidate firms, 
and come up with a report and a recommendation to the team. Emphasis should be placed on 
personal compatibility with the internal Project manager, demonstrated competence and 
knowledge, high quality reference implementations, a credible and acceptable proposed project 
timeline, and acceptable pricing with perceived high value for the budget. 
Before you make your final selection of a partner, the team should make a tentative selection, 
based on initial specifications and the candidate firms' estimated development budget. Then you 
should work together to jointly develop a final agreement with a very detailed specification, and a 
fixed development cost. If you can do that successfully, you have your CRM development partner. 
Once you make the final selection of your CRM development partner, you will likely have to 
make a substantial initial deposit against the development work to be undertaken and then you are 
up and running. 
System Development 
The typical CRM development process, even within a single phase of an overall CRM 
implementation program for your business, is broken down into a number of major areas—such as 
enhancements to be made to the accounts model, to contacts, to projects, and so on, as well as the 
custom reports and charts you may need.  
While some of these alterations may interact with each other, many of them will not, and clusters 
of functionality can typically be identified that are fairly independent of each other.  
Usually the best practice is to have the partner develop these off site, and then introduce each new 
function-cluster to you for evaluation one at a time (typically through a development website that 
is exposed just to you). Unless you have spent the time and money to develop a remarkably 
detailed specification, there will always be issues such as "I thought that control would be a 
dropdown, not a radio button", or " I wanted the tab order to go like this …", or "When you select 
a value in that field—this other field is meant to be pre-populated."  
Performing initial acceptance testing on each function-cluster one at a time lets the internal CRM 
implementation team focus on it clearly, and ensure that they get it implemented exactly as they 
need it. Then they can move on to the next function-cluster, and so on until a full first pass of the 
application has been implemented and accepted.  
Now full acceptance testing on the integrated CRM application should be performed by your team 
and a formal sign-off performed against a specific revision of the software on the evaluation website.  
Once that has been done, the CRM application is either hosted by a hosting supplier (which may 
be your CRM development partner again), or the now custom CRM application software is 
delivered to you for installation on your own server hardware. If the latter, you will need a further 
brief acceptance test of the application as installed on your own server.  

Chapter 7 
Data Import 
While the acceptance testing is going on, any past CRM or contact manager data that you wish to 
import into your CRM solution should be getting prepared, converted, and imported. Data import, 
checking and cleanup can itself easily take weeks to perform (when there is lots of data, and it comes 
from an awkward and complex source format)—so make sure to allow sufficient time.  
Do not think that the big job is to get the data into the CRM, and that you can clean it up 
afterwards. The big job is to get the data cleaned up. Ask yourself—are there any transformations 
that should be performed on the data while it is outside a CRM—the assignment of accounts to 
users, for example—by postcode perhaps? Will you design and run a scan for duplicates? 
When you have approved the software customization and development process, and your imported 
data looks just right, you are ready to start introducing your new CRM to the most important 
people in the process—its users. 
Pilot Testing 
Pilot testing of the CRM is a critical step of the process. Each section of the CRM should be tested 
by one of the user that are most dependent on that section working optimally. Sales management 
should test the pipeline charts. Sales staff and Finance should test the commission reports. Sales, 
service, and admin general staff should test the usability of account, contact, opportunity, lead, and 
case screens. Administrators should evaluate management reports, and so on.  
I always look at it this way. A year after your implementation, no one will remember clearly if it 
was on time, or on budget. All they will remember is if you produced a system that is now a 
critical part of the organization's business processes, if they like the system, and if they felt like a 
part of its introduction.  
Project managers should not be afraid to send the system back for re-work if the initial pilot 
testing indicates significant dissatisfaction with the usability of the system, or the accuracy with 
which it adheres to the desired business processes.  
The CRM Training Process 
CRM training has two goals and making the users familiar with the system and teaching them  
how to use it is only one of them. The other goal is to generate positive momentum for the 
implementation, and enthusiasm in the user base.  
To accomplish this latter goal, you need to make sure people like what they see—especially the 
general sales staff, and to some degree the general administrative staff—as these are the two most 
likely sources of resistance and negative reactions.  
Therefore your approach should be as follows: 
 211

Managing Your CRM Implementation 
 
212 
Session 1: Initial Management Training and Product 
Exposure 
Goals:  
• 
To create awareness in Senior Management, to stimulate questions, and to discover 
any shortcomings early, within a controlled group that consists of those individuals 
most likely to be supportive of the CRM implementation and its goals.   
• 
To finalize and clarify all system access details with MIS. 
Attendees:  
• 
Lead trainer 
• 
Project manager 
• 
Executive sponsor 
• 
Internal or external network administration and MIS 
• 
Finance management 
• 
Sales management 
• 
Administration management 
After the first session, all the attendees should be encouraged to go and use the system, enter live 
data, and take note of any problems, questions, or dislikes.   
Next Steps:  
• 
A week later, this same group should re-assemble for session 2.  
Session 2: Management Training Completion and Issue 
Management 
Goals:  
• 
To complete the management training, so that senior management has a good 
understanding of the system's capabilities, and how to operate the system.  
• 
To make management enthusiastic about the system. 
• 
To ensure management's full support of the broad introduction of the CRM system.  
• 
To allow management to answer questions about the system knowledgeably, and to 
correct any misinformation later on from staff.  
• 
To address any management concerns about the system function, clarify any 
misunderstandings, and identify any last-minute system shortcomings that must be 
addressed prior to general introduction of the system. 

Chapter 7 
Attendees:  
• 
Same as session 1. MIS optional. 
Next Steps:  
• 
Any mandatory fixes must be identified, documented, summarized, agreed by the 
CRM implementation team, and then developed and applied.  
• 
If any fixes were required, this same group should re-assemble for session 3 to 
review the fixes.  
Session 3: Present Final System Adjustments (Optional) 
Goals:  
• 
To reinforce the perception that the system will evolve over time, and will genuinely 
be guided by the needs of its users.  
• 
To ensure management's full support of the broad introduction of the CRM system.  
Attendees:  
• 
Same as session 1. 
Next Steps:  
• 
Schedule session 4 a week later.  
Session 4: General User Training Session 
Goals:  
• 
Note that there may be multiple classes scheduled for session 4. No class should 
have more than 6 users in it. Separating users by department is a good idea—Sales 
will have questions on different topics than Administration.  
• 
To present the CRM system capabilities and method of operation in a comprehensive 
and logical manner.  
• 
To stimulate class participation and questions.  
• 
To record user feedback and open questions.  
• 
To define initial goals for scope of use. (Departmental management participation is 
mandatory for this.) 
Attendees:  
• 
Lead trainer 
• 
Project manager (not all sessions if there are many) 
 213

Managing Your CRM Implementation 
 
214 
• 
Sales management 
• 
Sales general staff 
• 
Administration management 
• 
Administration general staff 
• 
All other general staff that will use the system 
Next Steps:  
• 
Optional follow-up session 5, two weeks later.   
Session 5: Training Completion (Optional) 
Goals:  
• 
To close off any open questions  
• 
To address any questions that have arisen in the last two weeks  
• 
To re-present training sections where users seem uncertain 
• 
To ensure a positive attitude on the part of of all users 
• 
To record any outstanding concerns or issues 
Attendees:  
• 
Lead trainer 
• 
Project manager 
• 
All staff that wish to participate 
Next Steps:  
• 
Presentation of training results to CRM implementation team, including any 
outstanding issues identified.  
CRM Training Materials 
The most important prerequisites for the CRM training sessions are: 
• 
A good trainer that can understand the business context, as well as relate to the users 
at their level. 
• 
A quiet training room, with overhead projector connected to the laptop/PC of the 
trainer, a meeting table, and plenty of room for all attendees. 
• 
A group of no more than six attendees, to create a constructive learning environment, 
and to prevent any impersonal mob rule negative feedback events from having a 
chance to start. 

Chapter 7 
• 
All users to have been pre-configured in the system prior to the session, so they can 
see themselves already set up as users, and so they can use the CRM system 
immediately after the session if they wish. 
• 
Optionally, you may wish to allow users to have their own PCs or laptops in the 
training session, to experiment with the system. If so, only allow laptop/PC use after 
initial orientation in the system is complete. Be prepared with slips of paper with 
sign-on URL, user names and passwords if you do this.  
Expect each training session to be 75-90 minutes long. Any longer and attendees will want to 
avoid them—attention spans will only stretch so far.  
While the various sessions outlined above have different goals and attendees, the material to be 
presented at the main sessions (1 and 4) as well as used for backup material at the reinforcement 
sessions (2 and 5) is largely common.  
The remainder of this section contains suggested content to be used to make up a set of overhead 
slides for use as training material for these sessions.  
While you present these slides, it is a useful technique to switch back and forth between the 
slideshow software, and the web browser with a live session on the go, to illustrate general points 
with specifics from the live software.  
Always be prepared to stop the presentation to answer (somewhat sane and valid) questions—the 
users must always feel that the company is listening to them.  
Slide 1: What is a CRM System? 
• 
A system that manages the information and processes surrounding your 
organization's relationship with its customers 
• 
Principle goals are to improve customer satisfaction and retention, plus sales 
efficiency and performance 
• 
Sales as well as service/support, plus administration and even finance 
• 
Not a contact manager—it is typically based on the distinction between an Account 
and a Contact 
• 
Includes opportunity tracking and sales pipeline, lead source analysis 
• 
Even corporate calendar, RSS news feeds, to-do lists, and email 
Slide 2: CRM Deployment Options 
• 
On Demand  
• 
Self Hosted Application Software 
• 
3rd Party Hosted Application Software 
 215

Managing Your CRM Implementation 
 
216 
Slide 3: What are our Business Goals? 
• 
For you to fill in the goals identified by your CRM implementation team  
• 
On your list you may want to include— 
o 
To improve customer satisfaction and retention  
o 
To improve sales efficiency and performance 
Slide 4: What Functional Areas of CRM will we Use the 
Most? 
• 
Again—you need to fill in the key areas of focus for your organization 
• 
Will you use simply the core basic CRM capabilities, or broaden its use to include 
Marketing Campaigns, Project Management, Document Management, and so on? 
Slide 5: What is SugarCRM? 
• 
A leading CRM implementation from a commercial open-source vendor in California  
• 
Based on the LAMP platform 
• 
Delivers CRM capabilities (and more) into any web browser 
• 
Are you using the Open Source or Pro version? 
• 
What are the customizations you have had developed? 
• 
What vendor developed those changes? 
• 
Where do users go for support— internally and externally? 
Slide 6: CRM Basics 1—System Access, Screen Layout, 
Navigation 
• 
Logging In—user name, password, selecting language and theme 
• 
Principal Screen Layout Elements  
• 
Navigating SugarCRM—tab or side panel navigation, shortcuts 
• 
List, Detail and Edit Views 
• 
Main panel and sub-panels 
• 
Logging Out 
Slide 7: CRM Basics 2—Accounts and Contacts 
• 
Account information content 
• 
Contact information content 
• 
Relating Contacts to Accounts 
• 
Permissions and Security—who sees my information? 

Chapter 7 
Slide 8: CRM Basics 3—Opportunities and the Sales 
Pipeline, Home Tab 
• 
Opportunity information content 
• 
Home Tab—My Pipeline, My Top Opportunities 
• 
Dashboard Charts 
Slide 9: CRM Basics 4—Calendaring 
• 
Home Tab Calendar 
• 
Calendar Module—Day, Week, Month, Year Views 
• 
Shared Calendar 
• 
Making a Quick Appointment 
Slide 10: CRM Basics 5—Activities (Calls, Meetings, Tasks, 
Notes) 
• 
Creating a Task 
• 
Scheduling a Call 
• 
Scheduling a Meeting 
• 
Making a Note—file attachments 
• 
My Upcoming Appointments 
• 
My Open Tasks 
Slide 11: CRM Basics 6—Email 
• 
Entering Your Email Settings  
• 
Sending a Single Email  
• 
System Email Reminders 
• 
Email Templates 
Slide 12: CRM Basics 7—Advanced Interface Features 
• 
Printing 
• 
Getting Help 
• 
Data Import and Export 
• 
Mass Update  
• 
Quick New Item Box  
• 
Input Business Card 
• 
Create from vCard 
 217

Managing Your CRM Implementation 
 
218 
Slide 13: Extending CRM 1—RSS News and External Sites 
• 
Interface Consolidation Concepts  
• 
RSS News Feeds  
• 
External Websites 
Slide 14: Extending CRM 2—Marketing Campaigns 
• 
Targets versus Leads and Contacts  
• 
Target Lists  
• 
Marketing Campaigns 
• 
Email Marketing Program 
• 
Mass Emailing Queue 
Slide 15: Extending CRM 3—Document Management 
• 
Document Information content  
• 
Document Revisions 
• 
Document Upload 
• 
Document Download 
Slide 16: Extending CRM 4—Project Management 
• 
Project Information Content 
• 
Project Tasks 
• 
Monitoring Project Status  
Slide 17: Extending CRM 5—Customer Service 
Management 
• 
Service Cases 
• 
Bug Tracker  
• 
Case and Bug History 
Slide 18: Extending CRM 6—Always in Touch 
• 
Pros and Cons of Various Remote Access Techniques  
• 
Offline Access and Synchronization 
• 
Wireless Handheld Sync—Palm, PocketPC, BlackBerry 
• 
Wireless Handheld Browser Access 

Chapter 7 
Slide 19: Extending CRM 7—Reaching Out 
• 
Website Lead Collection  
• 
Customer Self-Service Portal 
Going Live: Stepwise Introduction 
Once employees have been introduced to the new CRM and fully trained, it is time to go live.  
A common technique is to conduct general user training in sections by department, and to take 
each department live after they have been trained. If you adopt this approach, be sure to allow 
enough time after each department is trained for them to come to grips with the system and get any 
questions they have answered by support staff, before the next group goes through and the support 
staff is overwhelmed.  
This is typically the approach we ourselves use at The Long Reach Corp. with our clients. The 
only caveat I would recommend is that you make absolutely sure that you have an accurate 
reading on user acceptance in all departments and roles of the organization (from acceptance 
testing and pilot testing) if you are going to use this approach. Once you have taken one group 
live, if another group provides significantly negative feedback in their training session, you have a 
serious problem.  
Continuous Feedback and Enhancement 
Just as every business itself does, every CRM system needs continuous evaluation and 
enhancement. As your business changes, so must your CRM system. And as the competitive 
business environment gets steadily more intense, your CRM must evolve and improve to maintain 
and advance your competitive standing in your industry.  
Until the CRM system achieves a high level of internal user satisfaction, it should be reviewed at 
least once every business quarter for usability improvements, and any potential extensions to 
automate additional business processes.  
Once the system is popular internally, it should be reviewed at least once every six months for 
potential improvements and enhancements. In particular, opportunities should be sought for more 
advanced methods (typically involving external connectivity) of improving your customer 
relationships and satisfaction, such as customer self-service portals, automated website lead 
collection, automated client emails advising of product shipments and problem resolutions, as well 
as email marketing campaigns.  
 219

Managing Your CRM Implementation 
 
220 
Summary 
In this chapter, we analyzed the process of managing and delivering a CRM implementation. 
Some of the key topics detailed here include:  
• 
The makeup of a CRM implementation team 
• 
The key steps to a successful CRM implementation 
• 
How to plan your CRM implementation 
• 
Some common pitfalls to avoid in your CRM implementation 
• 
The importance of genuine team involvement 
• 
How to set CRM implementation project goals and specifications 
• 
How to select a CRM development partner 
• 
Managing your data import process 
• 
The CRM training process, for both management and staff 
• 
CRM training materials—suggested content for a CRM training slideshow was provided 
• 
Stepwise introduction of your CRM system as a key to a successful initial CRM 
implementation and overall long-term CRM program 
• 
Continuous user and customer feedback and resulting improvement of the CRM 
system as key to keeping your business operating at its competitive best  
In the following chapter we will go on to study more advanced CRM topics, which increasingly 
link your CRM to all your key business processes, as well as to your existing customers and future 
prospects. Typically an organization will address these capabilities after the initial phase of the 
CRM implementation is complete, as part of its ongoing program of continuous improvement.  

8 
Linking SugarCRM to  
Your Customers  
Surely the most important goal of any CRM system is to make your customers feel positive about 
your company, and to make them feel that exciting things are happening at your company such as: 
• 
That the employees they are in contact with are caring and well informed 
• 
That new and better information systems are coming into place 
• 
That your company is keeping them better informed about their orders and 
shipments, their service issues, and new product and service introductions  
When a CRM is limited to interacting with only the employees of a business, it will certainly 
affect the first item above positively, but not necessarily the other items. To really improve a 
customer's perception of your organization, one of the biggest improvements can be to let them 
interact almost directly with your CRM system. Some of the activities that this makes possible are:  
• 
Capturing customer leads and requests for information from the public website, 
directly into the CRM. 
• 
Developing email auto-responders within the CRM to send out requested 
information, and to advise clients of activities involving their orders and 
shipments—such as order receipt notices, advice of expected delivery dates, and 
shipping advice notes. 
• 
Developing a customer self-service portal in conjunction with the CRM system, to 
allow clients to file their own service cases, to check on the latest status on a case, 
and to update their own customer profile. 
• 
Linking an email marketing campaign to a public website, which then captures client 
requests for information and inserts the lead data directly into the CRM, complete 
with lead source information. 

Linking SugarCRM to Your Customers 
 
222 
Most of us in our own lives can forgive or understand when a family member, friend, or supplier 
lets us down a bit, or makes a mistake—as long as they communicate with us honestly and 
effectively. In addition, with early detection of any errors, corrective action can always be put in 
place more quickly. Integrating your CRM more directly with your customer is no more 
complicated than this—promoting more effective, more accurate, and timelier communications 
with your customers, in order to make them feel informed, valued, and empowered.  
Capturing Customer Leads from a Public Site into 
your SugarCRM Installation 
Capturing leads from a public website directly into your CRM is one of the greatest early 
initiatives you can implement in terms of streamlining business processes to save time and effort. 
In this section we will show you how to do this with SugarCRM.  
As our working example here, we will use the public site for The Long Reach Corporation. (By 
rights, we should really use RayDoc as our example here, but as RayDoc is not a real company, 
and as it was important that there be a live site you could go to look at and capture code from, we 
will have to make do with my own site.) On this site, there is a page that offers a free 30-day trial 
of Info At Hand software (a commercial extension of SugarCRM Open Source, by the way).  
One key advantage of the lead capture method described here is that your public site does not need 
to have access to PHP scripting capabilities which many inexpensive site hosting options do not 
include, reserving it for higher priced offerings.  
The sample lead capture page looks like this:  

Chapter 8 
 
 
Lead Capture Web Page 
 223

Linking SugarCRM to Your Customers 
 
224 
The code for the page overleaf defines and captures the data into a form. It assumes that it 
is sending the form data to a SugarCRM installation at the URL 
http://demo.longreach.net—where it is received by a PHP file called 
leadCapture.php in the root directory. 
This code can be found in the code bundle or you can browse to 
http://www.thelongreach.com/iah_free_trial.html and go to View | Source in  
your browser. 
If you have several pages on your public site that capture lead data from people interested in 
different topics, then each page can set one field in the form data to a specific value, to indicate 
that the lead captured is a person interested in a particular topic. Alternatively, each lead capture 
page on your public site could be the same, but post its form to a different lead capture module on 
your SugarCRM server, which could hardwire the referred by value, as seen in the code in the 
next section. 
One thing you will need to be careful of—the options offered for Lead Source (seen in the code above 
as Partner, SugarCRM forum, Google Search, and so on) need to be added to (or pre-existing) options 
in the drop-down list lead_source_dom. If they are not they will appear as blank.  
The software that receives the form data from your public website (you can see a reference to it 
about one page down from the top of the code segment discussed above) is the leadCapture.php 
file, which is in the root directory of your SugarCRM installation. It should be edited to include 
certain important blocks of code that are mentioned below (the entire code file can be found in the 
code bundle). 
At the line immediately under the comment about MODIFIED CODE, you see the reference to 
username and password—these must be a valid username/password combination within the 
SugarCRM installation. It is a good practice not to use a normal username here, but a special 
one like leadCapture, which is only used for this purpose. Case (upper or lower) matters here. 
$users = array( 
 
    // MODIFIED CODE 
   'leadCapture' => array('name'=>'username', 'pass'=>md5('password')), 
); 
 
$current_user = new User(); 
$current_user->user_name = $users[$_POST['user']]['name']; 
if($current_user->authenticate_user($users[$_POST['user']]['pass'])){ 
    $userid =  
         $current_user->retrieve_user_id($users[$_REQUEST['user']]['name']); 
    $current_user->retrieve($userid); 
    $leadForm = new LeadFormBase(); 
    $prefix = ''; 
    if(isset($_POST['prefix']) && !empty($_POST['prefix'])){ 
        $prefix =     $_POST['prefix']; 
    } 
 
    if( !isset($_POST['assigned_user_id']) || 
!empty($_POST['assigned_user_id']) ){ 
        $_POST['prefix'] = $userid; 
    } 

Chapter 8 
    $_POST['record'] =''; 
 
    if( isset($_POST['_splitName']) ) { 
        $name = explode(' ',$_POST['name']); 
        if(sizeof($name) == 1) { $_POST['first_name'] = '';  
$_POST['last_name'] = $name[0]; } 
        else { $_POST['first_name'] = $name[0];  $_POST['last_name'] = 
$name[1]; } 
 
//        die('first name is: '.$_POST['first_name'].'<br/>Last name 
is:'.$_POST['last_name'].'<br/>'); 
    } 
The block of code between the comments START ADDED CODE BLOCK 1 and END ADDED CODE 
manipulates some of the form values from their captured post values into the right form for saving 
in the leads table. 
    // START ADDED CODE BLOCK 1 
    $_POST['status']         = "New"; 
    $_POST['refered_by']   = "Lead Capture Webpage"; 
    // convert 'opt in' checkbox into 'opt out' value 
    $_POST['email_opt_out'] = empty($_POST['email_opt_in']) ? 'on' : 'off'; 
    // test_data is a custom field used by Long Reach 
    if(!empty($_POST['test_data'])) 
        $_POST['description'] = "Please set up test data on this account!"; 
    else 
        $_POST['description'] = "Do not populate this account with test 
data."; 
    $_POST['assigned_user_id'] = $userid; 
    // END ADDED CODE 
 
    $return_val = $leadForm->handleSave($prefix, false, true); 
The block of code between the comments START ADDED CODE BLOCK 2 and END ADDED CODE sends an 
email to sales@thelongreach.com indicating if the lead capture has been successful or not. 
Assume that the public site is at http://www.thelongreach.com, and that there is a file in the root 
directory of that site called success.html to which the user is transferred if his or her lead data 
has been successfully captured.   
        // START ADDED CODE BLOCK 2 
    if($return_val) { 
        mail( 
            "sales@thelongreach.com", 
            "Lead Capture Success", 
            "Lead Capture New Lead ID# ".$return_val->id 
        ); 
        header("Location: http://www.thelongreach.com/success.html"); 
    } 
    else { 
        mail( 
            "sales@thelongreach.com", 
            "Lead Capture Failed", 
            "Lead Capture Failed" 
        ); 
        header("Location: http://www.thelongreach.com/failure.html"); 
    } 
    exit(); 
    // END ADDED CODE 
 
    if(isset($_POST['redirect']) && !empty($_POST['redirect'])){ 
 
        //header("Location: ".$_POST['redirect']); 
 225

Linking SugarCRM to Your Customers 
 
226 
        echo '<html><head><title>SugarCRM</title></head><body>'; 
        echo '<form name="redirect" action="' .$_POST['redirect'].  
'" method="POST">'; 
 
         foreach($_POST as $param => $value) { 
 
            if($param != 'redirect') { 
                 echo '<input type="hidden" name="'.$param. 
'" value="'.$value.'">'; 
            } 
 
         } 
 
         if( ($return_val == '') || ($return_val  == 0) || ($return_val < 0) ) 
{ 
             echo '<input type="hidden" name="error" value="1">'; 
         } 
         echo '</form><script language="javascript" 
type="text/javascript">document.redirect.submit();</script>'; 
         echo '</body></html>'; 
         die(); 
 
    }else{ 
        echo "Thank You For Your Submission."; 
    } 
} 
The block of code between the comments START ADDED CODE BLOCK 3 and END ADDED CODE 
transfers the user to failure.html if the lead data is not captured successfully. 
else 
{ 
 
    // START ADDED CODE BLOCK 3 
    header("Location: http://www.thelongreach.com/failure.html"); 
    exit(); 
    // END ADDED CODE 
         
    echo "We're sorry, the server is currently unavailable, please try again 
later."; 
    echo '<html><head><title>SugarCRM</title></head><body>'; 
    echo '<form name="redirect" action="' .$_POST['redirect'].  
'" method="POST">'; 
     echo '</form><script language="javascript" 
type="text/javascript">document.redirect.submit();</script>'; 
     echo '</body></html>'; 
     die(); 
} 
 
?> 
If you want to capture a different set of data fields than that shown in this worked 
example, you simply need to change the set of fields used in the page on the public site.  
An example of a page to display upon a successful lead capture is as follows:  

Chapter 8 
 
Successful Lead Capture 
Once your public site is successfully sending leads to your CRM, and they are being captured 
there, and notification emails are going out to sales to follow them up—you will really begin to 
feel like you are making progress in your efforts to modernize and automate your organization.  
There are few things quite as satisfying as driving along in the car, and receiving an email on your 
BlackBerry telling you that a new lead has been received. Especially when you know that it took 
no effort at all from anyone in the company! 
And from a process perspective—having every new lead automatically entered into the CRM 
makes it quick and easy to convert that lead into a contact, enter details of new sales opportunities, 
and include them in email marketing campaigns—all without any data transcription errors, or lost 
leads, due to human errors. 
One note of caution—most lead capture sites capture as much as 50% bad data—people who just 
enter anything they fancy in the form for a lark. It is handy that all new leads above are captured in 
a way that they are assigned to an easily identified special leadcapture username. This way the 
leads list view can easily be filtered to show just these leadcapture leads, and they can be checked 
for data quality before they enter (and potentially pollute) your general data pool. 
 227

Linking SugarCRM to Your Customers 
 
228 
Customer Self-Service Portals 
After automating the lead capture process, the next step in linking your customers into your CRM, 
and therefore into your business and its processes, is the self-service portal.  
Much as it sounds, this is a software system that enables your customers to exchange information 
with your organization in a completely autonomous manner. In this initial implementation, we will 
show you how to implement a system that allows customers to file service cases and software bugs 
within your CRM system, and then to check periodically for their updated status. The system is 
designed to be extensible to support customer interaction in almost any area covered by the CRM. 
The fundamental capability that the self-service portal provides is to enable customers to add 
information into the CRM, and retrieve that information later on when it has been updated by 
company staff, without allowing them access to the CRM system as a whole. That information can 
also be provided in the context of other customer-focused information and services, creating a 
very positive impression and experience. 
The key business value provided by such self-service portals is that customers need not wait for 
support staff to be available in order to report problems they are experiencing, or to check on the 
latest progress in resolving them—speeding the process, reducing call volumes in customer 
services, and allowing support staff to focus on resolving problems, not just talking about them. It 
also allows customers to file new issues, or check on status of existing issues, 24 hours a day, not 
just within business hours.  
A word of caution: At the time of writing, SugarCRM 4.0 is the current Sugar version. However, it 
does not yet support the Mambo portal integration. Sugar 3.0 integration works solidly, and Sugar 
3.5 integration seems to be just being tidied up by several contributors. Check in the SugarCRM 
Open Source forums for the latest information on this integration. Additionally, with the split of 
the Joomla portal from Mambo portal, there is now some Joomla integration work going on, so 
you may wish to check into that as well. 
Installing the Mambo Portal 
Assuming you have already installed SugarCRM Open Source on your server, you have the 
perfect environment already established to receive the Mambo portal. Like SugarCRM, it uses the 
LAMP or WAMP system software platforms.  
Download the ZIP file for Mambo (versions 4.5.1 or 4.5.2 are supported by the Sugar portal 
components you will be installing shortly). You can find the Mambo download at 
http://mamboforge.net/frs/?group_id=5.  

Chapter 8 
You can refer to the following books by Packt Publishing (www.packtpub.com) for more 
information regarding the Mambo open-source content management system. 
• 
Building Websites with Mambo [ISBN 1-904811-73-6] 
(http://www.packtpub.com/mambo/book) 
• 
Mastering Mambo : E-Commerce, Templates, Module Development, SEO, Security, 
and Performance [ISBN 1-904811-51-5] 
(http://www.packtpub.com/mastering_mambo/book) 
Unzip the Mambo package—it produces a single main directory structure. Place this directory 
within your web server's document root, or within your public HTML directory. For our purposes 
here, it is assumed that we are installing into /mambo off the root directory of the web server. If the 
web server is serving the principal URL of http://longreach.net, then you would access the 
Mambo portal by going to the web address http://longreach.net/mambo/—and that is how we 
shall document the installation process here. Clearly, your server will be on a different URL, and 
you should change any references to the URL within this documentation appropriately.  
Set the permissions on the files in the /mambo directory just the same way as you did the files in 
the Sugar directory when you installed that software.  
Now you need to create a new database, and a new database user, that will be used within MySQL 
for the Mambo installation. For the purposes of this chapter, assume that both of these are to be 
called mambo. For a Linux server, you can follow the same process that you did in the Configure 
MySQL section of Appendix A. For a Windows server, use phpMyAdmin or a similar utility to 
create the new database mambo, and then create the new database user, mambo and assign that 
user full rights to the new database. 
Now—point your browser to your Mambo installation—for our example here that is http:// 
longreach.net/mambo/. You will see the pre-installation check screen (shown overleaf) of  
the Mambo web-based installer, which will guide you through the balance of the Mambo 
installation process.  
 229

Linking SugarCRM to Your Customers 
 
Installing Mambo Portal: Pre-Installation Check 
If you have set all the file permissions correctly, and all other supporting files required by the 
installation process are present, all the entries in the top section of the screen should be green, 
allowing you to proceed with the installation. When they are, click on Next. 
 
230 

Chapter 8 
 
Installing Mambo Portal: License Acceptance 
On the screen above, you simply accept the Mambo GPL license, and then click on Next.  
 231

Linking SugarCRM to Your Customers 
 
Installing Mambo Portal: Step 1: MySQL Database Configuration 
Assuming that you created your new MySQL database and MySQL database user as mambo, 
then the setting shown in the figure above should be fine for your installation. Enter them, and 
click on Next.  
 
232 

Chapter 8 
 
Installing Mambo Portal: Step 2: Naming Your Site 
Once you get to this screen safely, you are in great shape. Simply provide a name for your Mambo 
site, such as the one shown above, and click on Next.  
 233

Linking SugarCRM to Your Customers 
 
Installing Mambo Portal: Step 3: Confirm Installation Settings 
Now set the URL that will be used to access your portal, and the path on your server to the root 
directory of the Mambo installation. Add an email address that the portal can send any important 
messages to, accept all other defaults, and click on Next.  
 
234 

Chapter 8 
 
Installing Mambo Portal: Step 4: Installation Complete 
The basic Mambo installation is now complete.  
You should now erase (or at least rename) the installation directory within the Mambo root 
directory on your server.  
Take note of the administration username and password information—you will need it shortly. 
Now click on the View Site link to see your customer portal for the first time.  
 235

Linking SugarCRM to Your Customers 
 
First Login to Mambo Portal 
Here is your customer portal. Mambo includes an entire content management system that allows 
you to define the content, appearance, and navigational structure of your customer website, and 
that is a subject that needs its own book to describe properly. For now, just accept that you can use 
Mambo to create whatever company graphics and menu system you want for your customer 
portal. You can log in to this screen using the administrator username and password provided on 
the last screen.  
 
236 

Chapter 8 
 
Logged in to Mambo Portal Site as Admin 
Here you are logged in to the customer portal as a regular user. As of yet, the special features that 
link the Mambo portal to the SugarCRM system are not installed. In order to install them, we will 
need to use the administration functions provided within the Mambo portal. To access them, click 
on the Administrator link just above the login form. 
 237

Linking SugarCRM to Your Customers 
Now you see the administration login screen. Use the same administrator access information to 
login here.  
Login to Mambo Portal Admin Console 
And finally, we see the Mambo administration menu screen.  
 
The Mambo Admin Console 
 
238 

Chapter 8 
Installing the SugarCRM Portal Components for Mambo 
With Mambo now fully installed, you are ready to go on to the next step—that of installing the 
SugarCRM portal components for Mambo.  
The Sugar self-service portal for Mambo consists of three Mambo portal components, and one 
Mambo portal module (components and modules are different sorts of add-on elements within the 
Mambo framework). The new components are: 
• 
com_sugarregistration: This component links from the Mambo portal to Sugar Open 
Source to create an authenticated session between them. A user defined within the 
Sugar Open Source CRM is used for this purpose, and must be defined within the 
Sugar system. 
• 
com_sugarbugs: This links from the Mambo portal to Sugar Open Source using the 
Sugar's SOAP communications facility to provide searching, creating, and editing of 
software bug reports. 
• 
com_sugarcases: This links from the Mambo portal to Sugar Open Source using 
Sugar's SOAP communications facility to provide searching, creating, and editing of 
services cases. 
The new module for Mambo portal is:  
• 
mod_sugarlogin: In Mambo terms this is a helper module that works with  
the com_sugarregistration component to provide login services to Sugar from 
within Mambo. 
In order to install and use these objects within Mambo, you will first want to define a portal user 
within Sugar Open Source, for the Mambo modules to use to talk to the CRM system.  
Within the admin area of Sugar Open Source, create a new user—typically with the username 
Portal, and the Portal Only User checkbox selected. This user will be used uniquely for this role, 
and will not be a valid login for Sugar Open Source as a normal user. 
 239

Linking SugarCRM to Your Customers 
 
Definition of Sugar's Portal User for Mambo 
While in the Sugar admin area, choose Configure Settings, and click on the checkbox for Enable 
Self-Service Portal Integration. This turns on the portal integration services, and also adds a new 
Display in Portal checkbox for any notes attached to cases. This checkbox is used to enable notes 
to be exposed to customers if they do not contain sensitive information.  
 
240 

Chapter 8 
 
Enabling Sugar's Portal Services 
Next, you use the administration area within Mambo to install the various components and module 
for Mambo to link to Sugar. First, you will need to download these objects from SugarForge.org. 
These are currently at http://www.sugarforge.org/frs/?group_id=10&release_id=11.  
Each of these four objects is downloaded in the form of a ZIP file and you need to keep these files 
as ZIP files and not expand them.  
The process of installing these four objects within Mambo is rather sensitive—in particular, they 
need to be loaded in a specific order, as documented here.  
First, you need to install and configure the com_sugarregistration component. Use the drop-down 
menu system at the top of the page in the Mambo administration system to select the Components 
menu item, and the Install/Uninstall option on that menu. 
 241

Linking SugarCRM to Your Customers 
 
Installing Mambo com_sugarregistration Component 
Now you need to set the configuration information for this component. Type in the values for the 
Sugar portal username and password you created earlier for portal access within Sugar. Also enter 
the URL of the server, and then click on Save Configuration.  
 
242 

Chapter 8 
 
Configuring Mambo com_sugarregistration Component 
Next you will need to configure the form fields to be used within the com_sugarregistration 
component. You should see the next screen automatically displayed. If you do not, you can use the 
menu system within Mambo administration to navigate to Components | Sugar Registration | Form 
Fields. Make the screen look like the figure that follows, and click on the Save icon at the top right.  
 243

Linking SugarCRM to Your Customers 
 
 
Configuring the Sugar Registration Form Fields  
 
244 

Chapter 8 
Next, you will need to install the com_sugarcases component. It will make use of the 
configuration data already provided for the com_sugarregistration component. Use the menu 
system within Mambo administration to navigate to Components | Install/Uninstall, and then 
browse to the ZIP file for this component and click on Upload File and Install. All being well, you 
will see a screen confirming Upload component—Success. Click on Continue.  
Go to the administration menu option, Components | Sugar Cases | Configuration and check that 
all the configuration data is set correctly.  
Now do the same again for the com_sugarbugs component—installing the component, and then 
checking that the configuration values are correct. 
Adding Cases and Bugs to the Mambo User Menu 
Now that the three Sugar components have been loaded into Mambo and configured, we need to 
make these capabilities accessible to Mambo users.  
From the Mambo administration screen, select Menu | User Menu. Then click on the icon for a 
New Menu item. On the screen that appears next, select the radio button for Component, and then 
click on Next.  
Adding a New Mambo Menu Item 
On the next screen, type in the name Your Cases for the name of the menu item, and select Sugar 
Cases from the list. For access level, specify Registered. Then click on the Save icon.  
 245

Linking SugarCRM to Your Customers 
 
 
Adding Your Cases as a Menu Item 
Now repeat the process, and add Your Bugs as a menu item, linked to the Sugar Bugs component. 
You should now see the following display in the Mambo Menu Manager:  
 
246 

Chapter 8 
 
 
The Mambo Menu Manager 
Next, you need to install the mod_sugarlogin module from the Modules | Install/Uninstall menu 
within Mambo administration. Just browse to the ZIP file for that module, and click on Upload File 
and Install. You should see the following screen. Once you do, click on Continue.  
Installing the mod_sugarlogin Module 
 247

Linking SugarCRM to Your Customers 
Publish the Sugar Login Form 
Next, you need to publish the Sugar Login Form provided by this module. Use the Mambo 
administration menu to navigate to Modules | Site Modules. The Sugar Login Form is likely on the 
second page of modules listed. Click on the red X to publish the form.  
The Mambo Admin Console 
 
248 

Chapter 8 
Create a New Mambo User 
Now use the Mambo administration menu to navigate to Site | User Manager, and then click on 
the New icon to create a new user. Once you have entered the user information (note that you need 
to set Group to Registered), click on the Save icon. 
Creating a New Mambo User 
 249

Linking SugarCRM to Your Customers 
Create a New Sugar Contact Linked to the Mambo User 
Lastly, create a new contact within Sugar Open Source, link it to the Mambo username you have 
just created, and mark it as active within the portal.   
Creating a Sugar Contact Linked to the Mambo User 
Using Your New Self-Service Portal 
You should now be able to use your self-service portal. Log out of the system, and log in to the 
regular Mambo site (not administration) as the new Mambo user you just created.  
 
250 

Chapter 8 
 
Logged in to Mambo, with New Cases and Bugs Menu Items 
Click on the link to Your Cases. From here, you have choices for Home (which lists all cases that 
relate to your user), New (to create a new case), and Search (to look for a specific case). Click on 
New to create a new case. Enter a name for the case, and a description.  
 251

Linking SugarCRM to Your Customers 
 
 
Creating a New Case, Using the Mambo Self-Service Portal 
Click on Save. Now you see the full form for a new case, and can enter the details of a note to be 
attached to the case and optionally a file attachment.  
Now you can look at the cases within Sugar Open Source, and see that the case has been entered 
there automatically.   
Similarly, you can click on the link to Your Bugs. From here, you again have the choices for 
Home, New, and Search. Click on New to create a new bug report. Enter a name for the bug, select 
the release, and enter a description. Once you have saved this record, check within Sugar that it 
has been entered as a new bug.  
 
252 

Chapter 8 
 
 
The Mambo Admin Console 
While we have only illustrated self-service bugs and cases capabilities here, with the development 
of new components you can use the generalized SOAP interface to Sugar Open Source to create 
all sorts of customer self-service applications, including such applications as document sharing 
portals, project tracking portals, and so on. 
This sort of technology use is only going to grow faster and faster in the coming years. Now that 
you have seen what it can do for a business, do you really want to compete without these tools 
against companies that are using them to their full potential? 
 253

Linking SugarCRM to Your Customers 
 
254 
 
Summary 
In this chapter, we have covered two key techniques for linking your CRM to the outside world, 
and more specifically to your current and potential customers.  
Lead-capture applications are simple to set up, and have immediate impact on the bottom line in 
terms of both creating revenue, and cutting administration costs. 
Developing customer self-service portals is a key technique to maximize the return from your 
CRM investment. They keep your customers better informed and happier, while improving 
efficiency and reducing costs in the customer service and support areas. 
From here, the sky is the limit. The future will hold many new developments in the CRM field. 
One widely anticipated trend is CRM systems that act as their own portal—offering carefully 
controlled and regulated direct access to the CRM for customers and suppliers, allowing them to 
see only that information and navigation capability that the system is set up to allow them.  
At the current speed of evolution and development in the CRM field (especially in the red-hot 
field of CRMs for smaller businesses), we can expect this type of development, and many others, 
within the next year or so. I look forward to updating this book to describe them. 

A 
Installing SugarCRM on Linux 
To install SugarCRM on Linux, I recommend, and have documented here, the use of SUSE Linux. 
It is one of the two top Linux distributions, and owned by Novell. SUSE is particularly friendly to 
use for the novice, offering an excellent graphical user interface through which most system 
management and maintenance functions can be performed.  
SUSE has different versions of its Linux product, and several of them will be fine for you to use as 
an operating system platform for SugarCRM. SUSE Linux Enterprise Server 9 is currently the 
flagship SUSE server operating system. SUSE Linux Professional 9.2 or 9.3, or the newer SUSE 
Linux 10 will be fine as well. The important thing is to watch the versions of Apache, MySQL, 
and PHP that you use. My personal favorites have been PHP 4.3.8 with MySQL 4.0.21 and 
Apache 2.0.50. The balance of this chapter documents the installation using SUSE Linux 10. 
You will need the SUSE Linux 10 installation DVD, as well as the SugarCRM installation Zip file. 
An ISO image of a SUSE installation DVD (actually a cut-down evaluation version, but it will 
work for these purposes) may be downloaded (although it is 3.5 GB, so be ready to wait a while) 
from ftp://SUSE.cs.utah.edu/pub/SUSE.com/SUSE/i386/current/iso/. The filename is SUSE-
10.0-EvalDVD-i386-GM.iso.  
Once downloaded, you must use a DVD burning program capable of burning a disk from an ISO 
image—such as Record Now! Deluxe from Sonic, which may be purchased for download at 
http://estore.sonic.com/enu/recordnow/.  
We would recommend, however, that you simply purchase SUSE Linux 10, either online at 
http://www.novell.com/products/linuxprofessional/pricing.html, or at your local retailer 
or distributor. For 59.95 USD you will get a full installation image, and over 1000 pages  
of documentation.  
Basic SUSE Linux Installation 
1. Insert the SUSE Linux boot DVD and re-boot your server from the DVD drive. 
2. Choose Installation from the DVD Boot Options Menu. 
3. Wait for a few minutes during Initializing Hardware. 
4. Choose the SUSE installation language, most often English (US). 

Installing SugarCRM on Linux 
 
256 
5. On the Installation Settings screen, choose New Installation. Note that this screen 
does not appear if a brand new, unformatted hard drive is being used.  
6. Make any necessary changes to Installation Settings—including the formatting of 
disk partitions, setting the Time Zone, and adjusting the software to be installed (do 
not install Office Applications). 
7. Confirm the package license for the Macromedia flash player. 
8. Confirm the installation by clicking on the Install button. 
9. The system then goes on to prepare the hard disk and performs the installation—this 
should take 10-15 minutes. 
10. The system then reboots—and you must choose Boot from Hard Disk. 
Congratulations—your basic SUSE Linux installation is complete. You will now go 
on to configure your server installation.  
Configure the SUSE Linux Installation 
1. Enter a root password, and confirm it. 
2. The system then performs its network configuration. This usually goes quietly and 
when it completes, just click on Next. 
3. The network configuration is saved, and the internet connection is tested. Connect 
the server to the Internet, select Test Connection to the Internet, and click on Next. 
4. The server then downloads the latest release notes, and checks for the latest updates. 
If all is well, a Success message is displayed, and you should click on Next. 
5. You are offered the opportunity to download online updates—choose to skip this, 
and click on OK. 
6. For Authentication Method, choose Local (/etc/passwd), and click on Next. 
7. Enter User Data, Full User Name (for example Michael Whitehead), User Login (for 
example michael), Password (enter it once, and then again to confirm). Select 
Auto-Login, and click on Next.  
8. You may read the displayed release notes, and then click on Next. 
9. 
Browse to Hardware Configuration | Graphic Cards and ensure that the correct monitor 
type, resolution, color depth, and other settings are selected. Then click on Next. 
10. Click on Finish—the system then boots into the graphical desktop. You may remove 
the DVD from the drive at this time. 
Updating the SUSE Linux Installation 
Now you need to update the system software packages already installed, and add in several more that 
need to be installed in preparation for receiving SugarCRM. This section starts with two different 
sets of instructions for beginning this process, depending on the type of DVD you are installing from.  
If you are using the free SUSE evaluation DVD image from a download, use Version 1, provided 
here. Otherwise, skip to Version 2 if you are using a full installation DVD from a retail copy of 
SUSE Linux 10. Version 2 is much faster, as it eliminates a lot of downloading!  

Appendix A 
Version 1:  
Using a Downloaded DVD of SUSE Linux 10  
1. From the 
 button, choose 
SUSE
System | YAST (YAST is an acronym for Yet 
Another Setup Tool). You will need to provide the root password. From YAST, click 
on Change Source of Installation. Click on Add, FTP, and enter the server name 
, and the directory name 
SUSE.cs.utah.edu
pub/SUSE.com/SUSE/i386/current, with 
anonymous authentication. This will take a moment or so to complete. Once it has 
been added, promote it to become the first source on the list, and then click on Finish. 
2. Now select Install and Remove Software within YAST. The system will display 
Reading Package Information; One Moment Please… for a while, as it is reading this 
package data over the Internet.  
3. Now skip over Version 2, and proceed to Continuing the Update. 
Version 2:  
Using a Full Retail DVD of SUSE Linux 10  
1. From the SUSE button, choose System | YAST (YAST is an acronym for Yet 
Another Setup Tool). You will need to provide the root password. Now select Install 
and Remove Software within YAST. The system will display Reading Package 
Information; One Moment Please… for a moment, as it is reading this package data 
from the DVD.  
Continuing the Update…  
1. In the Search box, enter apache—and when a list of packages is displayed on the 
right side of the screen, select 
 and 
apache2-mod_php4
apache2-prefork, and click 
on Accept. Several additional packages will be selected to satisfy dependencies—
, 
apache2 libapr0, and 
. Click on 
php4
Continue. The various packages will now  
be installed. 
2. You will be prompted Would you like to install more packages?. Click on Install More.  
3. In the Search box, enter mysql—and when a list of packages is displayed, select 
mysql, 
, 
, 
, and 
, and click on 
mysqlcc mysql-client php4-mysql
phpMyAdmin
Accept. 
Many additional packages will be selected to satisfy dependencies. This is fine, so 
click on 
. The various packages will now be installed. 
Continue
4. You will be prompted Would you like to install more packages?. Click on Install More.  
5. In the Search box, enter 
—and when a list of packages is displayed, select 
php
php4-
session, and click on 
. The package will now be installed. 
Accept
—Click on 
6. You will be prompted Would you like to install more packages?
Finish.  
7. Now select 
 within YAST. Under 
, select 
Online Update
Update Configuration
User-
Defined Location, and enter the location: ftp://SUSE.cs.utah.edu/pub/SUSE.com/ 
SUSE—then click on Next. (Note that if you experience difficulty downloading 
updates from this location, you may need to try one of the pre-defined locations, 
 257

Installing SugarCRM on Linux 
 
258 
available from the drop-down menu.) Update information will be retrieved. If at any point 
the system seems to stall for several minutes, abort the update process, and re-try it—it 
should recover from where your last try left off.  
8. Typically, simply accept the list of packages to be updated, by clicking on Accept. 
You may receive a message suggesting that you are updating the kernel, and should 
re-boot after the update process is complete. This is OK. Remember to click on 
Remove Source Packages after Update. 
9. The various patches are now applied. This will take 5-10 minutes on a high speed 
connection. When the update is complete, click on Finish.  
10. Re-boot the server by clicking on SUSE | Logout | Restart Computer.  
11. Using YAST, select System on the left-hand menu, and click on Run Level Editor. 
Maximize the window, and find the Apache2 module in the list displayed. Select 
Apache2, and then click on Enable, to run the Apache server now, and in future on 
each boot. Now do the same for MySQL. Click on Finish to exit the Run Level 
Editor, and also close YAST. 
12. Congratulations—you have now installed the latest Apache, MySQL, and PHP 
system software for use with SugarCRM. You have also updated the SUSE Linux 
operating system to the latest software patches available.  
Test Apache and PHP 
1. Click on SUSE | Utilities | Editor to start the Kate editor. Enter <?php phpinfo() ?> and 
perform a File | Save As ... and store the file in your desktop for now, using the 
filename index.php. 
2. Click on SUSE | System | File Manager | File Manager—Super User Mode, and enter 
the root password when prompted. From file:/root, navigate upwards one click to 
file:/. Click on the srv folder, and then www, and then htdocs.  
3. Drag and drop the index.php file into this directory from your desktop.  
4. Run the Konqueror browser by clicking on its icon on the panel across the bottom of 
the screen. Enter localhost as the URL. You should see the results of phpinfo() 
displayed on the screen, providing a lot of configuration information about your PHP 
installation. This confirms that both Apache and PHP are running, and that they are 
getting along with each other. 
Configure MySQL 
1. Right-click on the SUSE button, and select Menu Editor. Select File | New Item, and 
enter the item name MySQL CC, then click on OK. Under command, enter mysqlcc. 
Click on the icon selector top right, and choose the SUSEconf icon. Close the Menu 
Editor, and Save Changes. Now when you click on the SUSE button, under All 
Applications, you will see MySQL CC. Click on this icon now. 

Appendix A 
2. You will need to register your server:  
Name: 
 
localhost
 
Host Name: 
 
localhost
 
: 
 
User Name root
Password: <leave 
 
blank>
: 
Port 3306 
Then click on Test | Add.  
Steps 3 and 4 are optional—you may create the database and database user name as you 
use the SugarCRM Installation Wizard if you prefer.  
3. Within MySQL CC, use the Action drop-down menu to connect to the localhost 
server. Then, on the left-hand side, click on Databases to expand the list of 
databases, then right-click on 
 to add a new database. Use the name 
Databases
. Similarly click on 
 
sugarcrm
User Administration to show all users, and then right-
click on 
 to add a new user.  
Users
4. In the dialog box for New 
 enter the username as 
, host as 
Users,
sugarcrm
localhost, 
and a password of your choosing (suggestion—sugardbpsw). On the right-hand side, 
click on Allow 
 
 
. Then click on 
Access to: sugarcrm
All 
, and 
Privileges
With Grant 
Option. Then click on the 
 button to add the new user 
.  
Add
sugarcrm
5. Now double-click on the user root@localhost. This is the default global user in the 
database, and this user currently has no password—a gaping security hole. So enter a 
password for this root MySQL user, and click on the Apply button, and then the 
Close button. 
6. Doing this has now broken your connection to MySQL, as you were connected as the 
root user with no password, from step 2 above. In the MySQL CC Console Manager 
click on 
. Then re-enter 
File | Exit
MySQL CC, and notice that you get an 
 
Access
 message at the bottom of the window. Click on the 
Denied
Action drop-down menu 
item, and select 
, to edit the localhost server connection. Enter the password 
Edit
from 
the previous step there, and click on the Apply button.  Now click on the Action drop-
down menu item, and select Connect. You should now be back connected to the 
database, but with no security hole.    
7. Exit MySQL CC.  
Configure php.ini 
1. Click on 
 | 
SUSE System | File 
 | 
Manager File 
—
 
 
Manager
Super User Mode, and enter 
the root password when prompted. From 
, navigate upwards one click to 
file:/root
file:/. Click on the 
 folder.  
etc
 
2. Scroll down to find the 
 file, and right-click on it. Select 
php.ini
Open With | KWrite.   
3. Search for 
, and set it to 
memory_limit
11M. This will allow SugarCRM to consume 
up to 11megabytes of memory as it executes. Without this setting, complex actions 
may run out of memory.  
 259

Installing SugarCRM on Linux 
 
260 
4. Search for max_execution_time, and set it to 90. This will allow any PHP instruction 
up to 90 seconds to complete. Without this, activities such as an import of large 
amounts of data will terminate with an error, as they exceed the maximum execution 
time allowed.  
5. Also set max_input_time on the next line of the file to 300. This allows a 5 minute 
window for large files to be uploaded.  
6. Search for display_errors, and set it to Off. This will suppress the display of warning 
messages, which will otherwise disrupt the display.  
7. Search for post_max_size, and set it to 25M to allow large documents to be 
uploaded. Then search for upload_max_filesize, and set it to 22M. The effect of these 
two changes will be to allow a document file of 20 megabytes in size to be uploaded 
to the system. A third setting ($upload_maxsize in config.php), is automatically set to 
exactly 20M by the installation script.  
8. Search for session.gc.maxlifetime. Note that by default it is set to 1440 seconds, 
which is 24 minutes. This controls the length of time a SugarCRM session can be 
idle before the session is terminated. Set it to 1800 for 30 minutes, 3600 for an hour, 
and so on.  
9. Make sure that when setting the above values in php.ini, that the entire line is not 
preceded by a semi-colon—as this indicates that the line is merely a comment, and 
not to be processed. 
10. Perform a File | Save, and exit KWrite.  
Install SugarCRM 
1. Put the SugarCRM zip file on the desktop within your session on your server.  
2. Right-click on the file and select rename. Change the file name to sugarcrm.zip. 
Then right-click on it again, and select extract to sugarcrm/.  
3. Click on SUSE | System | File Manager | File Manager—Super User Mode, and enter 
the root password when prompted. From file:/root, navigate upwards one click to 
file:/. Click on the srv folder, and then www, and then htdocs.  
4. Drag and drop the entire sugarcrm directory from the desktop to this directory. 
Confirm it is a Move when prompted.  
5. Right-click on the sugarcrm folder, and select Properties. On the Permissions tab,  
set Ownership to wwwrun, and Group to users. Set Owner to Can View & Modify 
Content, and Group and Others to Can View Content. Click on the box to apply 
changes to all subfolders, and then click on OK.  
6. We now begin the actual installation process: 
7. Installer Welcome Screen: Run the Konqueror browser by clicking on its icon on 
the panel across the bottom of the screen. Enter localhost/sugarcrm/install.php as the 
URL. You should see the SugarCRM Installer Welcome screen. You're getting close 
to the finish line! Click on Start.  

Appendix A 
 
 
SugarCRM Installer Welcome Screen 
License Acceptance Screen
8. 
: The SugarCRM license acceptance screen is the next 
one you will see. Click on the  
 checkbox, and then on the 
 button.  
I Accept
Next
 
SugarCRM License Acceptance Screen 
 261

Installing SugarCRM on Linux 
System Check Screen
9. 
: Next you see the 
 
 
262 
SugarCRM system check screen. The 
SugarCRM installer checks several aspects of the installation environment, and 
reports their status to you on this screen. You will see a series of green (and perhaps 
a few red) status messages down the right-hand side of the screen. They need to be 
all green for the installation to proceed. Now click on the Next button to proceed to 
the next step of the SugarCRM installation process. 
 
System Check Screen 
Database Configuration Screen
10. 
: Set Host Name to 
, 
localhost Database name to 
, 
sugarcrm Database User Name to 
, and 
sugarcrm
Database User password to 
whatever you chose above (sugardbpsw was suggested). Set the Admin password to 
your choice of password. Click on 
 
Drop & Re-create Existing Tables if this is a 
re-installation. Click on Populate Database With Demo Data if you would like some 
test data created for you. Set the 
 to 
, and the 
Privileged Database User Name
root
Privileged Database User password to the root password for MySQL (as defined in 
step 5 of the section Configure MySQL). Then click on 
. (If you see a prompt 
 
Next
re:
Kwallet, cancel it.) 

Appendix A 
 
 
Database Configuration Screen 
Site Configuration Screen
11. 
: Enter the new password you wish for the SugarCRM Admin 
user, and confirm it. Then click on 
 to proceed to the 
Next
Confirm Settings screen.  
 263

Installing SugarCRM on Linux 
 
 
Site Configuration Screen 
Confirm Settings Screen
12. 
: This screen simply shows you all the settings you have 
provided for the SugarCRM installation. If they look correct, click on the Next 
button to proceed with the actual SugarCRM installation.  
 
264 

Appendix A 
 
 
Confirm Settings Screen 
Perform Setup Screen
13. 
: You should see a screen like the one opposite generated. 
Note it will take a minute or two to complete—so be patient! Your database tables 
have now been created. If all goes well, this step will end with the message—The 
Setup of SugarCRM 4.0 is now complete.  
 265

Installing SugarCRM on Linux 
 
 
Perform Setup 
 
266 

Appendix A 
Log In Screen: 
14. 
Congratulations, you're done. Just click on Finish to log in to 
SugarCRM for the first time. You should see a screen like the one shown below. Log 
in, using the user name 
, and the admin password you provided on the 
admin
Site 
Configuration screen.  
SugarCRM Log In Screen 
Configure Installation Settings 
This section deals with the configuration of installation settings such as how to re-run the 
installation, and the integration of the email server. 
Re-running the Installation  
1. Click on Suse | System | File Manager | File Manager – Super User Mode, and enter 
the root password when prompted. From file:/root, navigate upwards one click to 
, and then 
file:/. Click on the srv folder, and then 
, and then 
. 
www
htdocs
sugarcrm
2. Right click on the config.php file, and select Kate to edit the file with the Kate editor. 
Scroll down about one page to the entry 'installer_locked' => true, and replace 
the word true with the word false. Now perform a File | Save, and then exit the editor. 
3. Exit the File Manager.  
4. Now you may run the install.php file again, to re-run the installation.  
 267

Installing SugarCRM on Linux 
 
268 
Email Server Integration 
1. Ensure that your SugarCRM installation is configured in the Admin area to use the 
sendmail Mail Transfer Agent (MTA).  
2. Check that sendmail is running—by default it is.  
Configure Apache for Multiple Virtual Server 
Installations 
If you intend to run more than one instance of SugarCRM on a server, perhaps providing service 
to a number of organizations, you will need to create multiple virtual server entries on your server. 
If you are performing a conventional installation of SugarCRM for a single organization, you will 
not need to follow the instructions in this section. 
1. Click on SUSE | System | File Manager | File Manager—Super User Mode, and enter 
the root password when prompted. From file:/root, navigate upwards one click to 
file:/. Click on the etc folder, and then on apache2.  
2. 
Scroll down to find the listen.conf file, and right-click on it. Select Open With | KWrite.  
3. Uncomment the name-based virtual hosting entry—NameVirtualHost *:80.  
4. Perform a File | Save, and exit KWrite.  
5. Open the folder vhosts.d in etc/apache2.  
6. In that folder, there are two template files—vhost-ssl.template, and vhost.template.  
7. Copy the vhost.template file by right-clicking on it and selecting Copy. Then right-
click in an open area within the current folder, and select Paste. Enter _primary.conf 
as the new file name when prompted. This will be the new configuration file for your 
primary server entry (if your URL is example.com, then http://www.example.com 
will use this configuration file). Note the underscore at the start of the name—it is 
very important. 
8. Edit your _primary.conf file, by right-clicking on it and selecting Open With | KWrite.  
9. Replace all instances of dummy-host.example.com with the fully qualified domain 
you intend to serve—for instance example.com.  
10. Within the same file, uncomment the line Include /etc/apache2/conf.d/*.conf.  
11. Now find the entry beginning with DocumentRoot and edit it to read DocumentRoot 
/srv/www/htdocs.  
12. Now look for the entry beginning with <Directory, and edit it to read <Directory 
"/srv/www/htdocs">. 
13. Save the file _primary.conf, and exit KWrite.  
14. Much the same way as in Step 7 above, copy vhost.template to your first virtual 
server entry, for example new.conf. 

Appendix A 
15. Edit your new.
 
 file, by right-clicking on it and selecting 
conf
Open With | KWrite. 
Replace all instances of dummy-host.example.com with the fully qualified sub-domain 
you intend to create—for instance new.example.com—where example.com is the URL 
you have defined in steps 7-13 above.  
16. Within the same file, uncomment the line Include /etc/apache2/conf.d/*.conf.  
17. Save the file 
, and exit KWrite.  
new.conf
18. Go to the directory /srv/www/vhosts and within that directory create the folder that 
will hold the content for your new sub-domain address—for instance 
new.example.com. When you are installing multiple instances of SugarCRM, this is 
the sort of folder into which it should be installed for each virtual host. As covered in 
step 5 of the Install SugarCRM section, ensure that permissions on this folder are set 
appropriately. Also—remember that each installation will require a new database to 
be defined within MySQL, and potentially a new MySQL user as well—or you will 
mix the data from one site with that of another.  
19. For each additional virtual host you wish to create, repeat steps 14-18 above.   
20. Restart the Apache web server, so that these changes come into effect. 
 269

 

B 
Installing SugarCRM on 
Windows Server 
To install SugarCRM on Windows Server, we recommend, and have documented here, the use of 
the SpikeSource Windows Installer for SugarCRM. SpikeSource (www.spikesource.com) and 
SugarCRM have built an integrated CRM solution based on the SpikeSource Core Stack that 
installs in just minutes. You can download this integrated installer from SugarForge at 
www.sugarforge.org/projects/spikewamp/.  
Basic SpikeSource Installation 
Once downloaded (the current file is about 25MB in size), you simply drop this executable file 
onto a server that already has Windows Server installed, and double-click on the icon to start the 
install. Once you do, you will see this dialog box on your display: 
 
Sugar on Spike Welcome Screen 
Click on the OK button to proceed, assuming you have no leftover Apache or MySQL installations 
on your server. You now see this SpikeSource License dialog box: 

Installing SugarCRM on Windows Server 
 
 
SpikeSource License Screen 
This is the SpikeSource license agreement. You must click on the button labeled I Agree in order 
to proceed. You then see this dialog box: 
 
Select Installation Folder 
 
272 

Appendix B 
Accept the default installation folder, or edit it to another folder you prefer. Then click on the 
Install button. You will see this dialog box:  
 
SpikeSource Install Completed 
Click on the Close button to proceed to finish the installation. A black DOS CMD session dialog 
box will come up as the last of the installation is completed, and then you see the dialog box 
shown below: 
 
SpikeSource Install Completed: Start Services? 
At this point, click on Yes to start the Apache and MySQL services. A DOS CMD window comes 
up again to start the services, and then two browser windows open. The first window contains the 
SpikeSource Sugar on Spike Readme notes, which also provide the instructions for completing 
this installation: 
 273

Installing SugarCRM on Windows Server 
 
SpikeSource Readme Notes 
 
274 

Appendix B 
The second browser window that opens contains the Welcome Screen for the SugarCRM 
Setup Wizard:  
 
SugarCRM Setup Wizard Welcome Screen 
Click on the Start button to begin the SugarCRM installation process.  
The SugarCRM license acceptance screen is the next screen you will see: 
 
SugarCRM License Acceptance Screen 
 275

Installing SugarCRM on Windows Server 
Click on the I Accept checkbox, and then on the Next button.  
Next you see the SugarCRM system check screen. The SugarCRM installer checks several aspects 
of the installation environment, and reports their status to you on this screen. You will see a series 
of green (and perhaps a few red) status messages down the right-hand side of the screen. They 
need to be all green for the installation to proceed. 
 
SugarCRM System Check Screen 
Now click on the Next button to proceed to the next step of the SugarCRM installation process.  
The database configuration screen helps you to configure MySQL properly for its role in 
supporting the SugarCRM installation. You need to create a database for MySQL to use for 
SugarCRM, and a database user name, with a password for that user as well.  
The first time you install, you will likely want to install the demo data as well.  
 
276 

Appendix B 
You also have to provide the name and password for a privileged database user, so that the 
installer has the power to create a new database and user within MySQL.  
 
SugarCRM Database Configuration Screen 
Once this screen is filled out properly (see the SpikeSource readme notes for more details on how 
to complete this screen if you are unsure), click on the Next button to proceed to the Site 
Configuration screen. Note that the Privileged Database User Password defaults initially to blank. 
 277

Installing SugarCRM on Windows Server 
 
 
SugarCRM Site Configuration Screen 
Enter the password you intend to use for the initial admin user within your SugarCRM installation, 
and then re-enter it for confirmation. Then click on the Next button to proceed to the Confirm 
Settings screen.  
 
278 

Appendix B 
 
 
SugarCRM Confirm Settings Screen 
This screen simply shows you all the settings you have provided for the SugarCRM installation. If 
they look correct, click on the Next button to proceed with the actual SugarCRM installation.  
 279

Installing SugarCRM on Windows Server 
 
 
SugarCRM Perform Setup Screen 
 
280 

Appendix B 
The Perform Setup screen shows you the actions taken by the SugarCRM installer as it builds the 
database for your SugarCRM installation. Once it completes the process (which can take up to 2-3 
minutes)—congratulations, you are done. (Note that the screen image opposite has been abridged. 
The actual screen is even longer than shown.) 
Click on the Next button, and you will see the optional Registration screen. If you wish, you may fill 
out the registration details, and click on the Send Registration button to register your installation with 
SugarCRM. Then click on the Finish button to log in to SugarCRM for the first time.  
SugarCRM Log In Screen 
Now type in the name of the admin user (admin), and the password you set for that user on the Site 
Configuration screen. You should now enter the SugarCRM application, and see the home page for 
the system administrator.  
 281

Installing SugarCRM on Windows Server 
 
SugarCRM Home Page 
Re-running the Installation  
1. Using notepad or another editor, edit the config.php file in the root directory of your 
SugarCRM installation. Scroll about a screenful down into the file, looking for the line 
'installer_locked' => true, and replace the word true with the word false. 
2. Save the edited file.  
Now you may run the install.php file again, to re-run the installation. 
 
 
282 

C 
Data Import and Export 
One of the most important aspects of any CRM software is getting the data from your last CRM 
system moved across into the new one, and getting the data out of your new CRM system for use 
in other applications. Note that this should typically only be done by a system administrator.  
SugarCRM supports the importing of various kinds of data from several different popular contact 
managers and full CRM systems. 
• 
Accounts may be imported from Salesforce.com, from ACT! 2005, or from most 
other systems via a custom comma-delimited or tab-delimited mapping.  
• 
Contacts may be imported from Salesforce.com, from ACT! 2005, from Outlook, or 
from most other systems via a custom comma-delimited or tab-delimited mapping.  
• 
Leads may be imported from Salesforce.com, or from  most other systems via a 
custom comma-delimited or tab-delimited mapping.  
• 
Opportunities may be imported from Salesforce.com, or from most other systems via 
a custom comma-delimited or tab-delimited mapping. 
Importing Accounts and Contacts 
Importing contacts into SugarCRM is fairly straightforward. First you use your old CRM 
application or contact manager to export the data into a Comma Separated Values (.CSV) file 
format. Then you use the import function within the Contacts module (accessible via the 
Navigation Shortcuts Box) to import the data. If a contact record that is imported refers to an 
unknown account, then a new record is automatically created for an account of that name.  
However, one thing to watch out for is that when account records are created automatically in this 
fashion, they are essentially empty—they have associated contacts, but no address or telephone 
information is recorded. Because of this, you should typically import your account data first, 
creating the records complete with address and telephone information (plus perhaps Account Type 
and lots of other information, depending on your old CRM system). This avoids creating rather 
empty account records, and having to manually add the rest of their information later. 
See the sections below for the exact steps for exporting and importing contacts and accounts. 

Data Import and Export 
 
284 
Export Contacts from Your Current Contact Manager 
We will use Outlook 2003 as an example of exporting contact manager data. Other systems tend to 
work in similar ways. 
1. Under the File menu, select Import and Export. The Import and Export Wizard dialog 
box is then displayed.  
2. Select the action Export to a file, and click the Next button. 
3. Choose to create a file of the type Comma Separated Values (Windows), and click on 
the Next button. 
4. Select an Outlook folder from which to export—typically your contacts folder—and 
click the Next button. 
5. Enter the filename and directory location for the exported file to be created, and click 
the Next button. 
6. Confirm your intention to export this file by clicking on the Finish button.  
7. The desired .CSV file is then created by Outlook 2003. You can view the file easily, 
using Microsoft Excel or a simple text editor, to confirm that the data you intended 
has been exported. 
Import Accounts 
If your account data is coming in from another CRM system, then typically that system 
understands the distinction between a contact and an account—that one account can have multiple 
contacts—and has separate data for each. However, if your data is being imported from a simpler 
contact manager—such as Microsoft Outlook, then the only data available is contact data, and you 
will have to be a bit creative to avoid a lot of manual data entry as described above.  
If you are importing account data from a full CRM, proceed now to step 6. If you only have 
exported contact data, and need to massage, or manually clean it to act as account data to be 
imported, perform steps 1-4 shown below: 
1. Copy your exported Contacts.CSV file, and call the copy Accounts.CSV. 
2. Edit the Accounts.CSV file using Excel. First, sort the file according to the 
company name.  
3. Now the more complex part: As you scroll through your data, sorted by company 
name, you will see successive records that have the same company name, because 
there is more than one contact from that account. To avoid multiple copies of the 
same account within SugarCRM, you need to delete these duplicates. And to make 
sure that the best information is attached to the Account record, you should retain 
only the contact whose address and telephone information best represents the 
account as a whole.  

Appendix C 
4. Also look out for company names that are similar but not identical due to 
inconsistencies in the way the company name was entered—you should delete all 
duplicate records except the one with the company name spelled exactly as you wish 
to see it in SugarCRM. 
5. Now that you have a nice clean set of account data, save the Excel file as a .CSV file 
type, and let's proceed to import this account data. 
6. Click on the Import Accounts function within the Navigation Shortcuts Box of the 
Accounts module. 
7. Specify the Data Source. Select Salesforce.com, ACT! 2005, Custom Comma 
Delimited or Custom Tab Delimited—then click on the Next button to continue. For 
massaged or manually cleaned Outlook files where the field names no longer match 
exactly what is exported from Outlook, use the Custom Comma Delimited data source. 
8. Upload the Export File. Use the Browse button to locate the Accounts.CSV data file, 
and then click on the Next button to continue. 
9. 
Confirm Fields and Import. This screen (see the figure overleaf) shows four columns 
of data. Column 2 (Header Row) is the key—this contains the names of the fields 
being exported from your old CRM or contact manager. Columns 3 and 4 show 
example data from the first two records you are about to import. Column 1 
(Database Field) is where you come in—you need to use all of the drop-down box 
controls in this column to select the fields within SugarCRM into which each 
incoming account field is imported.  
10. Spend some time with this, exploring the names of the incoming fields, and the 
names of the corresponding SugarCRM fields, until you are sure you have defined 
the optimum mapping between them. If you are importing from Outlook, a 
particularly important field mapping to get right is to map the incoming Company 
field to the Account Name field within SugarCRM.  
11. When you are satisfied you have the field mapping right, click on the Import Now 
button, at the bottom right of the screen. Before you do this you may choose to click 
on the Save As Custom Mapping checkbox, and provide a name for this mapping so 
that it may be used again in future. 
12. The Import Results screen is displayed. It will summarize how many records were 
successfully imported, how many were skipped over, and the reasons they were 
skipped over. Below the summary are complete lists of all the data imported.  
13. You can now choose to click on the Undo Last Import, Import More, or Finished 
buttons. Click on the Finished button if you are satisfied with the results of the data 
import, or Undo Last Import if you want to go back and try again—usually to 
improve the field mapping.  
 285

Data Import and Export 
 
Confirm Fields and Import Screen 
 
286 

Appendix C 
Import Contacts 
Now that you have a set of account records with fully descriptive data, let's import your contact data: 
1. Click on the Import Contacts function within the Navigation Shortcuts Box of the 
Contacts module. 
2. Specify the Data Source: Select Salesforce.com, Microsoft Outlook, ACT! 2005, 
Custom Comma Delimited or Custom Tab Delimited—then click on the Next button 
to continue. 
3. Upload the Export File: Use the Browse button to locate the data file exported by 
your contacts manager, and then click on the Next button to continue. 
4. 
Confirm Fields and Import: This screen (see the image opposite) shows four columns 
of data. Column 2 (Header Row) is the key—this contains the names of the fields 
being exported from your old CRM or contact manager. Columns 3 and 4 show 
example data from the first two records you are about to import. Column 1 
(Database Field) is where you come in—you need to use all of the drop-down box 
controls in this column to select the fields within SugarCRM into which each 
incoming Contact field is imported.  
5. Spend some time with this, exploring the names of the incoming fields, and the 
names of the corresponding SugarCRM fields, until you are sure you have defined 
the optimum mapping between them. If you are importing from Outlook, a 
particularly important field mapping to get right is to map the incoming Company 
field to the Account Name field within SugarCRM, so that contacts are associated 
with the correct accounts. (Be sure that you have corrected any inconsistent company 
names that you found in your data in step 4 of the Import Accounts section.) 
6. When you are satisfied you have the field mapping right, click on the Import Now 
button, at the bottom right of the screen. Before you do, you may choose to click on 
the Save As Custom Mapping checkbox, and provide a name for this mapping so that 
it may be used again in future. 
7. The Import Results screen is displayed. It will summarize how many records were 
successfully imported, how many were skipped over, and the reasons they were 
skipped over.  Below the summary are complete lists of all the data imported—both 
Contacts, and any Accounts that were automatically created.  
8. You can now choose to click on the Undo Last Import, Import More, or Finished 
buttons. Click on the Finished button if you are satisfied with the results of the data 
import, or Undo Last Import if you want to go back and try again—usually to 
improve the field mapping.  
Importing Leads and Opportunities 
Leads and opportunities are typically only tracked by a full CRM system, not a simple contact 
manager. If your old system is Microsoft Outlook or a similar contact manager, then you will have 
no data to import. If you are migrating from a full CRM system such as Salesforce.com, then the 
lead and opportunity data may be exported from that system and imported into SugarCRM in a 
very similar fashion to importing contact data, as described above.  
 287

Data Import and Export 
Exporting Information 
SugarCRM has flexible data exporting capabilities. Essentially all of the SugarCRM modules have 
an export function, accessed by clicking on the Export link in the top left corner of the list portion 
of each list view screen, including all of Activities, Accounts, Contacts, Documents, Leads, 
Opportunities, Bugs, Emails, Campaigns, Prospects, Projects, and Cases. 
In each case, a Comma Separated Values (.CSV) file is produced, which contains all the currently 
selected records from the module in use (not just those records currently displayed on the screen). 
CSV files can be opened for viewing by Microsoft Excel, or Notepad, WordPad, and other text 
editors—and can easily be parsed as input files by most software. 
CSV File in Excel 
A sample portion of a CSV file, exported from the Accounts module and viewed in Microsoft 
Excel, is shown above. You can see that essentially the entire database table of information  
is exported in the CSV file with column titles, including the Record ID (a long and largely 
incomprehensible string of letters and numbers used as a unique reference to each account 
record) and other fields that SugarCRM uses internally.  
 
288 

D 
The System Administrator Role 
This section is intended for system administrators of Sugar Open Source installations. 
Administrators access an additional System Administration home screen by clicking on the Admin 
link in the top right corner of the screen. Note that the Admin link is only displayed for users that 
have been given administrator access privileges.   
Every shared business system needs a system administrator, to perform the housekeeping tasks 
that belong to the system, not to any one user of the system. SugarCRM is no different in this 
regard, and has a number of general administrative activities that will be the responsibility of a 
system administrator.  
Some of these duties occur around the time of initial system installation and setup. Others are 
general maintenance activities that are performed as new users join the system, or other users 
leave. In this appendix we will deal with topics such as:  
• 
What are the system administration requirements as the time of initial system setup? 
• 
What are the ongoing responsibilities of the system administrator? 
• 
Who should be the system administrator? 
• 
Should more than one person have administrative access? 
System Administration Duties 
System administration duties fall into two categories. Those to be performed at the time of system 
installation, and those that will need to be performed on a regular or ad hoc basis for the duration 
of the system's time in service.  
At the time the system is installed, system administration duties include:  
• 
Adding all users to the system—their first and last names, their user name and 
password, and their other user settings.  
• 
Sending information to users about their user name, their initial password, and how 
to change their password.  
• 
Sending information to users as to how to fill in their email options.  

The System Administrator Role 
 
290 
• 
Defining System Roles. 
• 
Using the Configure Tabs feature to suppress any tabs not required, and the Rename 
Tabs feature to change the name of any tabs desired. 
• 
Using the Configure Settings feature to set options for email notifications, customer 
self-service portal, and SkypeOut. 
• 
Using Sugar Studio for any customizations required.  
• 
Defining system currencies and rates. 
• 
Using the Bug Tracker feature in administration to enter any software release 
information, to be used in the bug tracker module.  
• 
The system administrator may also need to define recurring system tasks (i.e. crontab 
on Linux-based servers, or using the Scheduler on Windows servers) to enable the 
System Scheduler, which is used for email marketing campaigns, running scheduled 
reports, and other scheduled system activities.  
From time to time after the system is installed and running, system administrators will need to:  
• 
Add new users, suspend (mark as inactive) the accounts of users on prolonged 
absences, and remove (actually, recycle) or mark as inactive accounts for users that 
leave the organization.  
• 
Reset passwords for users that forget them.  
• 
Update currency rates. 
• 
Maintain role data.  
• 
Check for Sugar updates.  
• 
Use the upgrade wizard to manage system upgrades when Sugar releases new 
version of their software.  
• 
Use the module loader to load in add-on modules from third-party suppliers of 
Sugar modules.  
• 
Create system backups from within Sugar, which back up the Sugar software (not 
the data).  
• 
Use MySQL administration tools such as phpMyAdmin or a MySQL dump to back 
up system data. 
• 
Check that available storage is not in danger of running out on the Sugar server.  
Who Should Be the System Administrator? 
As you can see from the lists above, the system administrator has a fair bit of work to do to help 
install and maintain the SugarCRM system.  

Appendix D 
This should tell you that whoever you choose as the system administrator needs to have some time 
available to discharge these new responsibilities. As well, the administrator must be someone who 
can be trusted with all the user access information, and with the company's most sensitive data—
as the administrator can see all the data in the entire SugarCRM system. 
Many businesses choose as their system administrator the same person that administers their PCs 
and their network. And in smaller businesses, this person is frequently a part-time contractor, not 
an employee.  
If an outside contractor is already administering all your network access information, it doesn't 
really make things any worse to hand them the keys to the CRM as well—so if that's your 
inclination—go ahead. Just make sure you have a good non-disclosure and non-competition 
agreement in place with that contractor. 
Otherwise, not that much technical knowledge is required to be the system administrator. With a 
little technical advice, a senior manager in the business can fill the role of system administrator 
just fine—although it may not be a good use of their time to be resetting user passwords. But at 
least they will have a good knowledge of and control over who is accessing the business's key data 
within the CRM. 
Should More Than One User Be Given System 
Admin Capability? 
The system is designed so that if there is only one system administrator, that user cannot be 
removed, or have those system administrator abilities removed. And a good thing too! 
But normally, most businesses keep two system administrators on the system. One is typically the 
real administrator, doing the bulk of the work day to day. The other is typically a senior manager 
who keeps an eye on the system but does not typically enter much data. This is also the person 
who makes the administration changes to the system if the everyday system administrator is 
terminated or resigns and has to have their system access disabled.  
Administration Duties at System Installation Time 
The figure overleaf shows the top-level Administration screen. The administration capabilities 
referred to below can all be accessed from this screen.  
 291

The System Administrator Role 
 
System Administration Module 
Configuring System Settings 
Configure Settings has five sections:  
• 
The first section is used to define the Email Notification Options associated with the 
emails that Sugar Open Source can send to Users when they are assigned new 
responsibilities. Email notification settings include the subject line of the email to be 
sent, the user name and email address from which the email will be sent, as well as 
the Mail Transfer Agent (MTA) to be used. Note that the SMTP (Simple Mail 
Transfer Protocol) MTA should be selected if your system is running Windows. If 
your system is running Linux, either the SMTP or sendmail MTA may be selected, 
depending upon how your server is configured. If the SMTP MTA is selected, you 
must also specify the SMTP server name, and port number (default is 25) used to 
communicate with SMTP. If SMTP Authentication is selected via the checkbox 
provided, the SMTP User Name and Password to be used must also be provided.  
Configure Settings can also be used to enable and disable the email notification 
system, and establishes the default notification setting for new users.   
 
292 

Appendix D 
• 
The second section is used to enable a proxy connection by which the Sugar server 
will access external information such as Sugar updates. If it is enabled, the user will 
also have to define settings for the proxy host and port number, and if authentication 
is checked, then a username and password must also be entered. 
• 
The third section is used to enable or disable the ability of Sugar Open Source to 
integrate data (such as Cases and Notes) with a Customer Self-Service portal. The 
initial implementation of this has been created using the Mambo portal.  
• 
The fourth section is used to enable or disable integration with SkypeOut—which 
enables users to click on phone numbers within the system to place outbound phone 
calls via the Internet.  
• 
The fifth section is used to enable the Sugar Mail Merge option—and should be checked 
only if the system is using a licensed copy of the Sugar Plug-in for Microsoft Word.  
Configure Settings Screen 
Defining Currencies and Rates 
The Currencies screen is used to define currencies other than the US dollar. For each new currency 
defined, the name, symbol (for example $), exchange rate to the US$, and code (such as CAN for 
the Canadian dollar) must be entered. Note that each user can select his or her default currency in 
the User Management screen. 
 293

The System Administrator Role 
 
The Currencies Screen 
Defining System Roles 
Roles within SugarCRM serve the purpose of limiting the access of certain users within the 
system. When you select the Roles option from within the administration area, you will see the 
Roles List view screen. It lists the roles defined within the system, and also offers shortcuts to 
create a new role, or list roles by user.  
Roles List View 
You can define roles for groups of users to specify which modules those users should have access to. 
For example—sales staff will want access to the opportunities and dashboard modules—marketing 
staff will want access to the campaigns module but not all staff will need access to these modules. As 
you can see in the figure overleaf, each role defines the modules which will be visible to the users 
assigned to the role, as well as the capabilities the user will have within each module.  
 
294 

Appendix D 
 
Role Detail View 
To create a role, click the Create Role shortcut, type a name and a description for the role, 
adjust the modules the role can access and the functions that may be performed within each 
module, and then save the role. To assign users to a role, use the detail view for that role. In the 
Users sub-panel, click the Select button to display a list of users. You can check the user names 
that you want to assign to this role. Note that when a module is excluded from a role, access is 
also removed to the sub-panels in other modules that relate to the excluded module. Also note 
that if a user belongs to multiple roles, their access in each module is defined by the most 
restrictive access any of their roles are assigned.  
Configuring System Tabs 
Both system administrators and users can easily configure which tabs appear at the top of the 
application.  In the Configure Tabs administration option, administrators can define which menu 
tabs will be available for all users, and which will effectively not be part of the installation. 
 295

The System Administrator Role 
Users can then modify their own personal tab settings in the My Account screen.  Any tabs that an 
administrator removes cannot be added back by a user. 
Defining Releases for Bug Tracker 
The Releases administration function is used to maintain the set of options available as selections on 
the Release drop-down box offered to users when reporting a new bug in the Bug Tracker module.  
Each release entry consists of a release version, a status (Active or Inactive, where Inactive will 
remove it from drop-down lists) and the order in which it is to appear in the Release drop-down list. 
Adding System Users 
To add new users to the system, or to edit user settings, select User Management from the main 
Administration screen. Note that system users may not be deleted. They may be made Inactive, or 
be recycled into a new user record, but not deleted. This system is designed this way principally to 
avoid having data in the system that is associated to a user that does not exist.  
User Management Screen 
Use the Create User shortcut to define a new user. Once a new user has been defined, with all the 
information shown in the screen below, then a new password must be defined for that user, using 
the Change Password button on the User Detail screen. Then you should send an email to the user 
giving them the full login information—what URL to use, and their new user name and password. 
It is also a good idea to tell the user how to change their password, and the procedure to follow 
when they forget their user name or password.  
 
296 

Appendix D 
 
 
User Edit View Screen 
 297

The System Administrator Role 
 
298 
Using Sugar Studio 
The Administration home page shows a number of tools grouped together as the Sugar Studio. 
They include: 
• 
Field layout editor 
• 
Dropdown editor 
• 
Edit Custom fields 
• 
Configure tabs 
• 
Rename tabs 
These tools collectively enable administrative users to perform a broad range of customization 
tasks, reducing the need for custom software development. For more information on these tools, 
see Chapter 5, which discusses these SugarCRM customization issues in detail. 
Enabling the Mass Emailer 
The system administrator can manage mass email campaigns that have been created in the Campaigns 
module. Within SugarCRM, users may create email campaigns targeting large numbers of prospects 
utilizing an email template. Depending on the send date the creator assigns to the email campaign, the 
emails then wait in the email queue to be sent at the particular date and time.  
As an administrator you can monitor these emails as they are sent. You can also delete emails that 
are waiting to be sent. You can view information on each email such as Campaign, Recipient 
Name, Recipient Email, From Name, From Address, User Name sending the email, Send On date, 
Send Attempts, and In Progress status.  
You should note that the Mass Emailing Queue Manager only displays emails created through 
email campaigns, not emails created using the Email module. 
To delete an email that is waiting to be sent, click the checkbox next to the email and click the 
Delete button. Click Check All to select all the emails in the list. 
The mass email queue manager processes emails that are scheduled to be sent from within 
Campaigns. The templated emails are sent to their recipients by a PHP script that must be run on 
regular intervals to send out the emails at the appropriate time. The user specifies the email template 
in the Campaigns module, as well as the sender name, sender email address (recommended to be no-
reply@<your company.com> or something similar), and the time and date to send the email.  
When an email is processed, a link is appended to the end of the email for recipients to opt out of 
receiving emails. This will link back to a page on the same machine as your Sugar instance.  
To use the mass email queue manager, you must first correctly configure the email settings 
covered in the administration section Configure System Settings. The mass email queue manager 
uses the same email server connection settings. Notifications do not necessarily have to be turned 
on, but the settings must be properly configured for recipients to properly receive emails.  
As well, the system administrator must also use the Mass Emailer Campaign Settings option to set 
how many emails may be sent per batch, and the location of the campaign tracking files. 

Appendix D 
To use email campaigns within SugarCRM, the administrator must first enable the System 
Scheduler, and configure the Schedule list within the Scheduler option of System section of the 
administration home page.  
The System Scheduler is enabled in two different ways—one for a Linux server, and another for 
a Windows server. For Microsoft Windows, you can use the Task Scheduler. For Linux, you can 
use cron. 
For Linux, as a root user, type the following command at the shell prompt, replacing the path-to-
sugar with your own path to the Sugar installation directory and replacing the apache with the 
proper username that the web server runs as (usually defaults to apache or wwwrun):  
/echo "0,10,20,30,40,50 * * * * cd /<path-to-sugar>; 
<path-to-php> ./scheduler.php" | crontab -u apache/  
 
This will setup a cron job to check every 10 minutes whether any emails need to be sent out. If any 
do, the mass email queue manager will process the template and send an email out immediately to 
the recipient. 
For Windows, as a user with Administrator privileges, go to Start > Settings > Control Panel > 
Scheduled Tasks. Double-click on Add Scheduled Task. When the Scheduled Task Wizard asks 
you for the program you want Windows to run, browse for the scheduler.php file under your 
path-to-sugar directory. Continue with the rest of the Wizard, making sure you click on the Daily 
option when asked when to perform this task. 
Before you click on the Finish button for the Scheduled Task Wizard, check the box that says, 
Open advanced properties for this task when I click Finish. A new dialog box displays after you 
click Finish. Click on the Schedule tab, and then on the Advanced button. Check the box for 
Repeat task and specify every 10 minutes with duration of 24 hours. 
Recurring Administration Duties 
This section describes those administrative duties that need to be performed on a regular or ad hoc 
basis throughout the time that your Sugar Open Source system is installed.  
User Management 
New users will need to be created, and existing users may need to be marked temporarily as 
Inactive if they take prolonged breaks such as a maternity leave. You can see how to add a new 
user earlier in this section.  
To mark a user as Inactive, go to the Admin main screen, select User Management, select the user 
you wish to mark as Inactive, click on the Edit button, mark Status as Inactive (from the 
dropdown), and then click on Save.  
Users may not be removed. Typically, the best solution is to mark a user as Inactive for a period of 
time (say 6 months) and then rename the user as a new user name you need to create, and mark it 
as Active once more.  
 299

The System Administrator Role 
Resetting Passwords 
When a user calls in with a need to have their password reset, go to the Admin main screen, select 
User Management, and then select the user involved. On their detail view screen, click on Change 
Password, and then enter New Password—and then Confirm Password—then click on Save. 
You will then need to email or telephone the user with their new temporary password, plus 
instructions on how to reset the password themselves to something you do not know.    
General Maintenance 
There are six topics that fall under general maintenance of the Sugar Open Source CRM system: 
• 
Updating currency rates 
• 
Maintaining Role data  
• 
Checking for Sugar updates  
• 
System Backups 
• 
Data backups 
• 
Checking that available storage is not in danger of running out on the Sugar server  
Some of these topics are explained sufficiently in the previous section on Administration Duties at 
System Installation Time, such as the maintenance of currency rates and roles.  
Checking for Updates to Sugar Open Source 
You can check for updates automatically using the Sugar Open Source administrative function 
Sugar Updates, as shown here: 
Checking for Updates 
You can set the system to automatically check for updates, or you can do it manually. If you do it 
manually, the system will perform the update check, and will display the name of the most recent 
update just below the Check Now button.  
 
300 

Appendix D 
The only drawback to using this function is that Sugar requests that you agree to its collection of 
usage statistics from your server. If that does not bother you, then this solution is ideal.  
If you do not wish to have Sugar collect usage statistics, you can check manually for newer 
revisions to the Sugar Open Source software at http://www.sugarcrm.com/crm/download/ 
sugar-suite.html.  
Either way, if you find a new update to the Sugar Open Source software, you can apply it using 
the Upgrade Wizard, dealt with in a section coming up shortly.   
System Backups 
Backing up the system directory, the area where the programs that compose your installation of 
Sugar Open Source are stored (including any customization you may have installed to the 
software), is a simple task. Use the Backups function within Admin to perform this backup. You 
need only enter the name of the directory in which the backup is to be stored, and the filename for 
the backup file (in Zip format) to be generated.  
To restore the system software from the Zip format file produced, a manual re-installation process 
must be performed, using this Zip file instead of the distribution file you originally used.  
System Backup 
Data Backups 
To backup your system data from the MySQL database, you should use a MySQL administration 
tool such as phpMyAdmin—which provides web-based access to all database administration 
functions. Alternatively, you can simply perform a command-line dump in MySQL. To learn more 
about phpMyAdmin, and download a copy, please visit http://www.phpmyadmin.net.  
Checking Available Storage 
Other than completely losing the data on a hard drive, few things are quite as bad as having the 
drive run out of free space.  
You can check for free disk space on a Linux server by using the df –h command in a shell, 
logged in as root.  
 301

The System Administrator Role 
You can check for free space on a Windows server by simply right-clicking on the hard drive used 
for data storage within My Computer. This will display a dialog box like this:  
 
Checking Available Disk Space 
As long as there is at least 5 GB of free space on the hard drive, there is not that much to worry 
about. If that is all there remains, or less, then it is time to be adding a new hard drive, replacing 
the existing one(s), or replacing the server. Going through system email (and attachments) and the 
document repository may also be a good idea, as that is where the bulk of disk space is used.  
Using the Upgrade Wizard 
The Upgrade Wizard is used to upgrade your system software from one revision to the next. Is it a 
sophisticated piece of software, which can also run SQL scripts to upgrade your database structure 
from the structure needed for one revision of software to that required for the next revision.  
 
302 

Appendix D 
 
The Upgrade Wizard 
The Upgrade Wizard also provides a quick way to upload and install patches to existing versions, 
as well as language packs and custom themes.  
1. You simply browse to select the zip file for the upgrade and click Upload. Uploading 
the file queues the upgrade files for installation. Next, whenever you like, you can 
click Install to install the upgrade files.  
2. When you do so, a file list will be displayed, with checkboxes to deselect specific 
files if you don't want them installed.  
3. You then click Commit to complete the installation.  
4. The Upgrade Wizard automatically unzips and installs the files. A history of all 
upgrades that have been queued and installed displays in a list on the Upgrade 
Wizard screen.  
5. You can also uninstall language packs and themes using the Upgrade Wizard. Select 
an item to uninstall and click Uninstall.  
Note that you typically cannot uninstall upgrades to new overall versions, or patch updates. 
Using the Module Loader 
The Module Loader is a remarkably innovative feature, introduced in Sugar Open Source and Pro 
at version 3.5, which enables independent third-party software modules to be developed for the 
Sugar application framework, and dynamically installed or uninstalled using the Module Loader.  
The Module Loader defines a standard packaging for a third-party module—a zip file that includes 
a manifest file, which specifies the following information for the module: 
• 
Acceptable_sugar_versions: The version of the sugar server that must be present to 
load this module. The format of the version dependency check can be provided as an 
exact match, or as a regex comparison. 
 303

The System Administrator Role 
• 
Acceptable_sugar_flavors: The flavor of sugar server. Currently Sugar supports 
Open Source, Professional, and Enterprise flavors. If there are elements or 
dependencies on functionality in a specific flavor this parameter should be used to 
specify what is required. If there are no restrictions or limitations specify all of the 
supported sugar flavors. 
• 
Name: The user-readable name for the module. This name will be displayed in the 
Sugar Admin interface when loading and installing the module. 
• 
Description: The description of the module that is displayed in the Sugar  
Admin interface.  
• 
Author: The name of the person or company that authored the module. 
• 
Published Date: The date the module was published or last revised. 
• 
Version: The version of the module. 
• 
Type: The type of package that is contained in the zip file. Currently the module 
loader only supports modules, and the Upgrade Wizard provides support for language 
packs, themes, patches, and a full upgrade.  
• 
Icon: The relative path and name of the icon file in the zip file the Sugar Loader 
should use to display in the Sugar Admin interface for this module. The system will 
use default icons if this is left blank. 
• 
Copy_files: An array of file copy instructions that specify the From & To source and 
destination for folders and files. The installation processing simply walks through 
this tree moving the files as specified. Folders are copied recursively. 
To use the Module Loader, simply select that option from the Admin main screen.  
The Module Loader 
Just browse for the zip file of the module to be loaded, click on Upload, and the module will be 
queued for installation. Once this step is complete, at any time you may click on Install to install 
the software, or Delete Package to remove the queued software. The figure above shows the High 
Contrast theme installed—the theme we have used in this book to make captured screenshots  
more readable. 
 
304 

Index 
A 
Access Control List (ACL) mechanism, role 
management, 191 
Access Control model, requirements, 34 
Account Activity History, 91 
Account Detail Screen, SugarCRM, 13 
Account Edit view screen, 68 
account reports, Reports module, 188 
Account Search panel, 65 
accounts and contracts slide, CRM training 
materials, 216 
Accounts Detail screen, 67 
Accounts tab, 64 
accounts, business activities, 26, 283, 284 
accounts, importing, 284 
activities slide, CRM training materials, 217 
Activities tab, 90 
Add Field button, Field Layout Editor, 143 
Add Invitees area, Meeting Detail view, 87 
Add New Site screen, 137 
adding system users, 296 
add-ons, SugarCRM 
commercial, 159 
free, 147, 149 
Sugar Pro, 171 
Admin Console, Mambo, 253 
Administration Home screen, 292 
administrator. See system administrator 
advanced interface features slide, CRM 
training materials, 217 
advanced role management, 191 
Advanced Search panel, Documents List view, 
123 
All Emails shortcut, Emails tab, 97 
All Opportunities by Lead Source chart, 84 
All RSS News Feeds shortcut, 135 
Apache configuration, multiple virtual server 
installation, 268 
application changes, CRM customization, 36 
application pack model, CRM deployment, 15 
application server, 50 
appointments, 86 
Assign user restriction setting, 154 
asymmetric internet connections, 54 
average transaction value, requirements, 32 
B 
B2B business model, requirements, 31 
B2C business model, requirements, 31 
back-office applications, 172 
backups, 51, 301 
bandwidth capacity, server requirements, 53 
bounce handling, emails, 114 
browser support, SugarCRM, 58 
Bug Tracker module, 131 
bugs, Mambo administration, 245 
business activites, CRM 
accounts and contracts, 26 
corporate directory, 29 
document management, 30 
interface consolidation, 30 
sales force automation, 27 
tracking leads, 26 
tracking sales pipeline, 28 
tracking service cases, 28 
business card, input, 103 
business goals slide, CRM training materials, 
216 
Business Intelligence (BI) software, 28 
business models, specific requirements, 31 
C 
calendar management, business activities 
requriements analysis, 29 
Calendar tab, 86 
calendaring slide, CRM training materials, 
217 
call scheduling, 94 
Calls List view, 90 
Calls screen, 94 
camera, security, 139 
Campaign Detail view, 112 
Campaigns tab, 110 
capturing customer leads, 222 

Case List view screen, 131 
case management, business activities, 28 
case study 
creating accounts, 68 
introduction, 19 
requirements analysis, 39 
cases, Mambo administration, 245 
central processing unit, server hardware, 49 
Chart Options tab, Reporting module, 185 
charts, dashboard 
All Opportunities by Lead Source chart, 84 
Opportunities by Lead Source by Outcome 
chart, 83 
Pipeline by Month by Outcome chart, 84 
Pipeline by Sales Stage chart, 82 
Choose Display Columns tab, Reporting 
module, 184 
com_sugarbugs component, 239, 245 
com_sugarcases component, 239, 245 
com_sugarregistration component, 239 
com_sugarregistration Component, 243 
com_sugarregistration component 
configuration, 241 
Commit button, Forecasts module, 181 
component configuration, Mambo, 241 
Compose Email button, Open Activities sub-
panel, 95 
Compose Email screen, 96, 98 
Configure Sugar Updates screen, 
administration, 300 
configure system wide settings, administration, 
293 
Configure Tabs option, administration, 295 
configuring Mambo components, 241 
configuring system tabs, 295 
Confirm Fields and Import screen, 286 
Confirm Settings Screen, SugarCRM Linux 
Installation, 264 
Confirm Settings screen, SugarCRM Setup 
Wizard, 279 
Contact Search panel 
searching, 71 
contacts, importing, 110 
Contacts sub-panel, 69 
contacts, importing, 287 
contracts slide, CRM training materials, 216 
Convert Lead button, 76 
converted leads, 75 
corporate calenda XE, 29 
corporate directory, business activities, 29 
cosmetic changes, CRM customization, 36 
Create a Document shortcut, Documents tab, 119 
Create Account shortcut, navigation shortcuts, 
68 
Create Account, Related Records sub-panel, 77 
Create Appointment, Related Records sub-
panel, 77 
Create Archived Email option, 98 
Create Campaign shortcut, Campaign tab, 111 
Create Custom Report button, 183 
Create Email Template shortcut, 112 
Create from vCard shortcut, Contacts tab, 104 
Create New Case shortcut, 129 
Create Note or Attachment button, 92 
Create Opportunity, Related Records sub-
panel, 77 
Create Quote shortcut, Quotes module, 176 
Create Role shortcut, role management, 152, 
295 
Create Target List shortcut, 114 
Create Target shortcut, 115 
Create Task button, 93 
Create User shortcut, user management, 296 
creating a campaign, 111 
creating a quote, 178 
CRM. See customer relationship management 
CRM basics slide, CRM training materials, 
216 
CRM implementation 
common pitfalls, 206 
data import, 211 
development partner, 209 
involved groups, 204 
pilot testing, 211 
planning, 205 
project goals, 208 
system development, 210 
team building, 207 
CRM training materials, 214 
CRM training process, 211 
CSV format, 101 
currencies, administration, 293 
custom fields, editing, 145 
customer leads, capturing, 222 
customer relationship management 
about, 8 
advantages, 18 
customization, 16 
deployment models, 44 
fundamental features, 9 
history, 14 
requirements analysis, 24 
306 

customer self-service portals, 228 
customer service management, 129 
customer service management slide, CRM 
training materials, 218 
customer-centric business management, 37 
customizations, CRM, 36, 141 
D 
dashboard 
about, 28 
charts, 81 
Dashboard tab, 81 
drilldown, 85 
data backup strategy, 51 
data backups, 301 
data import, CRM implementation, 211 
data import/export, 283 
Database Configuration Screen, SugarCRM 
Linux Installation, 262 
Database Configuration screen, SugarCRM 
Setup Wizard, 277 
database configuration, Mambo installation, 
232 
database server, 50 
Default Restrictions shortcut, role 
management, 152 
deployment options slide, CRM training 
materials, 215 
deployment, CRM, 44 
going live, 219 
Detail view screen, 67 
Details restriction setting, 154 
development partner, CRM implementation, 
209 
digital dashboard, 28 
Display HTML Code button, Field Layout 
Editor, 143 
Display in Portal checkbox, Sugar 
administration 
m, 240 
Document Detail view, 121 
document management slide, CRM training 
materials, 218 
document management, business activities, 30, 
118 
Document Revisions subpanel, 122 
documentation, 101 
Documents tab, 119 
Download File link, Documents panel, 122 
Drag Unwanted Items Here area, Field Layout 
Editor, 143 
drilldown, charts, 85 
Dropdown Editor, 143 
Due Date and Time, tasks, 93 
duties, system administrator, 289 
E 
ECC memory, server hardware, 49 
EDGE, 33 
edit custom fields, 145 
Edit Fields button, Field Layout Editor, 142 
Edit restriction setting, 154 
Edit Rows button, Field Layout Editor, 142 
Edit view screens, 68 
editors 
custom fields editor, 145 
Dropdown Editor, 143 
Field Layout Editor, 141 
EIS, 28 
Email Inbox List View, 168 
email management, 95 
email marketing campaigns, 109 
Email Notification Options, administration, 
292 
email notifications, 132 
email slide, CRM training materials, 217 
email template, creating a, 112 
Emails List view, 97 
Emails tab, 97 
Employee Detail view, HR records, 161 
Employee Leave subpanel, HR module, 162 
Employee List view, HR records, 160 
Enable Self-Service Portal Integration 
checkbox, Sugar administration, 240 
Enhanced Data rates for GSM Evolution 
(EDGE), 33 
enhanced role management, 191 
Enter Business Card screen, 103 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) tools, 37 
evaluation, CRM deployment, 219 
Executive Information Systems (EIS), 28 
Export link, 101, 288 
Export restriction setting, 154 
exporting contacts, 284 
exporting information, 101, 288 
307 

F 
features, CRM, 9 
feedback, CRM deployment, 219 
Field Layout Editor, 141 
Filter tab, Reporting module, 183 
Filter user restriction setting, 154 
Firefox support, SugarCRM, 58 
firewall, security measures, 52 
Forecast History shortcut, Forecasts module, 
181 
Forecasts module, Sugar Pro add-ons 
forecast commitment, 181 
forecast history screen, 180 
Forecast History shortcut, 181 
Forecasts tab, 179 
Forecasts tab, 179 
form factor, server hardware, 48 
front office applications, 172 
functional areas slide, CRM training 
materials, 216 
G 
goals, CRM implementation, 208 
graphical dashboard, 81 
Group Inbox, SugarCRM email features, 98 
Group tab, Reporting module, 184 
groupware application, 17 
H 
hard disk speed, server hardware, 48 
hard disk technology, server hardware, 48 
hardware, server requirements, 48 
help, documentation, 101 
Hide Controls for each sub-panel, details view, 
67 
History sub-panel, 91 
home page, 282 
home screen, SugarCRM, 11 
Home tab, 60, 90 
home tab slide, CRM training materials, 217 
home-based business, 6 
hosted application pack model, CRM 
deployment, 16 
HR module, add-ons, 160 
human resources management, commercial 
add-ons, 159 
I 
IDE, 49 
IDE disk drives, server hardware, 49 
implementing a CRM, 203 
Import Accounts function, 285 
Import and Export Wizard dialog box, 284 
Import Contacts function, Contacts module, 
287 
Import restriction setting, 154 
Import vCard button, 104 
importing, 283 
importing data 
about, 108, 283 
accounts, 284 
contacts, 287 
leads and opportunities, 287 
importing data, CRM implementation, 211 
inactive users, user management, 299 
inbound traffic, server bandwidth, 53 
input business card, 103 
installation, SugarCRM 
Linux, 255 
Mambo components, 241 
Mambo portal, 229 
Windows Server, 271 
integration, CRM customization, 36 
interface consolidation, 133 
interface consolidation, business activities, 30 
Internal Drive Electronics (IDE), 49 
international offices, requirements, 35 
Internet Explorer support, SugarCRM, 58 
invitees, add, 87, 88 
issue management, CRM training, 212 
J 
junior administrator, enhanced role 
management, 192 
K 
Konqueror support, SugarCRM, 58 
308 

 
L 
LAMP stack, 47 
LAN interface, server hardware, 48 
Lead Conversion screen, 76 
Lead Detail view, 75 
Lead Edit view, 75 
leads status, 75 
leads, business activities, 26, 73, 109 
importing, 287 
leads, capturing, 222 
leave data, employee details view, 163 
license acceptance screen, Mambo installation, 
232 
License Acceptance Screen, SugarCRM Linux 
Installation, 261 
License Acceptance Screen, SugarCRM Setup 
Wizard, 275 
linking external websites, 137 
Links theme, 61 
Linux installation, SugarCRM 
Apache testing, 258 
configuration, 256, 267 
installation, 255 
MySQL configuration, 258 
php.ini configuration, 259 
SugarCRM Installer, 260 
updating, 256 
List restriction settings, 154 
List view screen, 64 
live deployment, 219 
location, requirements 
multiple regional offices, 33 
outbound sales persons, 33 
Log In Screen, SugarCRM Linux Installation, 
267 
login screen, SugarCRM, 59 
M 
maangement, CRM implementation, 203 
maintenance, administration, 300 
Mambo component configuration, 241 
Mambo Menu Manager, 246 
Mambo portal 
about, 228 
Admin Console, 253 
administration, 238 
component configuration, 241 
installation, 229 
installing SugarCRM components, 239 
logging-in, 236 
new Mambo user, 249 
new menu item, 245 
Sugar Login form, 248 
management training, initial, 212 
Manufacturers option, Product Catalog 
module, 175 
marketing campaigns, 109 
marketing campaigns slide, CRM training 
materials, 218 
Mass Email Manager section, 117 
mass email monitoring, administration, 298 
Mass Emailer Campaign Settings option, 298 
mass emailing queue, 117 
Mass Update panel, 103 
master service contract, Service Contract 
module, 164 
materials, CRM training, 214 
medium services business, 7 
Meeting Detail view, 87 
meeting scheduling, 94 
meetings, detail screen, 87 
memory size, server hardware, 48 
menu items, Mambo administration, 245 
Microsoft .NET platform, deployment, 47 
Microsoft CRM, 15 
mid-sized business, 5 
mod_sugarlogin module, 239 
modifying existing modules, 141 
Module Loader, administration, 303 
modules, modifying, 141 
modules, third-party, 303 
Mozilla support, SugarCRM, 58 
multiple system administrators, 291 
My Forecasts option, Forecasts module, 181 
My Open Tasks area, 93 
My Portal module, 137 
My Portal tab, 137 
My Teams Forecasts option, Forecasts 
module, 181 
MySQL configuration, Mambo installation, 
232 
N 
.NET platform, deployment, 47 
navigation, SugarCRM 
about, 12, 63 
Accounts tab, 64 
309 

edit view screens, 68 
linking, 71 
main panel, 67 
searching, 71 
sub panel, 67 
needs, small business, 7 
NetSuite, 15 
new user, mambo portal, 249 
notes, creating a, 92 
notifications, email, 132 
O 
on demand model, CRM deployment, 15, 44 
Only My Items checkbox, search panel, 65 
Open Activities sub-panel, Account Detail 
screen, 93 
operating system, server requirements, 46 
Opportunities by Lead Source by Outcome 
chart, 83 
Opportunities List screen, 85 
Opportunities List view screen, 80 
opportunities slide, CRM training materials, 
217 
Opportunities tab, 79 
opportunities, business activities, 26, 73 
importing, 287 
Opportunity Detail view screen, 80 
Opportunity Edit view screen, 80 
outbound traffic, server bandwidth, 53 
P 
packaging third-party modules, 303 
password change, user management, 296 
password resets, administration, 300 
patches, role management extension, 149 
Perform Setup Screen, SugarCRM Linux 
installation, 265 
Perform Setup screen, SugarCRM Windows 
installation, 280 
Permissions Management Infrastructure 
(PMI), requirements, 34 
pilot testing, CRM implementation, 211 
Pipeline by Month by Outcome chart, 84 
Pipeline by Sales Stage chart, 82 
POP email, commercial add-ons 
benefits, 167 
ZuckerMail module, 167 
Portal Only User checkbox, Sugar 
administration, 239 
power supply, server hardware, 49 
pre-installation check, Mambo installation, 
230 
prerequisites, Mambo installation, 230 
printing information, 100 
priority, tasks, 93 
problems, CRM implementation, 206 
processor, server hardware, 49 
product based business model, requirements, 
31 
product catalog module, SugarPro add-ons, 
173 
Product Categories option, Product Catalog 
module, 174 
product exposure, CRM training, 212 
Product Types administration option, Product 
Catalog module, 174 
Products module, Sugar Pro add-ons, 175 
project goals, CRM implementation, 208 
project management, 124 
project management slide, CRM training 
materials, 218 
Project Tasks subpanel, 126 
Projects Detail View screen, 125 
Projects List View screen, 124 
Projects tab, 124 
proprietorship, 6 
Published Reports List View, 182 
Q 
Quick New Item box, 104 
Quotes List view screen, 176 
Quotes module, Sugar Pro add-ons 
about, 175 
creating a quote, 178 
Quotes list view, 176 
R 
recurring business model, requirements, 32 
recurring duties, administration, 299 
redundancy, internet connections, 54 
Related Records sub-panel, 77 
Releases function, administration, 296 
reliability, server requirements, 53 
reporting, need for, 181 
310 

Reports module, Sugar Pro add-ons 
account reports, 188 
Published Reports List View, 182 
sample custom report, 187 
tabs, 183 
requirements analysis, 24 
requirements, business models 
average transaction value, 32 
B2B, 31 
B2C, 31 
location, 33 
products, 31 
recurring business model, 32 
sales cycle, 32 
services, 31 
requirements, small business, 7 
Restrictions subpanel, role management, 152 
Return to List, details view, 67 
role management extension, free add-ons, 149 
Role Management option, SugarCRM 
administration, 149 
Roles List view screen, 149, 294 
roles, administration, 294 
RSS news feeds, 134 
S 
sales activities, 90 
sales cycle, requirements, 32 
sales force automation, business activities, 27 
Sales General and Administration, 38 
sales pipeline slide, CRM training materials, 
217 
sales pipeline tracking, business activities, 28 
sales team management, Sugar Pro add-ons, 
188 
Salesforce.com, 15 
SalesLogix, 15 
SATA disk drives, server hardware, 49 
Schedule button, Campaign Detail view, 117 
Schedule Call shortcut, Activities tab, 94 
scheduling, 86, 94 
SCSI disk drives, server hardware, 49 
search accounts, 65 
security camera, linking, 139 
security considerations, choosing a server, 51 
security measures, 52 
security,  deployment server, 52 
Select File button, Field Layout Editor, 141, 
142 
self-hosted model, CRM deployment, 44 
server issues, 46 
self-service portals, 228, 250 
Serial Advanced Technology Attachment 
(SATA), 49 
server appliance model, CRM deployment, 16 
server collocation model, CRM deployment, 
44 
server hardware, choosing, 48 
server requirements, SugarCRM 
backups, 51 
bandwidth capacity, 53 
hardware, 48 
operating system, 46 
security, 52 
web-based application platforms, 47 
server security, 52 
service contract detail view, 165 
service contract management, business 
activities, 28, 163 
Service Contracts module, 163 
services based business model, requirements, 
31 
Setup Wizard, SugarCRM, 275 
SG&A, 38 
shared server model, CRM deployment, 44 
Site Configuration Screen, SugarCRM Linux 
Installation, 263 
Site Configuration screen, SugarCRM Setup 
Wizard, 278 
size, requirements, 34 
slides, CRM training materials, 215 
Small Computer System Interface (SCSI), 49 
small services business, 6 
small-sized business, 5 
software bug tracking, 131 
software bug tracking, business activities, 28 
specifications, CRM implementation, 208 
speed, server requirements, 53 
SpikeSource Windows Installer, 271 
status, leads, 75 
subcontract detail view, 166 
subcontracts, Service Contract module, 164 
Subpanels restriction setting, 154 
Sugar Login Form, Mambo, 248 
Sugar on Spike 4.0 for Windows Setup screen, 
271 
Sugar Pro 
enhanced role management, 191 
Forecasting module, 179 
Product Catalog module, 172, 173 
311 

Products module, 175 
Quotes module, 175 
Reporting modules, 181 
sales team management, 188 
Sugar Wireless, 192 
Sugar Pro add-ons, 171 
Sugar self-service portal for Mambo, 239 
components, 239 
module, 239 
Sugar Studio, 298 
Sugar Wireless, 192 
SugarCRM 
about, 10 
browser support, 58 
importing data, 108 
Linux installation, 255 
navigation, 12 
server requirements, 50 
training, 211 
versions, 10 
Windows Server installation, 271 
SugarCRM Setup Wizard, 275 
support contracts, business activities, 28 
surveillence camera, linking, 139 
symmetric internet connections, 54 
system adjustments, CRM training, 213 
system administrator 
backups, 301 
choosing, 290 
currencies, 293 
defining releases, 296 
general maintenance, 300 
installation duties, 291 
mass emailing, 298 
Module Loader, 303 
multiple admins, 291 
recurring duties, 299 
resetting passwords, 300 
Sugar Studio, 298 
system roles, 294 
system settings, 292 
system tabs, 295 
system users, adding, 296 
updating, 300 
Upgrade Wizard, 302 
system backups, 301 
System Check Screen, SugarCRM Linux 
Installation, 262 
System Check screen, SugarCRM Setup 
Wizard, 276 
system development partner, CRM 
implementation, 210 
system roles, administration, 294 
system tabs, configuring, 295 
system users, adding, 296 
T 
Targets List view, 115 
targets, email campaign, 114 
targets, marketing campaign, 109 
task scheduling, 86 
task, creating a, 93 
team management, 188 
team notices, Teams module, 191 
Teams List view, 189 
Teams module, Sugar Pro add-ons, 188 
templates, email, 98 
testing, CRM implementation, 211 
themes, 61 
third-party modules, 303 
Tracker Link Text field, marketing campaign, 
118 
Tracker Re-direct URL field, marketing 
campaign, 118 
tracking a campaign, 118 
tracking leads, business activities, 26 
tracking sales pipeline, business activities, 28 
training materials, CRM training, 214 
training process, CRM implementation, 211 
training, CRM. See CRM training process 
TSV files, 110 
types of businesses, 6 
U 
undo last import option, 285 
Update button, Account List view screen, 103 
updates, checking for, 300 
updating several records simultaneously, 103 
Upgrade Wizard, administration, 302 
UPS, security measures, 52 
User Edit View screen, 297 
user interface changes, CRM customization, 
36 
user interface features, 99 
user management 
adding system users, 296 
inactive users, 299 
user training, general, 213 
user, Mambo portal, 249 
users, server hardware, 49 
312 

web-based CRM, 8 
 
V 
Wireless Contact List View, Sugar Pro, 194 
vCard, 104 
X 
VCR controls, details view, 67 
video, server hardware, 49 
View Change Log, details view, 68 
 XE, 6, 255 
W 
Z 
web based application platforms, server 
requirements, 47 
ZuckerMail module, commercial add-ons, 167 
 
313 

 
 
 

