Foundations of Physics, Vol. 17, No. 7, 1987 
The Implicate Order and Prigogine's Notions 
of Irreversibility 
David Bohm 1 
Received October 16, 1986 
In this' paper, a very close relationship between Prigogine's notions of irrever- 
sibility and the implicate order is brought out, Certain of Prigogine's basic 
assumptions with regard to irreversible processes are also shown to be the 
equivalent of the introduction of nilpotent operators in the algebra underlying the 
implicate order. 
It is a great pleasure, on the occasion of his 70th birthday, to acknowledge 
Professor 
Prigogine's 
fundamental contributions 
to 
the 
theory 
of 
equilibrium processes and to the understanding of their irreversibility. I 
should like to contribute to the collection of articles that is dedicated to 
this purpose, by showing that there is a close relationship between some of 
Prigogine's ideas in this subject and my own notions concerning the 
implicate order. 
First, let me begin by summarizing a few essential points about the 
implicate order. (1) I have given two main illustrative examples of the 
implicate order. The first is the ink-droplet model, which I shall call an 
implicate order of type A, and the second is the hologram, which I shall 
call an implicate order of type B. 
The example that is closest to Prigogine's conceptions of irreversibility 
is of type A. Briefly, the model consists of two concentric cylinders, with a 
viscous fluid, such as glycerine between them. A droplet of ink is placed in 
the fluid. The outer cylinder is then turned slowly, To see what happens, 
consider the element of fluid that contains the ink droplet. As the cylinder 
turns, the outer parts of the element will move faster than the inner parts. 
1Birkbeck College, University of London, Malet Street, London WC1E 7HX, United 
Kingdom. 
667 
0015-9018[87/0700-0667505.00/0 © 1987 Plenum Publishing Corporation 
825/17/7-2 

668 
Bohm 
The element will thus be drawn out into a fine thread; and the ink droplet 
will of course move with the element. Sooner or later the ink droplet 
becomes invisible. But, if the cylinder is turned slowly in the reverse direc- 
tion, each bit of fluid retraces its steps, carrying the ink particles with it. As 
a result, the ink droplet suddenly emerges into visibility, when the element 
has returned to its original form. If one continues to turn the cylinder, the 
droplet of course becomes invisible again, as it is drawn out into a thread 
in the reverse direction. 
It is clear that while the ink droplet is not visible, it still has some 
unseen kind of order. To bring this out, one may note that, after many 
revolutions of the cylinder, a radial line will encounter a series of very thin 
bands of ink, separated by clear spaces. There is thus a very fine sort of 
order, which I may say is in a certain sense enfolded in the glycerine. It is 
this order that contains the information needed to determine the 
reconstitution of the droplet when the cylinder is rotated in the reverse 
direction. I have called this an enfolded order or an implicate order. When 
the droplet is reconstituted, the original order returns, which I have called 
an unfolded order or an explicate order. 
Thus far, the implicate order of the enfolded droplet has been restric- 
ted to one that is derived from an original explicate or unfolded order by a 
simple point-to-point transformation (i.e., that induced in the glycerine by 
turning the cylinder). One can, however, easily obtain intrinsically implicate 
orders that are not derivable in this way. To see this, consider a process in 
which we inserted a droplet and turned the cylinder m times, then inserted 
a second droplet and turned the cylinder m times again, and so on. After 
many droplets had thus been inserted successively, we could then rotate the 
cylinder in the reverse direction; one droplet after another would then 
emerge into visibility, each of which was subsequently re-enfolded, to be 
succeeded by the next. In this case, we would have an intrinisically 
implicate order, not derivable as a whole by a single transformation from 
an explicate order. For even if one of the droplets were transformed into an 
explicate form, the other would still be implicate. 
A further variation of the above would be to insert successive droplets 
at slightly different positions, along a curve. Then, when the motion of the 
cylinder was reversed, the successive droplets would emerge in a sequence 
of slightly different positions that would traverse the curve. If the motion 
were rapid enough, and the droplets close enough together, this motion 
might appear to be along a continuous track. The whole process could then 
be regarded as an "implicate model" of the explicate movement of a par- 
ticle. Actually, this movement would arise out of an implicate order, 
enfolded into the whole system, but the visible result would be the 
movement of a droplet along what appears to be a smooth curve. 

Implicate Order and Irreversibility 
669 
This sort of process may be represented algebraically. (I~ If T is the 
transformation in the fluid that takes place when the cylinder is turned m 
times, T ~ will then represent the transformation brought about by n of 
these operations (which corresponds to a total of mn turns). 
Let po(X) represent the density of the ink in the original droplet, with 
p0(x) = 0 where there is no ink and p0(x) = 1 where there is ink. The effect 
of n transformations is 
p.(x) = r"po(X) 
(1) 
The result of adding successive droplets, each with initial density C., in the 
way described above is then 
p,(x)= ~ C°T~oo(X) 
(2) 
(-~n) 
where n does not take on negative values. 
It is also possible to obtain such an implicate order by starting with 
the droplet and turning in the reverse direction. The basic transformation is 
then T-t. This gives rise to 
p (x)= ~ c ,,T-"po(X) 
(3) 
(-n) 
The most general intrinsically implicate order of this kind is obtained by 
adding p + and p_, so that n covers both positive and negative values. 
p(x) = ~. C,~ T"po(x ) 
(4) 
In the expression, we may call the integer n the degree of enfoldment. 
Of course, the above can be generalized, because many kinds of trans- 
formation, TA, TB, Tc, etc., which do not commute, may be interwoven to 
produce yet more complex orders that are intrinsically implicate. 
Thus far, we have been considering only implicate orders of type A. 
The simplest example of an implicate order of type B is the hologram, The 
essential point here is that coherent light waves reflected from a whole 
object interfere in each small region of space, to make a very complex inter- 
ference pattern. Thus, in any such region there is a very fine order, usually 
hidden from our view, which contains an "enfolded" kind of information 
about the form of the object as a whole. Such information becomes 
relevant when coherent light shines through the photographic record of the 
interference pattern. A three-dimensional image of the entire object is then 
seen to emerge, even when only a part of the record is illuminated in this 
way. The reason is that the waves from any part of the hologram resemble 
the waves from the original objects, and thus constitute a kind of 
unfoldment of the order enfolded in the hologram. 

670 
Bohm 
The similarity to the ink droplet model is clear. In both cases, the 
order of an ordinary explicate form is enfolded and may be recovered 
(generally to a certain degree of approximation) in a process in which it is 
unfolded, i.e., made explicate. The key difference is that, in the ink droplet, 
we have to do with a distribution of ink particles, whose density is 
represented always by a positive-definite number (and which is subject to 
point-to-point transformations). In the hologram, we have to do with a 
field intensity, which can also be negative and which can therefore show 
interference. Moreover, the transformation is not point to point, but is 
defined by a Green's function G(x, x'). 
In spite of this difference, however, the mathematical treatment of 
both cases is basically similar. To simplify the mathematical representation, 
we may assume a complex scalar field O(x, t) that satisfies a suitable wave 
equation, determining how this field propagates. It is well known that, for 
any finite time interval, this propagation is determined by a linear operator 
(which in fact may be represented by the Green function). 
Let the operator for a single step be G. Then, after n steps, the 
operator will be G n. The corresponding field will be 
~,,(x) = G"~o(X) 
(5) 
where ~0(x) is the initial field configuration. Clearly ~n(x) represents a field 
that has been enfolded n times. 
We can construct an intrinsically implicate order by adding fields that 
have been enfolded a different number of times. For example, we may take 
~,(x) = ~cn c"~,o(X) 
(6) 
n 
A simple way of realizing such an order would be to have a radio station 
that was broadcasting a regularly recurrent signal of a complex kind. As 
the radio waves spread out through space and were reflected and refracted, 
to criss-cross each other in a complex way, each signal would be enfolded 
in the whole space, but successive signals would have different degrees n of 
enfoldment. 
To come to Prigogine's ideas, we note that he works in terms of dis- 
tribution functions in phase space. These have to be positive definite, and 
they undergo a point-to-point transformation in phase space determined by 
Liouville's equation 
~x~ @, @, Ox,/ 
(7) 
where H(x~, Pl) is the Hamiltonian function. 

Implicate Order and Irreversibility 
671 
He defines a Hermitian operator (2) 
L = -i 
Op i 
and writes Liouville's equation as 
, Op 
z~=Lp 
oH 
(8) 
8pi 8x fl 
(9) 
The solution is 
p(0 = e-'L'p(0) 
(10) 
In terms of a suitable interval of time Jr, we can write the corresponding 
time displacement operation as 
D=e -m~t 
(1l) 
where D is the (point-to-point) transformation, implied in a solution of 
Liouville's equation, for the interval of time At. 
Prigogine wishes, however, to consider unstable systems, having 
motions that might be called random or diffusive. Any reasonably complex 
system of particles with strong interactions would in fact give rise to such 
motions. However, to simplify the discussion, Prigogine has recourse to a 
certain idealization of such a process, using what he terms a baker transfor- 
mation. To picture this, one may consider a unit square, the lower half of 
which is full of ink, while the upper half is empty. After many transfor- 
mation operations, the distribution of ink will be in a set of fine bands that 
more or less cover the whole square (see From Being to Becoming, 12) 
Appendix A, Figs. A.1 and A.2). Eventually, the bands will become so fine 
that the distribution appears to be uniform. 
To discuss this process, Prigogine introduces a concept which he calls 
"age time." One may arrive at this by considering the eigenfunctions J~ and 
the eigenvalues ~o, of the Liouville operator. We may then define the 
"age operator" as 
__0f~ 
(12) 
Afo~ = -i &o 
(This is analogous to considering time and energy to be canonically con- 
jugate in the usual quantum mechanics.) One can show that 
dA 
d~-=J 
(13) 

672 
Bohm 
The solution is 
A =t+Ao 
(14) 
In other words, age increases linearly with time. 
If we begin with the transformation D, we obtain after n steps the dis- 
tribution 
pn=Dnpo 
(15) 
D n then describes the "aging" of the distribution, which has taken place in 
these n steps (while Pn is an eigenfunction of the age operator, 
corresponding to n steps in time). 
Clearly, time and age are not the same; all that we can say is that age 
and time increase together in the same way. But, of course, two systems of 
different ages may be present at the same time (i.e., they co-exist), whereas 
two systems of the same age may be present at different times (i.e., the 
existence of one succeeds the existence of the other). This is why I have 
emphasized the use of the term "age," i.e., to make it clear that the concept 
in question is to be distinguished from time. 
Prigogine then defines a general distribution as 
p = ~ C.Dnpo 
(16) 
n 
in which he considers the simultaneous presence of many distributions of 
different ages. 
The close relationship of Prigogine's approach to the implicate order 
should now be clear. To see this, we have only to compare Eq. (16) with 
Eq. (4), with D corresponding to T. We note also that, for the ink droplet, 
pn(x), given by Eq. (1), has a band structure similar to that implied in 
Eq. (15) for the baker transformation. In Eq. (16), Prigogine orders a set of 
simultaneously present distributions, according to the age parameter n, 
while in Eq. (4) I order a set of such distributions according to the 
implication parameter n. Both of these parameters increase linearly with 
the time. It is evident then that age and degree of implication are essentially 
the same concept. It follows then that the baker transformation is a par- 
ticular case of the implicate order and has all the essential features that 
belong to the latter. But Prigogine makes it clear that he regards the baker 
transformation as a paradigmatic illustration of the entire process that 
takes place in nonequilibrium dynamical systems. From this, it would 
follow that the implicate order should be relevant in this whole domain. 
Prigogine then goes on, however, to propose a key new idea. To bring 
this out, we first change the form of Eq. (16) by writing 
p,=C+X, 
(17) 

Implicate Order and Irreversibility 
673 
where C is the average of Pn over the phase space. We note that TC = C, 
not only for the baker transformation, but also for the implicate order 
transformation and indeed for all measure-preserving transformations in 
phase space (such as are induced by the Liouville operator). The quantity 
C thus represents an equilibrium distribution. The X. are then a set of 
functions whose average is zero (Prigogine shows, in addition, that the Xn 
are all mutually orthogonal). They evidently represent the deviation from 
an equilibrium distribution. 
An essential further step of Prigogine's is to introduce a new set of dis- 
tribution functions X-., defined by 
2~=,LXr, 
(18) 
He further assumes that 2, is a monotonically decreasing function, starting 
with 2, --+ 1 as n -+ -m and going to zero as n ~ oo. A typical form (2) for 2 
as a function of n is shown in Fig. 1. From these definitions, it follows that 
fi = ~ C.2,,D~Xo + C 
(19) 
n 
Noting that 2. has been defined as a function of the age, so that 
D2. = 2~ ÷ 1, we obtain 
D# =~ C.2.+lDn+lpo+ C 
(20) 
Pl 
What this equation means is not only that each term D"Xo, 
corresponding to the age n At, changes into D "+ 1X0, as is demanded by 
the Liouville equation, but also that )on is changed to 2. +1. The coefficient 
of the resulting set of distributions is therefore reduced from C,,)., to 
L 
;t as a function of n. 
Fig. 1. 

674 
Bohm 
Cn2n+ 
1 . But, as n--* oo, this coefficient approaches zero. The total dis- 
tribution fi therefore gets closer and closer to the equilibrium distribution 
C as t --, oc. In this way, Prigogine has derived from p another distribution 
fi, which automatically approaches equilibrium as t ~ oe. 
At this point, Prigogine introduces his basic physical assumption. This 
is that the entropy is to be derived, not from p, but rather from ~. With 
this assumption, it can easily be shown that as ¢5 approaches equilibrium, 
the entropy will increase to a maximum and will never decrease thereafter. 
In this way, Prigogine feels that he is able to bypass all the problems that 
arise when one tries to describe the irreversible increase of entropy from a 
basically reversible set of equations of motion. 
It is not my purpose in this article to criticize or evaluate the 
significance of such an assumption (though I shall perhaps do this in a 
later article). My only aim here is to show what this assumption means in 
terms of the implicate order. 
To do this, let us refer again to Eq. (20). In this equation, the 
functions Xn with negative values of n represent enfolded subdistributions 
(e.g., in the form of narrow horizontal bands, produced in the baker trans- 
formation, in which occupied and unoccupied regions alternate). These are 
on their way to unfoldment. The fully unfolded subdistribution Xo 
corresponds to occupation only of the lower half of the square. The J(~ with 
positive values of n then correspond to re-enfoldment and, as shown by 
Prigogine, (2) this time with vertical bands. 
With the passage of time, the enfolded subdistributions X_n steadily 
thus unfold while the bands constantly become wider and fewer. They then 
reach the fully explicate subdistribution X0, after which they enfold again. 
But in the distribution t5 they do not enfold significantly. Rather, as soon as 
a subdistribution such as X n reaches the fully explicate form X o, it begins 
to fade away rapidly (as 2n ~ oo). Ultimately, when all the enfolded sub- 
distributions X n have been unfolded and have faded, only the equilibrium 
distribution C remains. Or, to put it differently, one may say that all the 
enfolded subdistributions X_n are in a sort of pipe line, waiting to unfold, 
but that, very soon after they have unfolded, they die and ultimately only 
the equilibrium distribution C survives. 
This notion of a subdistribution Xo that "dies" more or less when it 
becomes explicate is, from the point of view of the implicate order, a very 
interesting one. Actually, something quite similar has already been con- 
sidered in Wholeness and the Implicate Order, ~1) Chap. 5, in a discussion of 
the algebra of the implicate order. In this algebra, we may include not only 
terms like D n, which are invertible, but also what are called nilpotent 
elements E. These have the property that there is some number S such that 
E s = 0. Such terms describe a series of transformations that ultimately end 

Implicate Order and lrreversibility 
675 
up in the vanishing element E = 0. And so, Prigogine's suggestion fits very 
well into the general notion of the implicate order. In further support of 
this conclusion, we may also note that the transformations from p to ~ can 
only be defined in terms of the implicate order of subdistributions X~, 
which are derived from X o through the operators D n. The transformation 
from (10) to (19) is thus evidently a nonlocal one, which can indeed be 
understood as a further kind of enfoldment and unfoldment, involving, as 
we have seen, nilpotent operators. 
Thus far it is clear that Prigogine has been working with what are 
effectively implicate orders of type A. For, as we have seen, he assumes 
positive-definite distribution functions, such as p and ~, and starts with 
Liouville's equation operating on p, which is a point-to-point transfor- 
mation of the arguments of this function. As Prigogine points out, for 
systems with chaotically unstable motions, such an approach has to do 
with processes resembling diffusion, which can be the basis of an 
explanation of irreversibility in physics. However, the implicate orders of 
type B deal with functions, such as the quantum-mechanical wave function 
O(x, t), which are not positive definite and can show interference. 
Moreover, their basic movement is that of wave propagation and not a 
point-to-point transformation. When they are analyzed in terms of normal 
modes, they are seen to oscillate. This oscillation is especially clearly 
manifested for the case of discrete stationary states, in which we can write 
= O(x) e-iEt/h, where E is the energy and h Planck's constant. Here there 
is no approach to equilibrium, but rather there is a periodic recurrent 
motion. 
I feel that because of his intense interest in making becoming the 
dominant concept in physics, Prigogine has heavily emphasized irreversible 
processes corresponding to implicate orders of type A. In my view, 
however, the concept of time must involve both irreversible process and 
recurrent (cyclical) process. Without the latter, there would be no 
"backdrop," making possible a measure of time sufficiently reliable and 
universal to allow us to distinguish between what is meant by reversibility 
and irreversibility. 
I therefore feel that what is needed is a more general theory in which 
implicate orders of type A and type B are both considered as limiting cases 
of a more general kind of implicate order lying between these extremes. 
This would inseparably unite both quantum mechanics and ther- 
modynamics in a really deep way. I think that Prigogine's approach to 
uniting quantum mechanics and statistical mechanics is very interesting in 
this regard. However, it seems to me that it starts too close to the 
traditional approach of quantum statistical mechanics, because of its 
assumption of a density matrix. It is my view that, by bringing the two 

676 
Bohm 
types of implicate order together in a more fundamental way, we may come 
to a radically new set of concepts. What I would suggest is that we start 
with an algebra whose elements consist of not only the unitary transfor- 
mations of quantum mechanics, but also further projective and nilpotent 
terms. These latter can describe irreversible processes in a fundamental 
way, because they have no inverses. This generalized algebra should have 
the reversible algebra of quantum mechanics as a subalgebra, describing 
cyclical (recurrent) processes. But, more generally, it will have processes in 
which fluctuating deviations from equilibrium tend to vanish, because they 
correspond to nilpotent elements of the algebra. 
Finally, I should like to comment on some remarks that Prigogine has 
made about the implicate order. He states (3) "To my mind enfolding and 
unfolding are exactly as conservative as are.., hidden variables. It always 
comes back to something which is there and which is then developed." In 
Prigogine's view, "The future is just not there. Time is creation." From this, 
I would conclude that Prigogine feels that the implicate order is restricted 
to a deterministic theory. But this is not so. As I have shown in the present 
article, it may equally well apply in a probabilistic theory, such as that of 
Prigogine. Even if one believes with him that the future is constantly 
created, one must notice that anything that one says about it (e.g., in the 
form of equations giving the probabilities for certain processes to take 
place) must still have the form of a determinate set of laws. The difference 
is that these laws now apply to potentialities, tendencies, and what Popper 
calls propensities, rather than to the actual individual events themselves. 
It is thus clear that the implicate order has room for novelty and 
creativity. In this regard, I should like to emphasize that it can go beyond 
determinism, and indeed beyond physics, to include for example (as shown 
in Wholeness and the Implicate Order) even life and consciousness. The 
main point is that it is a general form of order, and not a particular set of 
laws. The basic order of physics has thus far been given by the Cartesian 
coordinates. These are evidently eminently suitable for classical types of 
laws. What I argue in Wholeness and the Implicate Order is that Cartesian 
coordinates are not suitable for describing the order that is implicit in 
quantum laws. Rather, what is needed is an algebra of the general kind that 
has been discussed here. ! hope that the present paper shows that Prigogine 
is at least implicitly using a similar algebra to discuss order in irreversible 
processes. I would suggest that the implicate order is therefore basically 
more suitable for discussing the kinds of questions that Prigogine raises 
than are the Cartesian coordinates. Indeed, further work (a) indicates that 
even the properties of space-time can be derived from such an algebra, so 
that geometry, quantum theory, and irreversible thermodynamics could 
thus be unified on a new basis that is more fundamental than any of these. 

Implicate Order and Irreversibility 
677 
REFERENCES 
1. D. Bohm, Wholeness and the Implicate Order (Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1980). 
2. I. Prigogine, From Being to Becoming (W. H. Freeman, San Francisco, 1980). 
3. R. Weber, Dialogues with Scientists and Sages (Routledge and Kegan Paul, London and 
New York, 1986). 
4. F. Frescura and B. J. Hiley, Found. Phys. 10, 7 (1980). 

