In-Ground POOL   
   
 
Building an in-ground pool can be a 
rewarding experience, and less daunting 
than you first imagine.  Swimming pools 
today are manufactured from a variety of 
materials, and (some) are engineered to 
be almost easy to install. We will not cover 
building a concrete pool because a 
homeowner generally will not be able to 
install a concrete pool as it requires 
knowledge and tools beyond the scope of 
most homeowners. Our project is a vinyl 
liner pool with cement bottom and 
structural  
plastic walls. The walls of today's pools are made of various materials that are assembled  
like a giant erector set. The pool manufacturers make the sides from aluminum, galvanized 
steel, plastic, and fiberglass. All of these materials are acceptable.  
 
Step 1:  Determine the answer to a variety of 
questions before you start. (see last pages for a 
discussion of these points and others) 
• 
Pool location.  
• 
How much fall the land has within the 
pool area.  
• 
How deep you want your diving end to 
be.  
• 
How high out of the ground the finished 
pool deck be.  
• 
Local building code and permit 
requirements.  
 
Step 2:  Mark off the outline of the pool with stakes and string so that you can do fine tuning 
of final pool placement. Call for underground utilities to be marked (free service) so that you 
will not dig or trench through a buried cable or line. Secure your building permit. Determine 
supplier of pool and purchase pool kit, liner, Portland cement, vermiculite and all necessary 
supplies such as sliding board, pool vacuum etc. (These will be covered later)  

 
 
Step 3: On the big day...start digging in 
the deep end.  The pattern of the dig 
follows the diagram below. (which is a top, 
side and end view of the pool)   
 
Step 4:  The pool kit you purchase will provide 
the measurements for the final size of the pool 
bottom and sides.  You will aim to over dig the 
sides of the pool approximately 24" bigger than 
your outline marked on the ground when you 
started. This provides working room for the 
panels, room for the panel braces shown in the 
picture to the right, and is where the concrete 
footer is poured that holds the bottom of the 
panel and panel braces.    
 
  
 
 
Note:  Our project in the photographs is a 
6' deep Grecian style pool which has 
clipped corners. This changes the deep 
end bottom shape from that shown in our 
rectangular pool drawings above.  
You will dig down 42" for the pool walls 
and shallow end depth. The deep end is 
further excavated as shown in the picture 
on left. There is a 2' wide shelf outside the 
deep end as shown in both the picture and 
the drawing above it. The pool walls sit on 
the edge of this shelf and are held in place 
by 24" rebar stakes driven through the 
bottom. 

After excavation is complete it is time to clean 
up the rough excavation and start assembling 
and placing the panels.  Clean up the rough 
edges and make the 42" shelf and shallow end 
level and straight using a transit/builders level, 
and tape measure. Make sure the shelf and 
shallow end bottom are level and flat, as this is 
what the panels will sit on. If this shelf and pool 
bottom are 1" out of level, then your final pool 
will be 1" out when you are finished.   
Step 5: Install panels.  Use 2' long, 1/2" thick 
rebar as stakes through bottom of panels into 
ground to hold panels in place.  Use spikes and 
string to make outline of pool for guide in 
assembling panels. 
 
 
Step9: While preparing the bottom in step 8, 
also dig out for the bottom drain in the center of 
the deep end diving well as shown in various 
pictures. Make the drain box 2" above the 
excavation level of the soil. 
 
Step 6: After your satisfied the pool panels 
are level (you can shim up low spots with 
pieces of brick or block) then run string 
along the top of straight runs and adjust 
wall braces to make the top straight.  
Step 7:  Cut and install coping.  This also 
helps keep long runs of wall straight.   
Step 8: Prepare bottom for cement mix.  
Run strings along all bottom angle lines in 
the dirt as shown in photo above. Place 
the strings on large nails or spikes in the 
soil, following the final measurements you 
want your pool bottom to be. (these are the 
liner measurements provided by the pool 
kit supplier.)  Now make sure there is 2" 
space below these strings.  This is for the 
2" of cement mixture you will be adding to 
make the bottom. 
 
 
Step 10: Time to install your plumbing. Run 1 
1/2" PVC plumbing lines. You will have 3 lines 
from the filter to the pool.  
1. Wall line to pool (1 line, 2 wall outlets) 
2. Bottom drain line  
3. Skimmer return line  
Your skimmer should be in the deep end (on 
the side), and if there are prevailing winds, it 
should be downwind so floating debris is 
helped toward the skimmer. Water return lines 
to pool should be located at opposite end of 

pool from skimmer. 
   
  
Step 11  Pour footer concrete.  The footer 
locks the bottom of the wall brace (which by 
design locks the top of the wall) and the 
bottom of the wall in place.  Depending on 
vehicle access, and how much you want to 
"pull" concrete, you may find a loader helpful 
in placing the concrete in the footer cavity as 
shown in our pictures.  The footer should be 
6-8 inches thick.  
   
   
 
 
Note:  In-the-wall steps are a popular feature 
and will replace some panels in your pool 
wall.  They need to be supported underneath 
as shown in the instructions that come with 
them.   
As shown in the pictures you can run your 
plumbing lines through the wall braces for 
support.  Simply drill your inlet holes through 
the pool wall at approximately the height of 
the middle horizontal support on the wall 
braces.  This way the PVC piping can sit on 
the braces until it takes the turn away from the 
pool toward the filter.  
Step 12: Work begins on the bottom. This is 
easier than it looks.  The bottom of a pool is 
not as flat as sidewalks and patios, so most 
homeowners can trowel out an acceptable 2" 
thick bottom finish.    
Rent a mortar mixer (the largest one they 
have!) The mix ratio is 1 large bag of 
vermiculite (50lbs) to 94lb bag of Portland 
Cement, and 10 gallons of water.  Vary these 
measurements to suit your needs, as you 
may need less or more water. Also, you will 
have to cut these measurements in smaller 
increments as mortar mixers cannot hold the 
batch size described above.  
 
 

 
Start placing and finishing the 2" cement 
mixture at the deep end as shown. Start at the 
top of the diving well slopes, working your way 
toward the bottom drain. Use a wood or metal 
concrete finishing tool.  The correct finish is 
smooth and flat....not beautiful.  
Remove the grade nails and strings as you 
finish an area. Work your way out of the deep 
end toward the shallow end.  
   
The cement mixture with the correct moisture 
content will look relatively dry when 
compared to concrete.  
Note:  Any pool building supplies that are not 
available from the supplier of the pool such 
as vermiculite, can be purchased locally from 
a pool contracting company.  Portland 
cement and PVC plumbing lines are 
available at home centers, and building 
material stores.  
   
 
 
If you have in-the-wall steps, curve the 
cement bottom up on the plastic front piece of 
the step unit with a 2" radius. In other words 
add extra cement where the step unit meets 
the bottom, and smooth it up the front wall of 
the step unit 2".  The vinyl liner has trouble 
stretching into this bottom corner of the pool, 
so it is being filled in.  
 
 

 
   
Step 13: Installing the liner is next.  Your pool 
will probably be backfilled by this step. (unlike 
these pictures) 
When you order the liner you will provide the 
critical measurements shown on our discussion 
page, and any other measurements they ask 
for.  Normally each liner is custom made for 
each pool after the exact measurements are 
known.  This allows you to have small 
variations in your actual layout. 
   
   
 
Start at the deep end and pull out the entire 
liner.  Align the liner by lining up a seam in 
the vinyl with the appropriate wall panel 
seam, and start hooking the top of the liner 
in the grove in the coping. 
   
 
 
   
Pool kits and liner information: 
You can find many choices on the internet for 
your pool kits, filters and vinyl liners.  Here is 
one: 
WaterWarehouse.com
   

 
After the liner is hooked in to the top, kick 
out wrinkles and tuck into corners as 
shown.  The boxes used are the box the 
liner was shipped in.  They aid in tucking 
the liner into the corners. The liner will look 
small during this step.  It stretches 
considerably after water is added.  
Notice how the liner spans over the walk 
out steps opening. This is left this way until 
you have 8" of water in the shallow end, 
then screw on the flange and cut the liner 
out of the step well.   
   
 
 
 
Open up a small section of the liner at the top 
and insert shop vacuum as shown.  Vacuum 
hose should reach to bottom of pool.  Duck tape 
closed the liner/hose opening. Turn on vacuum 
and it will pull the liner tighter to the sides of the 
pool. Smooth out any wrinkles. Vacuum should 
run until their is 8" of water in the shallow end.  
 
Start filling pool.  When there is 2" of water 
in the deep end, smooth any wrinkles, 
screw on bottom drain collar, and cut out 
liner from center of drain box. Place top on 
drain.  
Notice in picture at right that your concrete 
deck will sit on top of the wall and be 
supported 18" out by the top of the wall 
braces.  
Also notice the location of the extra cement 
placed under the liner at the bottom of the 
step unit during the bottom cementing step 
described on the previous page. 
 
 
 
 

  
     
   
   
• 
Starting out correctly is very important...so do your homework.  Determine the 
answers to the questions listed on page one of this article.  Look for problems with 
your site such as drainage, or rock that may impact excavation.   
• 
You can save about 50% by doing this job yourself over hiring it out to a swimming 
pool contractor.  You can save about 150% over building a gunite/concrete pool.  
• 
Contrary to popular opinion, when you sell your house, whether you have a vinyl 
liner pool or a concrete pool will make very little difference in the final outcome. 
Vinyl liner pools need a new liner every 8-10 years (at $800-$1600) and gunite 
pools need to be re-plastered every 10 years because the final coating of cement is 
etched away by the pool chemicals. (cost $1200-$1600).  Besides, after you tell 
prospective home buyers your pool has a cement bottom and polymer sides under 
the liner, most concerns end there.  
• 
A good rule of thumb is to put the top of the pool 6" above the highest point on your 
ground surrounding the pool.  
• 
Find a good back hoe operator.  You can try to hire the machine operator from 
swimming pool contractors and see if they will dig on nights or weekends privately 
for you. Another source of good machine operators will be septic system installers. 
You want someone who is on their machine daily.  He will need a builders 
level/transit for determining that the excavation is level.  
• 
Be ready for a mess.  It does not matter whether you hire out the entire job, or do 
the entire job yourself, your back yard will look like a bomb went off in it!  
• 
Plan on renting a skid loader (bobcat) for backfilling the pool walls and rough 
landscaping and grading in preparation for concrete pool deck.   
• 
Plan on renting a 4 wheel drive tractor with grader box and stone rake for final 
landscaping and seed preparation.  
• 
Polymer sided pools are excellent, and by far the most common.  Do not believe 
just about any negative comment you read in competitive literature about polymer 
sides on in-ground pools.  
• 
Galvanized steel sided pools are acceptable however future buyers of your home 
may question the longevity of steel, and it may raise questions...even though they 
are unwarranted. (With today's galvanizing processes...rust is not an issue)  
• 
Fiberglas is hard to find and tends to be brittle.  
• 
Aluminum is expensive, but probably the highest quality.  
• 
Line up all your subcontractors ahead of time.  If you use a standard concrete 
finisher in place of one for swimming pools, you will save between $.75-$1.00 per 
sq ft on the job.  
• 
Fencing is an issue you will need to check with your local building code department 
about.  
• 
For coping, buy the biggest and most expensive coping they offer for your pool.  It 
holds the walls straighter, and the difference in cost is well worth it. Ask the supplier 
if they have a good, better and best selection in coping.  
• 
The pool bottom will be a Portland cement and vermiculite mixture.  This will harden 
to a softer surface than concrete, and is smoother and causes less wear on the 
vinyl liner.  
• 
Add extra cement at the bottom of in the wall steps as described in the article.  

• 
Select Pump/Filter location based on proximity to pool and source of electricity. 
Your pump/filter should not be excessively far from pool just to be close to 
electricity source. Pump and filter should be 30' or less from pool.  
• 
Pool kits, filters and liners are available on the internet at discounted prices. Here is 
one source...see if you can beat the offering here!   WaterWarehouse.com  
• 
You can make the deep end of your pool 6' or 8' deep, because the liner is going to 
be made to your specifications, for your pool.  A 6' deep pool allows diving but no 
diving board.   
Critical measurements your vinyl liner manufacturer will need.  
 
 

