 
Incompleteness

 

PUBLISHED TITLES IN THE GREAT DISCOVERIES SERIES 
David Foster Wallace Everything 
and More: A Compact History of co 
Sherwin B. Nuland 
The Doctors' Plague: Germs, Childbed Fever, 
and the Strange Story oflgndc Semmelweis 
Michio Kaku 
Einstein's Cosmos: How Albert Einstein's Vision Transformed Our 
Understanding of Space and Time 
Barbara Goldsmith Obsessive 
Genius: The Inner World of Marie Curie 
Rebecca Goldstein 
Incompleteness: The Proof and Paradox of 
Kurt Godel 
FORTHCOMING TITLES 
David Leavitt on Alan Turing and the Computer 
Madison Smartt Bell on Lavoisier and Modern Chemistry 
Richard Reeves on Rutherford and the Atom George 
Johnson on Hubble and the Measurement of the Universe 
Daniel Mendelsohn on Archimedes and the Science of 
the Ancient Greeks 
William T. Vollmann on Copernicus and the Copernican Revolution 
David Quammen on Darwin and Evolution 
General Editors: Edwin Barber and Jesse Cohen 

BY REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
The Mind-Body Problem The Late-
Summer Passion of a Woman of Mind 
The Dark Sister 
Strange Attractors 
Mazel 
Properties of Light 
Incompleteness 

G R E A T    D I S C O V E R I E S  
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
The Proof and Paradox of 
KurtGodel 
ATLAS   BOOKS 
->r 
W.  W.  NORTON   &   COMPANY 
NEW  YORK   ■   LONDON 

Photograph Credits 
p. 24 The American Institute of Physics/Emilio Segre Visual Archives 
p. 255 Leonard McCombe/Timepix 
Copyright © 2005 by Rebecca Goldstein 
All rights reserved 
Printed in the United States of America 
First Edition 
For information about permission to reproduce selections from this book, write to 
Permissions, W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10110 
Manufacturing by the Haddon Craftsmen, Inc. 
Book design by Chris Welch 
Production manager: Julia Druskin 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Goldstein, Rebecca, date. Incompleteness : the proof 
and paradox of Kurt Godel / Rebecca Goldstein.— 1st ed. 
p. cm. — (Great discoveries) 
Summary: "An introduction to the life and thought of Kurt Godel, who 
transformed our conception of math forever"—Provided by publisher. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-393-05169-2 1. Godel, Kurt. 2. Logicians—
United States—Biography, 3. Logicians—Austria— 
Biography. 4. Proof theory. I. Title. II. Series. 
QA29.G58G65 2005 510'.92—dc22 
2004023052 
W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110 
www.wwnorton.com 
W. W. Norton & Company Ltd., Castle House, 75/76 Wells Street, London WIT 3QT 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0  

For Yael the child is 
mentor to the mother 

 

Introduction   13 
I 
A Platonist among the Positivists    53 
II Hilbert and the Formalists    121 
III The Proof of Incompleteness    147 
IV Godel's Incompleteness    207 
Notes    263 
Suggested Reading 275 
Acknowledgments 
279 
Index   281 

 

But every error is due to extraneous factors 
(such as emotion and education); reason 
itself does not err. 
--KURT   GODEL 
29 November 1972 

 

Introduction. 
Exiles 
t's late summer in suburban New Jersey. Down a secluded 
road two men are strolling, hands clasped behind their 
backs, quietly speaking. Above them a thick canopy of 
trees shelters them from the sky. Stately old homes stand far 
back from the road, while on the other side, just beyond the 
elms, the lush green carpet of a golf course rolls away, the 
muted voices of men at play coming as if from a great distance. 
Yet, appearances to the contrary notwithstanding, this is not 
just one more suburban enclave strictly populated by the 
country club set, with men commuting daily into the city to 
support the affluence. No, this is Princeton, New Jersey, 
home of one of the great universities of the world, and so 
possessed of a far more eclectic population than a first glance 
suggests. At this moment that finds these two men strolling 
home on a quiet back road, Princeton's population has 
become even more cosmopolitan, with many of Europe's 
finest minds on the run from Hitler. As one American 
educator put it, "Hitler shakes the tree and I gather the 
apples." 
13 
I

H 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
Some of the choicest of apples have ended up rolling into 
this little corner of the world. 
So it is not so surprising that the language in which the two 
strollers are conversing is German. One of the men, dapperly 
dressed in a white linen suit with a matching white fedora, is 
still in his thirties while the other, in baggy pants held up by 
old-world-style suspenders, is approaching seventy. Despite 
the difference in their ages, they seem to be talking to one 
another as peers, though occasionally the older man's face 
crinkles up into a well-worn matrix of amusement and he 
shakes his head as if the other has now said something wirk-
lich verrukt, really cracked. 
At one end of the leafy road, in the direction away from 
which the two are heading, the spanking new red-brick 
Georgian building of the Institute for Advanced Study is 
laid out on a great expanse of lawn. The Institute has been 
around now for over a decade, renting space in Princeton 
University's Gothic mathematics building. But the brainy 
influx from Europe has boosted the Institute's prestige, and 
now it has moved a few short miles from the university 
onto its own spacious campus, which includes a pond and a 
small forest, crisscrossed by paths, where fugitive ideas can 
be run to ground. 
The Institute for Advanced Study is already, in the early 
1940s, an American anomaly, peopled with a few select thinkers. 
Perhaps part of the explanation for the Institute's uniqueness 
lies in its having developed out of the visionary ideas of a 
single man. In 1930, educational reformer Abraham Flexner 
had persuaded two New Jersey department store heirs, Louis 
Bamberger and his sister Mrs. Felix Fuld, to charter a new type 
of academy, dedicated to the "usefulness of useless knowl- 

Incompleteness 
15 
edge." The two retail magnates, motivated by their 
philanthropic intent, had sold their business to R. H. Macy 
and Co. just weeks before the stock market crash; with a 
fortune of $30 million, they had turned to Flexner to advise 
them on how to apply it to the betterment of mankind's mind. 
Flexner, the son of Eastern European immigrants, had 
taken it upon himself some years before single-handedly to 
expose the shoddiness of American medical education. 
Around the turn of the century there was a surplus of medical 
schools, granting medical degrees that often indicated little 
more than that the recipient had paid the required tuition. 
The state of Missouri alone had 42 medical schools, the city of 
Chicago 14. Flexner's report, exposing the sham and 
published by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement 
of Teaching, had made a difference. Some of the worst of the 
institutions folded up their tents and snuck off into the night. 
The Bamberger/Fulds were grateful to their former New 
Jersey patrons and wanted to give them something back. Their 
first thought was a medical school, and so they sent their 
representatives to speak with the man who knew so much 
about how medicine ought to be taught. (Flexner's brother 
was head of Rockefeller University's medical school, which 
served Flexner as a model.) But Flexner had been harboring 
even more Utopian dreams than ensuring that American 
doctors know something about medicine. His thoughts on 
educational reform had taken a decided turn away from the 
applied and practical. His idea was to create a haven for the 
purest of thinkers, to realize the proverbial ivory tower in 
solid red brick: in short, to create what would come to be 
known as the Institute for Advanced Study. 
Here the reverentially chosen faculty would be treated as 

16 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
the princes of Reine Verniinft, of pure reason, that they were. 
They would be given generous remuneration (so that some 
dubbed the place "the Institute for Advanced Salaries"), as 
well as the priceless luxury of limitless time in which to think, 
unburdened of the need to prepare classroom lectures and 
correct student exam booklets—in fact unburdened of the 
presence of students altogether. Instead a constantly 
replenished stream of gifted younger scholars, eventually 
known as the "temporary members," would visit for one or 
two years, injecting the bracing tonic of their energy, youth, 
and enthusiasm into the ichor of genius. "It should be a free 
society of scholars," Flexner wrote. "Free, because mature 
persons, animated by intellectual purposes, must be left to 
pursue their own ends in their own way." It ought to 
provide simple, though spacious, surroundings "and above 
all tranquility— absence of distraction either by worldly 
concerns or by parental responsibility for an immature 
student body." The Bamberger/Fulds had originally wanted 
to locate their school in Newark, New Jersey, but Flexner 
persuaded them that Princeton, with its centuries-old 
traditions of scholarship and insulated layers of serenity, 
would be far more conducive to drawing forth the desired 
results from unfettered genius. 
Flexner decided to establish his vision on the firm 
foundations of mathematics, "the severest of all disciplines," in 
his words. Mathematicians, in a certain sense, are the farthest 
removed of all academics from thoughts of "the real world"—a 
phrase which, in this context, means more than merely the 
practical world of current affairs. The phrase is meant to cover 
just about everything that physically exists, aside from ideas, 
concepts, theories: the world of the mind. Of course, the world 
of 

Incompleteness 
17 
the mind can certainly be, and typically is, about the real world; 
however, not, typically, in mathematics. Mathematicians, in 
their extreme remoteness, may not enjoy (or suffer) much 
notice from the public at large; but, among those who live the 
life of the mind, they are regarded with a special sort of wonder 
for the rigor of their methods and the certainty of their 
conclusions, unique features that are connected with some of 
the very reasons that make them largely useless ("useless" in 
the sense that the knowledge of mathematics leads, in and of 
itself, to no practical consequences, no means of changing our 
material condition, for better or for worse). 
The rigor and certainty of the mathematician is arrived at a 
priori, meaning that the mathematician neither resorts to any 
observations in arriving at his or her mathematical insights1 
nor do these mathematical insights, in and of themselves, 
entail observations, so that nothing we experience can 
undermine the grounds we have for knowing them. No 
experience would count as grounds for revising, for example, 
that 5 + 7 — 12. Were we to add up 5 things and 7 things, 
and get 13 things, we would recount. Should we still, after 
repeated recounting, get 13 things we would assume that one 
of the 12 things had split or that we were seeing double or 
dreaming or 
1 This is not, however, to imply that these beliefs are innate, i.e., that we 
are born having them. Obviously, we must first acquire the concepts, and 
the language for expressing them, before we can come to believe that 5 + 7 
= 12. Innateness is a psychological notion, whereas aprioricity is an episte-
mological notion, having to do with the way in which the belief is justified, 
what counts as evidence both for and against it. [Note: Two types of notes 
will be employed in this book: footnotes to continue a thought on the page, 
endnotes to give citations.] 

18 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
even going mad. The truth that 5 + 7 = 12 is used to evaluate 
counting experiences, not the other way round. 
The a priori nature of mathematics is a complicated, 
confusing sort of a thing. It's what makes mathematics so 
conclusive, so incorrigible: Once proved, a theorem is 
immune from empirical revision. There is, in general, a sort of 
invulnerability that's conferred on mathematics, precisely 
because it's a priori. In the vaulting tower of Reine Vernunft 
the mathematicians stand supreme on the topmost turret, 
their methods consisting of thinking, and thinking alone; this 
is partly what Flexner meant by calling their discipline the 
most severe. 
Despite their intellectual stature, mathematicians are 
relatively cost-effective to maintain, requiring, again in 
Flexner's words, only "a few men, a few students, a few 
rooms, books, blackboards, chalk, paper, and pencils." No 
expensive laboratories, observatories, or heavy equipment is 
required. Mathematicians carry all their gear in their 
craniums, which is another way of saying that mathematics is 
a priori. Calculated also in Flexner's practical reasoning was 
the fact that mathematics is one of the few disciplines in 
which there is almost total unanimity on the identity of the 
best. Just as mathematics, alone among the disciplines, is able 
to establish its conclusions with the unassailable finality of a 
priori reason, so, too, the ranking of its practitioners follows 
with almost mathematical certitude. Flexner, functioning not 
only as the Institute's designer but as its first director, would 
know exactly after whom to go. 
He soon loosened the requirements sufficiently to allow for 
the most theoretical of physicists and mathematical of 
economists, and late in 1932 was able to make the 
triumphant 

Incompleteness 
19 
announcement that the first two employees he had hired were 
Princeton's own Oswald Veblen, a mathematician of the highest 
rank, and none other than Germany's Albert Einstein, the 
scientist whose near-cult status had made him a prominent 
target for the Nazis. Einstein's revolutionary theories of special 
and general relativity had been attacked by German scientists 
as representative of pathologically "Jewish physics," corrupted 
by the Jewish infatuation with abstract mathematics. Even 
before the genocidal plans kicked into full operation, the 
physicist had been placed on the Third Reich's special hit list. 
As would be expected, a host of universities were more than 
willing to open their doors to so prestigious a refugee; in 
particular, Pasadena's California Institute of Technology was 
vigorously trying to recruit him. But Einstein favored 
Princeton, some say because it was the first American 
university to show interest in his work. His friends, casting 
their cosmopolitan eyes at the New Jersey seat of learning, 
convinced of its essential provinciality, asked him "Do you 
want to commit suicide?" But with a homeland suddenly 
turned maniacally hostile, perhaps Princeton's early and 
lasting friendliness proved irresistible. Einstein asked Flexner 
for a salary of $3000 and Flexner countered with $16,000. Soon 
the famous head with the ion-charged hair was strolling the 
suburban sidewalks, so that at least on one occasion a car hit a 
tree "after its driver suddenly recognized the face of the 
beautiful old man walking along the street." 
Other luminaries from Europe followed Einstein to New 
Jersey, including the dazzling Hungarian polymath, John von 
Neumann, who would begin construction of the world's first 
computer while at the Institute, scandalizing those members 

20 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
who shared Flexner's commitment to keeping the Institute 
free of any "useful" work.2 But it is Albert Einstein who has 
been immortalized, even while still very much alive,3 as the 
apotheosis of the man of genius, so that townspeople have, 
almost since the day of his arrival, taken to calling Flexner's 
establishment "the Einstein Institute." 
Sure enough the older of the two strollers glimpsed on 
the leafy road leading from the Institute is none other than 
Princeton's most famous denizen, his face once again 
registering wry amusement at something his walking partner 
has just propounded in all apparent seriousness. The younger 
man, a mathematical logician, acknowledges Einstein's 
reaction by producing a faint, crooked smile of his own, but 
continues to deduce the implications of his idea with 
unflappable precision. 
The topics of their daily conversations range over physics and 
mathematics, philosophy and politics, and in all of these areas 
the logician is more than likely to say something to startle 
Einstein in its originality or profundity, naivete or downright 
outlandishness. All of his thinking is governed by an "interesting 
axiom," as Ernst Gabor Straus, Einstein's assistant from 1944 to 
2 As the first venture of the Institute outside the realm of purely theo 
retical work, it was criticized as "out of place" even by faculty members who 
had a high regard for the endeavor itself, according to the official account 
of the Institute's School of Mathematics. After von Neumann's death, the 
computer was quietly transferred to Princeton University. 
3 Many contemporaries report the "awed hush" (in the words of Helen 
Dukas, ibid.) that would fall over a lecture or seminar room when he 
entered. Princeton philosopher Paul Benacerraf, who had been a graduate 
student at Princeton in Einstein's day, told me that Einstein sometimes 
used to attend the weekly Friday philosophy seminar, seldom speaking but 
still making his presence felt simply because it was his presence. 

Incompleteness 
21 
1947, once characterized it. For every fact, there exists an 
explanation as to why that fact is a fact; why it has to be a fact. 
This conviction amounts to the assertion that there is no brute 
contingency in the world, no givens that need not have been 
given. In other words, the world will never, not even once, 
speak to us in the way that an exasperated parent will speak to 
her fractious adolescent: "Why? I'll tell you why. Because I said 
so!" The world always has an explanation for itself, or as 
Einstein's walking partner puts it, Die Welt is vernunftig, the 
world is intelligible. The conclusions that emanate from the 
rigorously consistent application of this "interesting axiom" to 
every subject that crosses the logician's mind—from the 
relationship between the body and the soul to global politics to 
the very local politics of the Institute for Avanced Study 
itself—often and radically diverge from the opinions of common 
sense. Such divergence, however, counts as nothing for him. It is 
as if one of the unwritten laws of his thought processes is: If 
reasoning and common sense should diverge, then... so much 
the worse for common sense! What, in the long run, is common 
sense, other than common? 
This younger man is known to far fewer people, in his own 
day as well as in ours. Yet his work was, in its own way, as 
revolutionary as Einstein's, to be grouped among the small set 
of the last century's most radical and rigorous discoveries, all 
with consequences seeming to spill far beyond their respective 
fields, percolating down into our most basic preconceptions. At 
least within the mathematical sciences, the first third of the 
twentieth century made almost a habit of producing conceptual 
revolutions. This man's theorem is the third leg, together with 
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle and Einstein's relativity, of 
that tripod of theoretical cataclysms that have been felt to force 
disturbances deep down in the foundations of the "exact sci- 

22 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
ences." The three discoveries appear to deliver us into an 
unfamiliar world, one so at odds with our previous 
assumptions and intuitions that, nearly a century on, we are 
still struggling to make out where, exactly, we have landed. 
It is much in the remote nature both of the man and of his 
work that he will never approach the celebrity status of his 
Princeton walking partner nor of the author of the 
uncertainty principle, who is almost certainly engaged at this 
same moment in history in the effort to produce the atom 
bomb for Nazi Germany. Einstein's walking partner is a 
revolutionary with a hidden face. He is the most famous 
mathematician 
 
The logician and the physicist on one of 
their daily walks to and from the Institute 
for Advanced Study, Princeton. 

Incompleteness 
23 
that you have most likely never heard of. Or if you have heard 
of him, then there is a good chance that, through no fault of 
your own, you associate him with the sorts of ideas—subver-
sively hostile to the enterprises of rationality, objectivity, 
truth—that he not only vehemently rejected but thought he 
had conclusively, mathematically, discredited. 
He is Kurt Godel, and in 1930, when he was 23, he had 
produced an extraordinary proof in mathematical logic for 
something called the incompleteness theorem—actually two 
logically related incompleteness theorems. 
Unlike most mathematical results, Godel's incompleteness 
theorems are expressed using no numbers or other symbolic 
formalisms. Though the nitty-gritty details of the proof are 
formidably technical, the proof's overall strategy, delightfully, 
is not. The two conclusions that emerge at the end of all the 
formal pyrotechnics are rendered in more or less plain 
English. The Encyclopedia of Philosophy's article "Godel's 
Theorem" opens with a crisp statement of the two theorems: 
By Godel's theorem the following statement is generally 
meant: 
In any formal system adequate for number theory 
there exists an undecidable formula—that is, a formula 
that is not provable and whose negation is not provable. 
(This statement is occasionally referred to as Godel's first 
theorem.) 
A corollary to the theorem is that the consistency of a 
formal system adequate for number theory cannot be 
proved within the system. (Sometimes it is this corollary 
that is referred to as Godel's theorem; it is also referred to 
as Godel's second theorem.) 

24 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
These statements are somewhat vaguely formulated 
generalizations of results published in 1931 by Kurt Godel 
then in Vienna. ("Uber formal unentscheidbare Satze der 
Principia Mathematica und verwanter Systeme I," received 
for publication on November 17,1930.) 
Though one might not guess it from this terse statement of 
them, the incompleteness theorems are extraordinary for 
(among other reasons) how much they have to say. They 
belong to the branch of mathematics known as formal logic 
or mathematical logic, a field which was viewed, prior to 
Godel's achievement, as mathematically suspect;4 yet they 
range far beyond their narrow formal domain, addressing 
such vast and messy issues as the nature of truth and 
knowledge and certainty. Because our human nature is 
intimately involved in the discussion of these issues—after 
all, in speaking of knowledge we are implicitly speaking of 
knowers— Godel's theorems have also seemed to have 
important things to say about what our minds could—and 
could not—be. 
Some thinkers have seen in Godel's theorems high-grade 
grist for the postmodern mill, pulverizing the old absolutist 
ways of thinking about truth and certainty, objectivity and 
rationality. One writer expressed the postmodern sentiment 
in lively eschatological terms: "He [Godel] is the devil, for 
math. After Godel, the idea that mathematics was not just a 
4 Before Godel came onto the scene, logicians were more likely to be 
members of a philosophy department. Simon Kochen, a logician in the 
mathematics department at Princeton University, remarked to me that 
"Godel put logic on the mathematical map. Every mathematical 
department of note now has logic represented on its staff. It may only be 
one or two logicians, but there will, at least, be someone" (May 2002). 

Incompleteness 
25 
language of God but language we could decode to understand 
the universe and understand everything—that just doesn't 
work any more. It's part of the great postmodern uncertainty 
that we live in." The necessary incompleteness of even our 
formal systems of thought demonstrates that there is no non-
shifting foundation on which any system rests. All truths— 
even those that had seemed so certain as to be immune to the 
very possibility of revision—are essentially manufactured. 
Indeed the very notion of the objectively true is a socially 
constructed myth. Our knowing minds are not embedded in 
truth. Rather the entire notion of truth is embedded in our 
minds, which are themselves the unwitting lackeys of 
organizational forms of influence. Epistemology is nothing 
more than the sociology of power. So goes, more or less, the 
postmodern version of Godel. 
Other thinkers have argued that, in regard to the nature of 
the human mind, the implications of Godel's theorems point 
in an entirely different direction. For example, Roger Penrose 
in his two bestselling books, The Emperor's New Mind and 
Shadows of the Mind, has made the incompleteness theorems 
central to his argument that our minds, whatever they are, 
cannot be digital computers. What Godel's theorems prove, 
he argues, is that even in our most technical, rule-bound 
thinking—that is, mathematics—we are engaging in truth-
discovering processes that can't be reduced to the mechanical 
procedures programmed into computers. Notice that Penrose's 
argument, 
in 
direct 
opposition 
to 
the 
postmodern 
interpretation of the previous paragraph, understands Godel's 
results to have left our mathematical knowledge largely intact. 
Godel's theorems don't demonstrate the limits of the human 
mind, but rather the limits of computational models of the 
human 

26 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
mind (basically, models that reduce all thinking to rule-following). 
They don't leave us stranded in postmodern uncertainty but 
rather negate a particular reductive theory of the mind. 
Godel's theorems, then, appear to be that rarest of rare 
creatures: mathematical truths that also address themselves— 
however ambiguously and controversially—to the central 
question of the humanities: what is involved in our being 
human? They are the most prolix theorems in the history of 
mathematics. Though there is disagreement about precisely 
how much, and precisely what, they say, there is no doubt that 
they say an awful lot and that what they say extends beyond 
mathematics, certainly into metamathematics and perhaps 
even beyond. In fact, the metamathematical nature of the 
theorems is intimately linked with the fact that the 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy stated them in (more or less) plain 
English. The concepts of "formal system," "undecidable," and 
"consistency" 
might 
be 
semi-technical 
and 
require 
explication (which is why the reader should not worry if the 
succinct 
statement 
of 
the 
theorems 
yielded 
little 
understanding); but they are metamathematical concepts 
whose explication (which will eventually come) is not 
rendered 
in 
the 
language 
of 
mathematics. 
Godel's 
conclusions are mathematical theorems that manage to 
escape mere mathematics. They speak from both inside and 
outside mathematics. This is yet another facet of their distinct 
fascination, the facet seized upon in yet another popular book, 
Douglas Hofstadter's Putlizer-prize-winning Go'del, Escher, Bach: 
An Eternal Golden Braid. 
The prefix meta comes from the Greek, and it means "after," 
"beyond," suggesting the view from outside, as it were. The 
metaview of a cognitive area poses such questions as: how is it 

Incompleteness 
27 
possible for this area of knowledge to be doing what it is doing? 
Mathematics, just because it is sui generis—the severest of 
disciplines—using a priori methods to establish its often 
astounding, though incorrigible, results, has always forcefully 
presented theorists of knowledge (known as "epistemologists") 
with metaquestions, most specifically the question of how it is 
possible for it to be doing what it is doing. The certainty of 
mathematics, the godlike infallibility it seems to bestow on 
its knowers, has been seen as presenting both a paradigm to 
be emulated—if we can do it there, let's do it everywhere5—
and also a riddle to be pondered: how can we do it, there or 
anywhere? How can the likes of us, thrown up out of the 
blindfolded thrashings of evolution, attain any sort of 
infallibility? To grasp this riddle it might be helpful to recall 
a famous remark of Groucho Marx's, to the effect that he 
would not belong to any country club that would accept the 
likes of him. Similarly, some have fretted that if mathematics is 
really so certain then how can it be known by the likes of us? 
How can we have gained entry into so restricted a cognitive 
club? 
Metaquestions about a field, say about science or 
mathematics or the law, are not normally questions that are 
contained in the field itself; they are not, respectively, 
scientific or 
5 This Utopian epistemology is characteristic of the seventeenth-century 
rationalists-—Rene Descartes (1596-1650), Benedictus Spinoza (1632-1677), 
and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646-1716). Spinoza and Leibniz, in 
particular, believed it was possible to appropriate the standards and methods 
of the mathematicians and generalize them so that they could answer all our 
posed questions: scientific, ethical, even theological. Then, when theological 
differences of the sort that cause long and bloody wars arose, men of reason 
could respond: "Come, let us a priori deduce." 

28 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
mathematical or legal. Rather they are categorized as 
philosophical 
questions, 
residing, 
respectively, 
in 
the 
philosophy of science, of mathematics, of law. Godel's 
theorems are spectacular exceptions to this general rule. They 
are at once mathematical and metamathematical. They have 
all the rigor of something that is a priori proved, and yet they 
establish a metaconclusion. It is as if someone has painted a 
picture that manages to answer the basic questions of 
aesthetics; a landscape or portrait that represents the general 
nature of beauty and perhaps even explains why it moves us the 
way it does. It is extraordinary that a mathematical result 
should have anything at all to say about the nature of 
mathematical truth in general. 
Godel's two theorems address themselves to the very issue 
that has always singled out mathematics: the certainty, the 
incorrigibility, the aprioricity. Do the theorems cast us out of 
the 
most 
exclusive 
cognitive 
club 
in 
epistemology, 
undermining our claim of being able to attain, in the area of 
mathematics at least, perfect certitude? Or do the theorems 
leave us members in good standing? Godel himself, as we 
shall see, held strong convictions on this metaquestion, 
sharply at odds with interpretations that are commonly linked 
with his work. 
For both Godel and Einstein, metaquestions of how, 
respectively, 
physics 
and 
mathematics 
are 
to 
be 
interpreted—what it is that these powerful forms of 
knowledge actually do and how they do it—are central to 
their technical work. Einstein, too, had extremely strong 
metaconvictions 
regarding 
physics. 
More 
specifically, 
Einstein's and GodePs metaconvictions were addressed to the 
question of whether their respective fields are descriptions 
of an objective reality—existing independent of our thinking 
of it—or, rather, are subjective human projections, socially 
shared intellectual constructs. 

Incompleteness 
29 
The emphasis that each placed on these metaquestions 
was, in itself, enough to separate them from most 
practitioners in their respective fields. Not only were both men 
centrally interested in the metalevel, but, even more 
unusually, they also wanted their technical work to shed 
metalight. Godel, in fact, had acquired the ambition, while 
still an undergraduate at the University of Vienna, of 
devoting himself only to the sort of mathematics that would 
have broader philosophical implications. This is a truly 
daunting goal, in some sense historically ambitious, and one 
of the most astounding aspects of his story is that he 
managed to achieve it. This daunting ambition, which he 
preserved throughout his life, may have limited how much 
he did, but it also determined that whatever he did was 
profound. Einstein, though not quite so strict with himself as 
Godel, still shared the conviction that truly good science 
always keeps the larger philosophical questions in view: 
"Science without epistemology is—insofar as it is thinkable 
at all—primitive and muddled." 
The friendship between Einstein and Godel is still the stuff 
of both legend and speculation. Every day the two men made 
the trek back and forth from the Institute, and others watched 
them with curiosity and wondered that they had so much to 
say to one another. For example, Ernst Gabor Straus wrote: 
No story of Einstein in Princeton would be complete 
without mentioning his really warm and very close 
friendship with Kurt Godel. They were very, very dissimilar 
people, but for some reason they understood each other 
well and appreciated each other enormously. Einstein 
often mentioned that he felt that he should not become a 
mathematician  because the wealth  of interesting  and  
attractive 

30 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
problems was so great that you could get lost in it without 
ever coming up with anything of genuine importance. In 
physics, he could see what the important problems were 
and could, by strength of character and stubbornness, 
pursue them. But he told me once, "Now that I've met 
Godel, I know that the same thing does exist in 
mathematics." Of course, Godel had an interesting axiom 
by which he looked at the world; namely, that nothing that 
happens in it is due to accident or stupidity. If you really 
take that axiom seriously all the strange theories that Godel 
believed in become absolutely necessary. I tried several 
times to challenge him, but there was no out. I mean, from 
Godel's axioms they all followed. Einstein did not really 
mind it, in fact thought it quite amusing. Except the last 
time we saw him in 1953, he said, "You know, Godel has 
really gone completely crazy." And so I said, "Well, what 
worse could he have done?" And Einstein said, "He voted 
for Eisenhower." 
Straus's language indicates a certain puzzlement as to what 
the two men saw in one another; in particular, what the 
sagacious physicist could have seen in the neurotic logician. 
Einstein, wrote Straus, was "gregarious, happy, full of laughter 
and common sense." Godel, on the other hand was "extremely 
solemn, very serious, quite solitary and distrustful of 
common sense as a means of arriving at the truth." 
The Einstein of legend—with his wild hair and absent-
mindedness, his quixotic embrace of one-world politics and 
other lost causes—is not usually portrayed as a savvy, worldly 
sort; but, compared to Godel, he was. Most in Princeton, even 
his mathematical colleagues, found Godel, with his 
"interesting axiom" exponentially complicating every 
discussion and 

Incompleteness 
31 
practical decision, all but impossible to speak with. As the 
mathematician Armand Borel wrote in his history of the 
Institute's School of Mathematics, he and the others 
sometimes "found the logic of Aristotle's successor. . . quite 
baffling." Eventually, the mathematicians solved their Godel 
problem by banishing him from their meetings, making him a 
department of one: the sole decision-maker on anything 
having strictly to do with logic. 
Though Princeton's population is well accustomed to 
eccentricity, trained not to look askance at rumpled 
specimens staring vacantly (or seemingly vacantly) off into 
space-time, Kurt Godel struck almost everyone as seriously 
strange, presenting a formidable challenge to conversational 
exchange. A reticent person, Godel, when he did speak, was 
more than likely to say something to which no possible 
response seemed forthcoming: 
John Bahcall was a promising young astrophysicist when 
he was introduced to Godel at a small Institute dinner. He 
identified himself as a physicist, to which Godel's curt response 
was "I don't believe in natural science." 
The philosopher Thomas Nagel recalled also being seated 
next to Godel at a small gathering for dinner at the Institute 
and discussing the mind-body problem with him, a 
philosophical chestnut that both men had tried to crack. 
Nagel pointed out to Godel that Godel's extreme dualist 
view (according to which souls and bodies have quite separate 
existences, linking up with one another at birth to conjoin 
in a sort of partnership that is severed upon death) seems 
hard to reconcile with the theory of evolution. Godel 
professed himself a nonbeliever in evolution and topped this 
off by pointing 

32 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
out, as if this were additional corroboration for his own 
rejection of Darwinism: "You know Stalin didn't believe in 
evolution either, and he was a very intelligent man," 
"After that," Nagel told me with a small laugh, "I just gave 
up."6 
The linguist Noam Chomsky, too, reported being stopped 
dead in his linguistic tracks by the logician. Chomsky asked 
him what he was currently working on, and received an 
answer that probably nobody since the seventeenth-century's 
Leibniz had given: "I am trying to prove that the laws of nature 
are a priori." 
Three magnificent minds, as at home in the world of pure 
ideas as anyone on this planet, yet they (and there are more) 
reported hitting an insurmountable impasse in discussing 
ideas with Godel. 
Einstein, too, was presented time and again, on their daily 
walks to and from the Institute, with examples of Godel's 
strange intuitions, his profound "anti-empiricism." Nevertheless 
Einstein consistently sought out the logician's company. In fact, 
6 Godel's hostility to the theory of evolution becomes quite 
understandable the more one understands his mind. A rationalist like Godel 
wishes to excise chance and randomness, whereas natural selection invokes 
randomness and contingency as fundamental explanatory factors. At the 
level of microevolution (generation-to-generation changes), the theory 
gives a central role to random mutation and recombination. At the level of 
macroevolu-tion (patterns in the history of life), it gives a central role to 
historical contingency, such as the vagaries of geology and climate, or such 
chance events as a meteorite's crashing to Earth, blackening out the Sun, 
wiping out the dinosaurs, thus allowing mouselike mammals to inhabit the 
vacated ecological niches. (I am indebted to Steven Pinker for this insight.) 

Incompleteness 
33 
economist Oskar Morgenstern,7 who had known Godel back in 
Vienna, confided in a letter: "Einstein had often told me that in 
the late years of his life he has continually sought Godel's 
company, in order to have discussions with him. Once he said to 
me that his own work no longer meant much, that he came to 
the Institute merely urn dasPrivilegzu haben, mit Godel zu Fuss 
nach Hause gehen zu diirfen" that is, in order to have the 
privilege of walking home with Godel. Even given their shared 
interest in the metalevel of their respective fields, Einstein's 
avowal of devotion strikes one as extravagant. 
For his part, Godel's letters to his mother, Marianne, who 
remained behind in Europe (a correspondence that gives us 
some knowledge of his life until her death in 1966), are filled 
with references to Einstein. If Einstein, in his last years, went 
to the Institute merely for the privilege of walking home with 
Godel, for Godel there was simply nobody else in all the world 
with whom to talk, at least not in the way in which he could 
talk to Einstein (an exclusivity made all the more poignant 
when one considers that Godel had a wife). So that, for 
example, on 4 July 1947, he wrote to his mother that Einstein 
had been ordered by his doctor to take a rest cure. "So I am 
now quite lonesome and speak scarcely with anybody in 
private." 
It was, and remains, a minor mystery to those who observed 
their powerful friendship. "I used to see them walking across the 
path from Fuld Hall to Olden Farm every day," the Swiss-born 
7 Morgenstern had also fled Nazi-occupied Austria for the Institute. 
Even though he was an economist, his work was sufficiently 
mathematical—he is one of the founders, with von Neumann, of game 
theory—to gain him entrance into Flexner's Institute. 

34 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
Armand Borel, who came to the Institute a little after Godel, 
told me as I sat in his office at the Institute. "I do not know what 
it was they spoke about. It was most probably physics, because 
Godel, too, was interested in physics, you know.8 They didn't 
want to speak to anybody else. They only wanted to speak to 
each other," he concluded with a shrug. 
It is important in understanding the relationship between 
Einstein and Godel, in trying to peer behind Straus's bemused 
"somehow they understood each other very well," not simply to 
stop short at the easy explanation that these two were uniquely 
each other's intellectual peer, that they constituted, in the 
logician Hao Wang's words, a "two-membered 'natural land' 
consisting of the leading'natural philosophers' of the century."9 
There is much more, even beyond membership in so exclusive 
a set, to be said for what bound the two together. 
There are the surface similarities, of course. There is the 
fact, for example, that they had both done their most 
important work in Central Europe, in German-speaking lands, 
from which they had been forced to flee. But in this respect at 
least, Einstein and Godel were hardly unique in the 
Princeton of their day. Scholar after scholar had had to flee 
Vienna and Gottingen and Budapest for places like 
Pasadena and Princeton. The fact that they were political 
exiles, who spoke the same native tongue and found 
themselves strolling the 
8 Godel produced a very original solution to the field equations of 
Einstein's general relativity, and surprised Einstein with them for his seven 
tieth birthday. In Godel's solution, time is cyclical. See Chapter 4. 
9 Hao Wang (1921-1995), a logician at Rockefeller University, devoted 
himself to understandiing Godel's views on everything from the nature of 
mathematical intuition to the transmigration of souls, and produced three 
books out of the material. 

Incompleteness 
35 
improbable landscape of suburban New Jersey, certainly does 
not begin to explain the special bond between them, which 
mystified even their fellow refugees. 
There are other striking similarities between the two. There 
is, for example, the fact that both of them had done their most 
important work when quite young men. Einstein had been 26 
in 1905, his annus mirabilus, when, as an obscure patent clerk 
in Bern, Switzerland, he had published his articles on (special) 
relativity, the light quantum, and Brownian motion, as well as 
completed his Ph.D. dissertation. Godel's results (which also 
were three in number, though it is the first incompleteness 
theorem that far outshines all else10) had been accomplished 
three years before reaching the comparable age. 
More important than this shared autobiographical detail is 
the fact that each man had toyed, at an even earlier age, with 
the idea of entering the field that the other had chosen. Godel 
had entered the University of Vienna intending to study 
physics. Einstein had first thought of becoming a 
mathematician. There is a sense in which each saw in the other 
a realization of what he might have become had he opted 
otherwise, and there was undoubtedly a certain fascination 
in this. 
Still there is far more that bound the two of them together. I 
would like to propose that the reason for the profound 
understanding and appreciation that held between these two 
"very, very dissimilar people" lay on the deepest level of their 
revolutionary ideas. They were comrades in the most profound 
sense in which thinkers can be comrades. Both men were 
committed to an understanding of reality, and of their own 
work in rela- 
10 His other two achievements dating 1929-30 were the second 
incompleteness theorem and the proof of the completeness of the predicate 
calculus. 

36 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
tion to that reality, that placed them painfully at odds with the 
international community of thinkers. 
One might have thought, with each having presented 
results so uniquely transformative that their respective fields 
had been forced to remake themselves to contain these results 
at their center, that the last thing that Einstein and Godel 
would have felt is marginalized. Feelings of alienation, 
disaffection, dismissal, isolation are for the noninfluential 
and the failed. But disaffected and even dismissed they felt, 
and, moreover, disaffected and dismissed in profoundly 
similar ways, at the metalevel of their fields, the level at 
which you interpret what it all means. 
There is a sense, then, at least as I have tried to penetrate to 
the core of a friendship that mystified onlookers, in which 
Einstein and Godel were fellow exiles within a larger exile, 
and it is a sense that goes far beyond the geopolitical 
conditions that caused them to seek safety in Princeton, New 
Jersey. I believe that they were fellow exiles in the deepest 
sense in which it is possible for a thinker to be an exile. 
Strange as it might seem for men so celebrated for their 
contributions, they were intellectual exiles. 
To fully understand their sense of shared isolation, which 
provided the cohesive force to their famous friendship, it will 
be necessary to consider the metaconvictions that alienated 
them from their peers. How ought we to interpret, in terms of 
the larger philosophical questions, Einstein's relativity theory 
and Godel's incompleteness theorems? How did the authors 
of these masterpieces of human thought interpret them and 
how did others? 
Godel's incompleteness theorems. Einstein's relativity 
theories. Heisenberg's uncertainty principle. The very names 
are 

Incompleteness 
37 
tantalizingly suggestive, seeming to inject the softer human 
element into the hard sciences, seeming, even, to suggest that 
the human element prevails over those severely precise systems, 
mathematics and theoretical physics, smudging them over with 
our very own vagueness and subjectivity. The embrace of 
subjectivity over objectivity—of the "nothing-is-but-thinking-
makes-it-so" or "man-is-the-measure-of-all-things" modes of 
reasoning—is a decided, even dominant, strain of thought in 
the twentieth-century's intellectual and cultural life. The work 
of Godel and Einstein—acknowledged by all as revolutionary 
and dubbed with those suggestive names—is commonly 
grouped, together with Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, as 
among the most compelling reasons modern thought has given 
us to reject the "myth of objectivity." This interpretation of the 
triadic grouping is itself part of the modern—or, more 
accurately, postmodern—mythology. 
So, for example, in the 1998 acclaimed play Copenhagen, 
the playwright Michael Frayn not only correctly presents the 
physicists Niels Bohr and Werner Heisenberg as rejecting the 
idea that physics is descriptive of an objective physical reality, 
but he also inaccurately identifies Einstein's relativity theory 
as the first of modern physics' moves in the direction of that 
ultimate rejection: 
Bohr: It [quantum mechanics] works, yes. But it's more 
important than that. Because you see what we did in those 
three years, Heisenberg? Not to exaggerate but we turned 
the world inside out. Yes, listen, now it comes, now it 
comes.. . . We put man back at the center of the universe. 
Throughout history we keep finding ourselves displaced. 
We keep exiling ourselves to the periphery of things. First 

38 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
we turn ourselves into a mere adjunct of God's 
unknowable purposes. Tiny figures kneeling in the great 
cathedral of creation. And no sooner have we recovered 
ourselves in the Renaissance, no sooner has man become, 
as Protagoras proclaimed him, the measure of all things, 
than we're pushed aside again by the products of our 
reasoning! We're dwarfed again as physicists build the 
great new cathedrals for us to wonder at—the laws of 
classical mechanics that predate us from the beginning of 
eternity, that will survive us to eternity's end, that exist 
whether we exist or not. Until we come to the beginning 
of the twentieth century, and we're suddenly forced to rise 
from our knees again. 
Heisenberg: It starts with Einstein. 
Bohr: It starts with Einstein. He shows that 
measurement—measurement, 
on 
which 
the 
whole 
possibility of science depends—measurement is not an 
impersonal event that occurs with impartial universality. 
It's a human act, carried out from a specific point of view 
in time and space, from the one particular viewpoint of a 
possible observer. Then here in Copenhagen in those three 
years in the mid-twenties we discover that there is no 
precisely determinable objective universe. That the 
universe exists only as a series of approximations. Only 
within the limits determined by our relationship with it. 
Only through the understanding lodged inside the human 
head. 
Like Einstein's relativity theory, Godel's incompleteness 
theorems have been seen as holding a prominent place in the 
twentieth-century's intellectual revolt against objectivity and 
rationality. For example, in a popular work of philosophy 
written by William Barrett, Irrational Man: A Study in 
Existentialist Philosophy, published in 1962 while Godel was 
still alive (and 

Incompleteness 
39 
which I was required to read the summer before entering 
college), Godel is placed alongside such thinkers as Martin 
Heidegger (1889-1976) and Friedrich Nietzsche (1844-1900), 
destroyers of our illusions of rationality and objectivity: 
Godel's findings seem to have even more far-reaching 
consequences [than Heisenberg's Uncertainty and Bohr's 
Complementarity], when one considers that in the 
Western tradition, from the Pythagoreans and Plato 
onward, mathematics as the very model of intelligibility 
has been the central citadel of rationalism. Now it turns out 
that even in his most precise science—in the province 
where his reason had seemed omnipotent—man cannot 
escape his essential fmitude; every system of mathematics 
that he constructs is doomed to incompleteness. Godel has 
shown that mathematics has insoluble problems, and hence 
can never be formalized in any complete system. . . . 
Mathematicians now know they can never reach rock 
bottom; in fact, there is no rock bottom, since mathematics 
has no self-subsistent reality independent of the human 
activity that mathematicians carry on. 
Barrett correctly states the (first) incompleteness theorem, 
that mathematics can never be formalized in any complete 
system. And the philosophical conclusion he draws from it is 
very much in sync with the most fashionable intellectual 
trends of the twentieth century. So it might surprise the reader 
to learn that Godel himself drew no such conclusion. In fact, 
if we replace the "no" before "self-subsistent reality" with an 
"a," we will arrive at an accurate statement of Godel's own 
metamathe-matical view, the view that inspired all of his 
mathematical work, including his famous incompleteness 
theorems. 

40 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
Though intellectual gurus may have interpreted Godel as 
falling into step with the great revolt against objectivity and 
rationality that characterizes much of twentieth-century 
thinking, this was not the interpretation that Godel himself 
held of his revolutionary results. Precisely the same thing can 
be truthfully said of Einstein. Both men, in fact, were staunch 
believers in objectivity and interpreted their own most famous 
work as support positive of this increasingly unpopular 
position. While so many of their intellectual peers might have 
made the subjec-tivist turn—citing the great achievements of 
relativity theory and the incompleteness theorems as signposts 
pointing them in that direction—Einstein and Godel did not. 
Both Einstein and Godel are as far from seconding the 
ancient Sophist's "man is the measure of all things" as it is 
perhaps possible to be. For both of these men the methodology 
of their respective fields—the complex mixtures of reasoning, 
including both intuition and deduction (and, in the case of 
physics, which is not a priori, observation as well)—does not 
consist of arbitrary sets of rules that govern an elaborate made-
up mind-game or language-game, which could just as well have 
been played by some other sets of rules entirely, leading to an 
altogether different construction of reality. No, for both thinkers 
these are the rules that lead our minds out beyond the 
circumscriptions of personal experience to gain access to 
aspects of reality that it is impossible otherwise to know. 
Einstein's profound isolation from his scientific peers is as 
well known (if as little understood) as most other aspects of 
his celebrated life. It is often explained as stemming from his 
curmudgeonly refusal to accept the revolutionary advance of 
quantum 
mechanics, 
in 
particular 
its 
fundamentally 
stochastic nature, from which the element of pure chance 
cannot be 

Incompleteness 
41 
excised. The familiar story told about him is that, having 
made his own conceptual revolution as a young man with his 
relativity theories, both special and general, he settled, as is 
the wont of older men, into a conservative mind-set unable to 
wrap itself around the revolutions of the next generation, 
even if those later revolutions were the logical extensions of 
his own. This telling of Einstein's story is also part of the 
intellectual mythology of the twentieth century. 
Yet it is not accurate. The heart of Einstein's scientific 
alienation is his rejection of the subjectivist turn that the 
playwright has his characters declare "all began with 
Einstein." Einstein had not understood his relativity theory as 
pointing toward the subjectivist interpretation of physics 
but, rather, precisely in the opposite direction. "Relativity," as 
it occurs in Einstein's theory, means something far more 
technical and restricted than that measurement (and so 
everything) is relative to human points of view.11 For 
Einstein, in fact, to have 
11 Measurements of properties like length are, according to special 
relativity, relative to a particular coordinate system or reference frame. But 
to reduce these technical terms—coordinate system, reference frame—to 
the idea of human points of view, is, well, nonsense. We have the choice of 
various coordinate systems to describe the motion of something, and, 
according to the theory of relativity, all coordinate systems are equal; 
none is privileged. In one coordinate system an "observer" (who does 
not even have to be a conscious entity, and hence does not have to be 
literally observing or even capable of observing anything) will be at rest; in 
another he or she or it will be moving. It's often natural, though not 
determined, to choose a coordinate system with respect to which a 
particular observer is at rest. Thus it is often natural (though not 
determined) to choose the coordinate system in which the earth, for 
example, is at rest. The motion of all of us terrestrials, with our myriad 
subjective points of view would then be described relative to one 
coordinate system, in which the earth is at rest. 

42 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
followed men like Werner Heisenberg and Niels Bohr in the 
direction of subjectivity would have been to deny what he 
took to be the most fundamental meta-implications of 
relativity theory. Einstein interpreted his theory as 
representing the objective nature of space-time, so very 
different from our human, subjective point of view of space 
and time.12 Far from restoring us to the center of the universe, 
describing everything as relative to our experiential point of 
view, Einstein's theory, expressed in terms of beautiful 
mathematics, offers us a glimpse of an utterly surprising 
physical reality, surprising precisely because it is nothing like 
what we are presented with in our experiential apprehension 
of it. 
Einstein sometimes speaks of objective reality as the "out 
yonder," and in the "Autobiographical Notes" that he supplied 
with his typical self-mocking good humor for the Festschrift 
that P. A. Schilpp edited in honor of the physicist's seventieth 
birthday,13 he explicitly identifies his belief in this reality as 
the spiritual center of his life as a scientist: 
It is quite clear to me that the religious paradise of youth, 
which was thus lost, was a first attempt to free myself from 
the chains of the "merely personal," from an existence 
which is dominated by wishes, hopes, and primitive feel- 
12 In relativity theory, for example, time doesn't flow, but rather is, as 
the fourth dimension, as static as space. In vivid contrast, the most dra 
matic (and poignant) aspect of our experience of time is its ceaseless, unidi 
rectional motion, carrying us away from the past and toward the future. 
13 "Here I sit in order to write, at the age of 67, something like my own 
obituary. I am doing this not merely because Dr. Schilpp has persuaded me 
to do it; but because I, in fact, believe that it is a good thing to show those 
who are striving alongside of us how one's striving and searching appears 
to one in retrospect" (Schilpp, p. 3). 

Incompleteness 
43 
ings. Out yonder there was this huge world, which exists 
independently of us human beings and which stands 
before us like a great, eternal riddle, at least partially 
accessible 
to 
our 
inspection 
and 
thinking. 
The 
contemplation of this world beckoned like a liberation.... 
The mental grasp of this extra-personal world within the 
frame of the given possibilities swam as highest aim half 
consciously and half unconsciously before my mind's eye. . 
. . The road to this paradise was not as comfortable and 
alluring as the road to the religious paradise; but it has 
proved itself as trustworthy, and I have never regretted 
having chosen it. 
This is an eloquent statement of Einstein's credo as a scientist, 
and it really could not be more at odds with the sentiments of 
almost all the other prominent physicists of his circle.14 Einstein 
understood the business of physics to be to discover theories 
that offer a glimpse of the objective nature that stands "out 
yonder" behind our experiences. Werner Heisenberg, together 
with such men as the Danish Niels Bohr and the German Max 
Born (who are together the leading advocates of the 
Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics) reject this 
view in the name of an intellectual movement known as 
"positivism," according to which any attempt to reach out 
beyond our experience results in arrant nonsense. 
We will have occasion to look more closely at positivism in 
the next chapter, when we move from Princeton, New Jersey, to 
Vienna, Austria, and examine the circumstances that brought 
14 Contrast it, for example, with this statement of Werner Heisenberg's: 
"The idea of an objective real world whose smallest parts exist objectively 
in the same sense as stones or trees exist, independently of whether or not 
we observe them ... is impossible." 

44 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
forth, almost as an act of supreme intellectual rebellion against 
the positivists, Godel's two incompleteness theorems. 
Positivism, especially as it came to be espoused by the 
group of scientists, mathematicians, and philosophers of the 
famed Vienna Circle, under the strong influence of the 
charismatic 
Viennese-born 
philosopher 
Ludwig 
Wittgenstein, is a severe theory of meaning that makes 
liberal use of the word meaningless. In particular, it brands 
as meaningless any descriptive proposition15 that cannot in 
principle be verified through the contents of our experience. 
The meaning of a proposition is given by the means of 
empirically verifying it (the verificationist criterion of 
meaning). 
Godel, like Einstein, is committed to the possibility of 
reaching out, pace the positivists, beyond our experiences to 
describe the world "out yonder." Only since Godel's field is 
mathematics, the "out yonder" in which he is interested is the 
domain of abstract reality. His commitment to the objective 
existence of mathematical reality is the view known as 
conceptual, or mathematical, realism. It is also known as 
mathematical Platonism, in honor of the ancient Greek 
philosopher whose own metaphysics was a vehement 
rejection of the Sophist Protagoras' "man is the measure of all 
things." 
Platonism is the view that the truths of mathematics are 
independent of any human activities, such as the construction 
15 By descriptive proposition one means a proposition that is not just 
true (or false) by virtue of its meaning alone. Propositions whose truth-
value (truth or falsity) is a function of their meaning alone are called 
"analytic" or, sometimes, "trivial." So, for example, "all bilingual people 
speak at least two languages" is analytic. A proposition that is, on the other 
hand, descriptive is not true or false simply by virtue of its meaning but 
also by virtue of the facts of the matter. So the proposition "I am bilingual" 
is false by virtue of both its meaning and the facts of the matter. 

Incompleteness 
45 
of formal systems—with their axioms, definitions, rules of 
inference, and proofs. The truths of mathematics are 
determined, according to Platonism, by the reality of 
mathematics, by the nature of the real, though abstract, 
entities (numbers, sets, etc.) that make up that reality. The 
structure of, say, the natural numbers (which are the regular 
old counting numbers: 1, 2, 3, etc.) exists independent of us, 
according to the mathematical realist, just as does the structure 
of space-time, according to the physical realist; and the 
properties of the numbers 4 and 25—that, for example, one is 
even, the other is odd and both are perfect squares—are as 
objective as are, according to the physical realist, the physical 
properties of light and gravity. 
For Godel mathematics is a means of unveiling the features 
of objective mathematical reality, just as for Einstein physics is a 
means of unveiling aspects of objective physical reality. Godel's 
understanding of what we are doing when we are doing 
mathematics could be rendered in words echoing Einstein's 
credo: "Out yonder there is this huge world, which exists 
independently of us human beings and which stands before us 
like a great, eternal riddle, at least partially accessible to our 
inspection and thinking." Only here the "out yonder" is to be 
understood as at an even further remove from the subject 
of experience, with his distinctly human point of view. The 
"out yonder" is out beyond physical space-time; it is a reality of 
pure abstraction, of universal and necessary truths, and our 
faculty of a priori reason provides us—-mysteriously—with the 
means of accessing this ultimate "out yonder," of gaining at 
least partial glimpses of what might be called (in the current 
fashion in naming television shows: "Extreme Survival," 
"Extreme Makeover," "The Most Extreme") "extreme reality." 
Godel's mathematical Platonism was not in itself unusual. 
Many mathematicians have been mathematical realists; and 

46 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
even those who do not describe themselves as such, when they 
are cornered and asked pointblank about their metamathe-
matical position, will slip unself-consciously into realism 
when they speak of their work as their "discoveries."16 G. H. 
Hardy (1877-1947), an English mathematician of great 
distinction, expressed his own Platonist convictions in his 
classic A Mathematician's Apology, with no apologies at all: 
I believe that mathematical reality lies outside of us, that 
our function is to discover or observe it, and that the 
theorems which we prove, and which we describe 
grandiloquently as our "creations," are simply our notes 
of our observations. This view has been held, in one form 
or another, by many philosophers of high reputation 
from Plato onwards, and I shall use the language which is 
natural to a man who holds it.... 
[T]his realistic view is much more plausible of 
mathematical 
than 
of 
physical 
reality, 
because 
mathematical objects are so much more what they seem. A 
chair or a star is not in the least like what it seems to be; 
the more we think of it, the fuzzier its outlines become in 
the haze of sensation which surrounds it; but "2" or "317" 
has nothing to do with sensation, and its properties stand 
out the more clearly the more closely we scrutinize it. It 
may be that modern physics fits best into some framework 
of idealistic philosophy—I do not believe it, but there are 
eminent physicists who say so. Pure mathematics, on the 
other hand, seems to me a rock on which all idealism 
founders: 317 is a prime, not because we think so, or 
because our 
16 Interestingly, this is true even of David Hilbert, whose formalism was 
sharply opposed to Platonism (see chapter 2). 

Incompleteness 
47 
minds are shaped in one way or another, but because it is so, 
because mathematical reality is built that way.17 
The almost three millennia since Plato have given us plenty 
of new and amazing mathematics, but not much more reason 
to believe in Platonism than the ancient Greek philosopher 
himself had. Mathematician after mathematician has 
testified, like Hardy, to their Platonist conviction that they are 
discovering, rather than creating, mathematical truths. 
However, testifying is just about all we ever got... until 
Godel. Godel's audacious ambition to arrive at a 
mathematical conclusion that would simultaneously be a 
metamathematical result supporting mathematical realism 
was precisely what yielded his incompleteness theorems. 
Godel's metamathematical view, his affirmation of the 
objective, independent existence of mathematical reality, 
constituted perhaps the essence of his life, which is to say 
what is undoubtedly true: that he was a strange man indeed. 
His philosophical outlook was not an expression of his 
mathematics; his mathematics were an expression of his 
philosophical outlook, his Platonism, which was the deepest 
expression, 
17 The circumstances of the writing of Hardy's classic are as moving as 
they are unusual. Hardy had lost his mathematical creativity, which tends 
to happen to mathematicians relatively young. (A mathematician of 40 has 
probably already seen his best years, which is why the most prestigious 
award for mathematicians [there is no Nobel Prize for mathematics], the 
Fields Medal, is awarded to someone 40 or younger.) Hardy attempted 
suicide, survived the attempt, and was persuaded by C. P. Snow to write a 
book explaining the life of a mathematician. The result, A 
Mathematician's Apology, is incomparable. Soon after completing it, 
Hardy again attempted suicide, and succeeded. 

48 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
therefore, of the man himself. That his work, like Einstein's, 
has been interpreted as not only consistent with the revolt 
against objectivity but also as among its most compelling 
driving forces is then more than a little ironic. 
Einstein was fortunate in his last years to have a kindred 
philosophical spirit, even if one as unstable and fey as Godel, 
to soften the sense of exile. The words that Morgenstern 
quoted from Einstein, that in his last years he went to his 
Institute office only in order to have the privilege of walking 
home with Godel, become, in the subtleties of the metalight, 
less surprising. 
After Einstein's death in 1955, Godel's sense of intellectual 
exile deepened; his most profound sense of identification was 
with the iiber-rationalist Leibniz, who had been dead for 
almost 300 years. The explanations the logician arrived at 
through the rigorous application of his "interesting axiom" 
took on ever darker tones. The young man in the dapper 
white suit shriveled into an emaciated man, entombed in a 
heavy overcoat and scarf even in New Jersey's hot humid 
summers, seeing plots everywhere. He came to believe that 
there was a vast conspiracy, apparently in place for centuries, 
to suppress the truth "and make men stupid." Those who had 
discovered the full power of a priori reason, men such as the 
seventeenth-century's Leibniz and the twentieth-century's 
Godel, were, he believed, marked men. His profound 
isolation, even alienation, from his peers provided fertile soil 
for that rationality run amuck which is paranoia. 
That the greatest logician since Aristotle should have 
followed 
reason 
so unwaveringly 
to 
such 
illogical 
conclusions has struck many people as paradoxical. But, as I 
hope will become ever clearer in the chapters to come, 
the internal 

Incompleteness 
49 
paradoxes in Godel's personality were at least partially 
provoked by the world's paradoxical responses to his 
famous 
work. 
His 
incompleteness 
theorems 
were 
simultaneously celebrated and ignored. Their technical 
content transformed the fields of logic and mathematics; the 
method of proof he used, the concepts he defined in the 
course of the proof, led to entirely new areas of research, 
such as recursion theory and model theory. Other central 
areas of research were abandoned, particularly those 
sanctioned by the greatest mathematician of the generation 
just preceding Godel's, David Hilbert (1862-1943), having 
been shown to be futile by reason of Godel's theorems. 
Yet the metamathematical import of the theorems, which 
to Godel was their most important aspect, was disregarded. 
Even more paradoxically, the racier currents in the culture, 
hawking postmodern uncertainty and the false mythology of 
all absolutes, scooped his theorems up, together with 
Einstein's relativity, reinterpreting them so that they precisely 
negated the convictions that Godel and his fellow exile had so 
passionately wanted to demonstrate. 
Paradoxes, in the technical sense, are those catastrophes of 
reason whereby the mind is compelled by logic itself to draw 
contradictory conclusions. Many are of the self-referential 
variety; troubles arise because some linguistic item—a 
description, a sentence—potentially refers to itself. The most 
ancient of these paradoxes is known as the "liar's paradox," its 
lineage going back to the ancient Greeks.18 It is centered on 
18 Here is the textual reference the paradox is derived from: "One of 
themselves, even a prophet of their own, said, 'The Cretans are always liars.' 
... This witness is true" (Titus 1:12-13). 

50 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
the self-referential sentence: "This very sentence is false." This 
sentence must be, like all sentences, either true or false. But if 
it is true, then it is false, since that is what it says; and if it is 
false, well then, it is true, since, again, that is what it says. It 
must, then, be both true and false, and that is a severe 
problem. The mind crashes. 
Paradoxes like the liar's play a technical role in the proof 
that Godel devised for his extraordinary first incompleteness 
theorem. Godel was able to take the structure of self-
referential paradoxicality—the sort of structure that causes 
our minds to crash when considering "This very sentence 
is false"—and turn it into an extraordinary proof for one of 
the most surprising results in the history of mathematics.19 
This itself seems almost paradoxical. Paradoxes have 
always seemed specifically designed to convince us that we are 
simply not smart enough to take up whatever topic brought 
us to them. Godel was able to twist the intelligence-
mortifying material of paradox into a proof that leads us to 
deep insights into the nature of truth, and knowledge, and 
certainty. 
According 
to 
Godel's 
own 
Platonist 
understanding of his 
19 That mathematical conclusions have the ability to surprise us might 
itself seem paradoxical. The world might very well, and often does, 
confound our expectations, our experiential contact with it bringing us to 
rude awakenings. But how can conclusions that are arrived at through 
purely a priori reason do so? If a priori truths are—by definition—
immune from empirical revision, then it's not some unexpected experience 
of the world that delivers the punch. We ourselves must deduce the 
confoundment, and this seems prima facie odd. This metamathematical 
issue, too, is addressed by Godel's prolix first theorem. For Godel, the 
independent reality of mathematics, of which our axioms are only 
incomplete descriptions, takes the surprise out of the surprisingness of 
mathematics. 

Incompleteness 
51 
proof, it shows us that our minds, in knowing mathematics, 
are escaping the limitations of man-made systems, grasping 
the independent truths of abstract reality. 
The structure of Godel's proof, the use it makes of ancient 
paradox, speaks at some level, if only metaphorically, to the 
paradoxes in the tale that the twentieth century told itself about 
some of its greatest intellectual achievements—including, of 
course, Godel's incompleteness theorems. Perhaps someday a 
historian of ideas will explain the subjectivist turn taken by so 
many of the last century's most influential thinkers, including 
not only philosophers but hard-core scientists, such as 
Heisenberg and Bohr. Such an explanation lies well beyond the 
scope of this book. But what I can do is to describe the effects 
that the revolt against objectivity had on one of the twentieth 
century's greatest thinkers: how it provoked him into his proof 
of the incompleteness theorems and how it then reinterpreted 
those theorems as confirmation of itself. 
To understand the full richness—and paradox—of Godel, 
his world and his work, it will be necessary to take two steps 
backward from the glimpse of him walking home with 
Einstein on a shady road in Princeton. We'll step back first to 
the 1920s Vienna of his youth, the scene of so many of the 
young century's intellectual and cultural assaults on tradition; 
and then take another retreat back to the turn of the century, 
when a conception of mathematics gave birth to a program 
for completing mathematics that would fall victim to the 
work of the reticent young logician with the outsized meta-
mathematical ambitions. 

 

I 
 A Platonist among the Positivists 
First Love 
urt Godel was 18 when he arrived in Vienna to begin 
his studies at the university. Though he had been born 
in Moravia, in what is now the Czech Republic but 
was then part of the Hapsburg Empire, his arrival in Vienna 
must have felt like something of a homecoming. He had 
considered himself an exile even in the land of his birth. 
He was born on 28 April 1906 in Brno, or what the Germans 
and Austrians still call "Briinn." His parents, Rudolf and 
Marianne, were of German rattier than Czech origin, and 
associated exclusively with the other Sudenten Germans who 
dominated in Brno. The city was the center of the Hapsburg 
Empire's textile industry,1 so when Rudolf proved to be no 
scholar at grammar school, he was enrolled, at the age of 12, at 
a weaver's 
1 It was also, interestingly, the location of the Augustinian monastery 
where Gregor Mendel (1882-1884) performed his highly tedious and 
important experiments with pea plants, resulting in his discovery of the 
laws of dominance and recessiveness in heredity. 
53 
K 

54 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
school, where he found his calling. He completed his studies 
there with distinction and was given a job in the textile factory 
of Friedrich Redlich, where he worked until his death. He rose 
swiftly through the ranks, eventually becoming a director and 
joint partner. Consequently, the family lived comfortably, 
eventually acquiring a villa in a fashionable neighborhood. 
Godel's mother, Marianne, was far more educated and 
cultured than his father, which was not unusual among the 
bourgeoisie of the Empire. It was also common for 
marriage choices to be forged out of practical concerns 
rather than romantic inclinations, and this, too, seemed to be 
the case in the Godels' marriage. As so often happens in such 
cases, the mother's strongest emotional ties were supplied by 
her children, in her case Rudolf, born a year after her 
marriage, and then four years later Kurt, who was baptized 
Kurt Friedrich, the middle name honoring his father's 
employer, who served as godfather. For some reason, the 
logician dropped his middle name when he became a U.S. 
citizen in 1948. 
Almost all of our knowledge of Kurt Godel's earliest years, as 
sparse as it is, comes by way of his older brother Rudolf, who 
wrote a brief "History of the Godel Family," as well as from 
Rudolf's responses to queries from the logicians Hao Wang and 
John Dawson on the subject of his younger brother's childhood. 
(Rudolf was a physician who never married and remained in 
Austria. He died in 1992, at the age of 90.) 
We learn from Rudolf that Kurt asked so many questions 
that his nickname was der Hen Warum, or Mr. Why. Little 
children, as anyone who has spent any significant amount of 
time with them knows, tend to push the "why" questions 
pretty hard. We are born into a sort of ontological wonder 
(thaulamazein) that passes into oblivion as we get used to the 

 
The Godel family, ca. 1910: Marianne, Kurt, father Rudolf, brother 
Rudolf. 
lay of the land. Godel's intense childhood thaulamazein 
persisted throughout his adult life, so that the child who was 
called Hen Warum grew into the man who began the 14 
principles of his private credo with Die Welt is vernunftig: 
the world is rational. Like many gifted mathematicians, 
Godel reached a certain level of precocious maturity while 
still a young child; then, having arrived at this level, he 
remained there. The picture en famille we have of the future 
"successor to Aristotle"2 at age four shows a cherubic little 
man, seriously 
2 Aristotle is commonly acknowledged as the father of logic. His work 
in logic is laid out in the Prior Analytics, which is part of the posthumous 
consortium known as the Organon. The philosopher had the seminal 
Incompleteness 
55 

56 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
staring straight into the camera, his hand precisely poised 
before him, the little forward hunch giving the suggestion of 
solemn contemplation. 
We also learn from Rudolf, in a letter to the logician Hao 
Wang, that at about the age of five, the younger brother suffered 
a mild anxiety neurosis ("leichte Angst Neurose"), and at the age 
of eight he suffered a severe bout of "joint rheumatism, with 
high fever." The patient did research on his illness and, learning 
that the illness could cause possible permanent heart damage, 
he inferred that precisely this outcome had occurred in his 
particular case. Godel held to the conviction of an injured 
heart throughout his life, despite the absence of any evidence. 
The conclusion he reached as an eight-year-old child, entirely 
on his own, was to contribute to his lifelong hypochondria. 
When the random permutations of genetic blending 
produce an offspring whose intelligence far outstrips that of 
his parents that child faces a special sort of predicament: he 
both recognizes his utter dependence, being after all only a 
child; and he also clearly perceives the severe limits of his 
own par- 
insight that in a deductive logical argument, some words are logically 
relevant while others are not. The irrelevant words can be dispensed with 
by making them variables. So, for example, in the stock syllogism: if all 
men are mortal, and Socrates is a man, then Socrates is mortal, the words 
"men" and "mortal," and "Socrates" are disposable. This particular syllogism 
is just an instantiation of the more general syllogism-scheme: if all X's are Y, 
and i is an X, then i is a Y. The move toward denoting logically irrelevant 
words with variables was a move toward generality and thus toward the 
science of logic. Aristotle, however, generalized too much, asserting that all 
deductive reasoning is syllogistic. The modern developments of the 
nineteenth century, most especially those of the German Gottlob Frege 
(1848-1925), revealed the greater variety of deductive arguments. 

Incompleteness 
57 
ents' understanding. Most people come to the latter 
recognition only during adolescence, when the normal 
reaction is an explosive mixture of hubris, contempt, and 
outrage (how can they be so dumb?). But the reaction of a 
young child is more likely to be blind terror (how can they be 
trusted to take care of me?). The leichte Angst Neurose is 
some indication that the precocious Godel grasped the limits 
of parental omniscience at about the age of five. It would be 
comforting, in the presence of such a shattering conclusion, 
especially when it's reinforced by a serious illness a few years 
later, to derive the following additional conclusion: There are 
always logical explanations and I am exactly the sort of 
person who can discover such explanations. The grownups 
around me may be a sorry lot, but luckily I don't need to 
depend on them. I can figure out everything for myself. The 
world is thoroughly logical and so is my mind—a perfect fit. 
Quite possibly the young Godel had some such thoughts to 
quell the terror of discovering at too young an age that he was 
far more intelligent than his parents. It would explain much 
about the man he would become. The child is father to the 
man—even more so, perhaps, in the case of mathematical 
geniuses. 
At school, the K.-K. Staatsrealgymnasium mit deutscher 
Unterrichtssprache3 (obviously, a German-language school), 
Godel excelled in all his studies and began to show the 
3 "K.-K." stands for Kaiserliche-Kb'ngliche (imperial-royal) and referred 
to all pertaining to the Austrian crownlands. Kaiserliche und konigliche was 
applied to that which was jointly administered by Austria and Hungary, 
and konigliche alone referred to that pertaining to Hungary. This system of 
imperial abbreviation seems ready-made for satirizing, and so it was, 
magisterially, by Robert Musil in his novel, Man Without Qualities. 

58 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
marked aloofness and solemnity that would characterize him 
throughout his life. A fellow schoolmate, Harry Klepetaf, 
wrote to John Dawson that "from the beginning . . . Godel 
kept more or less to himself and devoted most of his time to 
his studies." He also reported that Godel's interests were 
"manifold," and that "his interest in mathematics and physics 
[had already] manifested itself... at the age of 10." 
Godel, however, declined to take any courses in the language 
of the republic in which he was living (the native language of 
most of the students was German). Klepetaf recalled to 
Dawson that Godel was the only one of his fellow students he 
never heard speak a word of Czech and that, especially after 
October 1918 when the Czechoslovak Republic declared its 
independence, "Godel considered himself always Austrian and 
an exile in Czechoslovakia." So the sense of exile began early in 
his life and, in its various senses, some more pernicious than 
others, it is doubtful that it ever left him. 
Godel entered the University of Vienna in 1924, intending 
to study physics, but, as he later told Hao Wang, "his interest 
in precision led him from physics to mathematics and to 
mathematical logic." Godel's interest in physics had begun at 
the age of 15, when he read Goethe's theory of colors, which 
was embedded in a general attack on Newtonian physics. His 
transition to mathematics was also encouraged, he told Hao 
Wang, by the excellent teaching of some of his professors at 
the university. The course on number theory, given by 
Professor Phillip Furtwangler, attracted such huge numbers 
of students (up to 400) that it was necessary to issue 
alternate-day seating passes. Godel was one of these rapt 
students, and he later said that they were the most 
wonderful lectures he had ever heard. 

Incompleteness 
59 
Intending to concentrate on number theory, he switched 
his major to mathematics in 1926, but in 1928 he began to 
work in mathematical logic. He was already a committed 
Platonist in 1926 when he turned from physics to 
mathematics. His metaphysical commitment had been forged 
the year before, when he took a course in the history of 
philosophy with Professor Heinrich Gomperz, whose father, 
Theodore, was a distinguished professor of ancient 
philosophy. 
It is no easy task to penetrate the inner life of Kurt Godel. 
One knows enough to recognize that it is markedly different 
from those of others, so reasoning by analogy will get us only 
so far. Then, too, he was the most reticent of men, assertively 
nondemonstrative in all things other than mathematics— 
where "demonstration" means, of course, something quite 
unique. He was a man of deep passions, as his life will bear 
out; but these passions were kept scrupulously hidden and 
they were rigorously intellectual. 
I think it is fair to say, however, that like so many of us 
Godel fell in love while an undergraduate. He underwent 
love's ecstatic transfiguration, its radical reordering of 
priorities, giving life a new focus and meaning. One is not 
quite the same person as before. 
Kurt Godel fell in love with Platonism, and he was not 
quite the same person as he was before. 
What is the evidence for so transformative a passion roiling 
within the opaquely self-contained logician? That is, what is 
the evidence, in addition to the incompleteness theorems 
themselves? 
Some of the evidence lies in the Nachlass, Godel's literary 
remains, which are housed in Princeton's Firestone Library. 
The Nachlass had been left to molder in the Institute's base- 

60 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
ment, until John Dawson undertook the formidable task of 
becoming Godel's archivist. (Godel used a sort of shorthand 
script, Gabelsberger, that he had learned in high school, so the 
job involved, on top of everything else, translation.) Godel 
had apparently kept almost every scrap of paper that had ever 
intercepted his life. There are journal articles, clothing bills, 
manuscripts, family pictures, student exercises, library slips 
for books he had borrowed in Vienna and Princeton. I found 
(these in the Institute's collection of Godeliana) those little 
Bible studies published by the Jehovah's Witnesses, the kind 
that their itinerants will urge on you if you happen to be 
home in the middle of the day and answer the door. These 
contained careful underlinings and marginalia in the 
logician's hand. 
More telling are the many drafts of letters that were never 
posted, the manuscripts for articles that he had promised to 
deliver, that he had labored over with revision upon 
painstaking 
revision, 
and 
then 
never 
released 
for 
publication. One receives the impression of a cautiousness of 
hysterical proportions. Not a cautiousness of cerebration, for 
Godel's intellectual ambitions were audacious, his intuitions 
fierce, his willingness to carry them to their logical 
conclusion undeter-able. Rather there was a hysteria of 
discretion in presenting his thoughts to the external world. 
Among the documents over which Godel labored, and 
then never delivered, are the responses he made to a 
questionnaire that had been prepared for him by a 
sociologist. Burke D. Grandjean had made repeated attempts 
to interview Godel and finally devised a questionnaire for 
him in 1974. (This is two years before the logician's death.) 
There are two slightly different versions of the completed 
questionnaire in the 

Incompleteness 
61 
Nachlass, as well as a typed, unsigned, and unsent letter 
addressed to Mr. Grandjean, dated 19 August 1975, and which 
begins in a rather bristling manner: "Dear Mr. Grandjean: 
Replying to your inquiries I would like to say first that I don't 
consider my work 'a facet of the intellectual atmosphere of 
the early 20th century' but rather the opposite." One can 
imagine the sociologist's reverential letter that had prompted 
this testy retort. In the context of so reticent a life, this letter, 
together with the two sets of replies to the questionnaire, is 
revealing. Godel's bristling tone in his unsent response to 
Grandjean strengthens the sense that his life, especially after 
the death of Einstein, was characterized by a profound sense 
of intellectual isolation—a sense of isolation deepened by 
misinterpretations of his famous result. 
Grandjean had listed various thinkers and asked Godel to 
indicate which ones had influenced him, and Godel made 
clear how far from the mark Grandjean's assumptions were. 
There seems to be a lifetime of exasperation behind the 
responses. Leibniz is not even listed. 
To Grandjean's question: "Are there any influences to which 
you attribute special significance in the development of your 
philosophy?" Godel's entire answer consisted of: "Heinrich 
Gomp. [erz] Processor] of Philosophy] of Vienna." A strange 
answer, but, then again, not. It was in Professor Gomperz's 
class that Godel's transfigurative intellectual love had been 
engendered. Though Godel may have sat rapt in Professor 
Furtwangler's class on number theory, it was in Professor 
Gomperz's Introduction to the History of Philosophy that the 
true rapture transpired. 
Plato has always had a strong appeal to the mathematically 
inclined. Plato himself was mathematically inclined. Written 

62 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
over the entrance to the Academy, the Athenian school of 
higher education he founded (essentially, the first European 
university), were the words: "Let no one enter herein who has 
not first studied geometry." 
The ancient Greek philosopher's disdain for the Sophists, 
particularly for such men as Protagoras, gave the negative 
connotation to the word for these itinerant teachers. (The root 
of the word Sophist is the ancient Greek word for knowledge. 
Philosophy, literally "love of knowledge," shares the root.) 
Protagoras had meant his assertion that "man is the measure 
of all things" to apply most directly to the moral sphere; he 
had been arguing for what we now call "moral relativism," the 
claim that there is no objective difference between right and 
wrong, only different opinions, relativized either to individuals 
or to conglomerates of individuals who roughly share the 
same values (i.e., to societies). "True," when attached to moral 
opinions is an abbreviation for "true for %," where x is an 
individual or a society of ethically like-minded individuals. 
Plato took on the relativists. It was his lifelong occupation. He 
not only argued for the objectivity of moral truth but he also 
founded his claim of objective truth—in the moral as well as 
other spheres—on his assertion of the objectivity of an abstract 
reality, graspable not through the senses but through reason. 
The one area in which Platonism has proved most 
stubbornly 
resilient 
is 
mathematics, 
or 
rather 
metamathematics. A mathematician's sense that he is 
discovering objective truths, rather than simply constructing 
systems, is a commitment to Platonism. The conviction that 
such things as numbers and sets serve as models for our 
systems, which systems are true only insofar as they describe 
the nature of such things as numbers and sets, is likewise a 
commitment to Platonism. 

Incompleteness 
63 
First exposure to Plato can be an extremely heady 
experience for those with a passion for abstraction. (I 
remember my own.) It can amount to a sort of ecstasy. Plato 
himself argued that the beauty of the abstract realm, which 
immeasurably exceeds that of any single particular, can and 
ought to kindle a passion far larger than any prompted by 
individual beautiful persons (fickle, imperfect creatures who 
cannot even be counted on to love us in return and whose 
beauty not only cannot compete with the transcendent sort 
but also is subject to the corrosive actions of time). To have 
used the expression "fell in love" in relation to Godel's 
undergraduate experience is to echo Plato himself, who used 
the most erotically charged language to describe the mind's 
approach toward and possession of the beauties of abstract 
objectivity. 
"Here is the life, Socrates, my friend," said the Manitean 
visitor, "that a human being should live—studying the 
beautiful itself. Should you ever see it, it will not seem to you 
to be on the level of gold, clothing, and beautiful boys 
and youths, who so astound you now when you look at 
them that you and many others are eager to gaze upon your 
darlings, and be together with them all the time. You 
would cease eating and drinking, if that were possible, and 
instead just look at them and be with them. What do we 
think it would be like," she said, "if someone should 
happen to see the beautiful itself, pure, clear, unmixed, and 
not contaminated with human flesh and color and a lot of 
other mortal silliness, but rather if he were able to look 
upon the divine, uniform, beautiful itself. Do you think," 
she continued, "it would be a worthless life for a human 
being to look at that, to study it in the required way, and be 
together with it?" 

64 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
A "symposium" actually meant a drinking party in Plato's 
Athens, and in the dialogue to which Plato wryly gave that 
name he urges us to leave off lesser intoxications, including 
those associated with the sensual love of beautiful young 
things, and to become drunk on the beauty of truth—the sort 
of necessary and immutable truth acquired through pure 
reason, for which mathematics serves as the model. An aspect 
of the Platonic vision is a rejection of the easy bifurcation 
between passion, on the one side, and reason, on the other. 
Plato is urging us toward impassioned reason, the higher 
intoxication. Of course, susceptibility to the higher 
intoxication is predicated on the ability to grasp the 
intellectual love object, the beauties of pure abstraction, "to 
look at that, to study it in the required way, and be together 
with it." The young Kurt Godel was singularly susceptible. 
Godel's reaction to the headiness of Plato's rapturous 
vision of truth was, it seems, the resolve to devote himself 
only to mathematics of (to recall Einstein's phrase) "genuine 
importance." It would have to be mathematics that had 
metasignificance, that was philosophically porous so that the 
objective source of all abstract truth could be seen to shine. 
At first, Godel had been drawn toward number theory 
because he believed that it would provide the strongest 
evidence for, and the clearest application of, conceptual 
realism. It was in 1928, when he was 22, that his 
mathematical interests began to shift toward mathematical 
logic. The fact that he had been attracted to number theory 
precisely because of his Platonist commitment, as he told Hao 
Wang, and that he then veered toward mathematical logic is 
tantalizing. Hao Wang did not ask the follow-up question. 
Exactly when did Godel 

Incompleteness 
65 
glimpse that logic might yield the metamathematical 
conclusions that he was seeking? 
It is tempting to speculate about this, and informed 
speculation is the most that we have. We have no good idea of 
the path that led him to his theorems, by way of an ingenious 
form of argument the likes of which had never before been 
seen. 
In contrast, we know a great deal about the preoccupations 
that had led Einstein to his special theory of relativity. It is all 
part of the public record of the scientist who performed the 
role of the professional genius in the collective imagination of 
the world. We know how, beginning at the age of 16, he used 
to perform Gedanken-experiments, thought-experiments, 
imagining himself hitching a ride on a light beam, or running 
along beside it, trying to deduce how the laws of physics 
would look from the point of view of an observer moving at 
the speed of light. 
But Godel's genius was never put on public display the 
way Einstein's was. The sources of his inspiration, the play 
of mind, revealing how ancient paradox could be 
transformed into a proof for conclusions shot through with 
meta-overtones, are unknown. He must somehow have 
glimpsed the metamathematical potential of logic, even 
when logic was, as it was then, far less mathematically 
respectable than his own work would render it. We do not 
know exactly when he proved his first incompleteness 
result. Not even his dissertation advisor (he had by then 
advanced to doing graduate work) knew what he was up to. 
But we do know that by 7 October 1930 he had the proof for 
the first incompleteness theorem. 
The logician Jaakko Hintikka wrote: 

66 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
It is a measure of Godel's status that the most important 
moment of his career is the most important moment in the 
history of twentieth-century logic, maybe in the history of 
logic in general. This Sternstunde was October 7,1930. The 
setting was a conference on the foundations of 
mathematics in Konigsberg on October 5-7,1930. 
What happened at Konigsberg on 7 October 1930 was that 
Kurt Godel, a relatively unknown graduate student attending 
a conference on metamathematics dominated by the leaders 
in the field, dropped a parsimonious few words indicating 
that he had a proof for the incompleteness of arithmetic. He 
was basically ignored by everyone present, with the exception 
of one mathematician, who happened to be there to represent 
a metamathematical position deeply at odds with Godel's 
Platonism but who was astute enough to draw for himself the 
implications of Godel's wildly muted "announcement." 
Yet there is something wrong with what Hintikka says. The 
most important moment in Godel's career did not come in 
the public revelation of the first incompleteness theorem. 
That moment just seems like the most important because that 
is when Godel gave some slight public indication of what he 
had been up to. The most important moments of his career 
were, in fact, those about which we know nothing: the 
moments of intuitions or thought-experiments or God-
knows-what that brought him to the proof itself. 
His Platonist conviction must have convinced him, sans 
proof, that mathematical reality must exceed all formal 
attempts to contain it; but how did he lay hands on the 
strategy by which to prove incompleteness? How did it occur 
to him, in particular, to transform the structural features of 
self- 

Incompleteness 
67 
referential paradoxes into a proof? How did the inspired idea 
of what we now call "Godel numbering" come to him, the 
technique by means of which statements of mathematics 
would acquire double-entendres, making metamathematical 
statements as well? The overall strategy of the proof is 
astoundingly simple, the details that had to be worked out are 
astoundingly complicated, and both astounding features 
make us wish we knew more about how he came up with it 
all. But all we have is the result: the proof that forever changed 
our understanding of mathematics, and, in doing so, perhaps 
helped to change our understanding of ourselves. 
So it is not Konigsberg that is the scene of the real drama 
but rather Vienna—the Vienna of the late twenties and early 
thirties, a city utterly unique in its cultural and intellectual 
aspects. No thinker reflects in an utter vacuum—not even the 
purest of pure mathematicians up there on the topmost turret 
of Reine Vernunft. Not even a thinker so unwaveringly loyal 
to the integrity of his own intuitions as Kurt Godel is utterly 
indifferent, if even in the spirit of opposition, to the 
prevailing opinions of his day, to the sorts of questions 
floating like spores in the intellectual atmosphere. 
The city of Vienna in that period between the two world 
wars, the strange intensity of the thinking and the creating 
that were pursued there, plays its role in the story of Godel's 
theorems. Vienna was then a city with a hugely 
disproportionate number of seminal thinkers and artists—
scientists, musicians, poets, visual artists, philosophers, 
architects—who collectively seemed drawn into one 
sustained and intense conversation, pursued across every 
discipline and art form. Godel, as reticent as he was, also 
ended up participating in this conversation. 

68 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
Here, in this highly dramatic city, in which even intellectual 
life achieved a theatricality, even Godel, the last person in the 
world to seek outward drama, attained a certain degree of it. 
Out from the Muddle of the Old: A City in 
Search of New Foundations 
If Princeton is a high-energy intellectual vortex disguising 
itself as a pleasantly bland spot on the suburban New Jersey 
landscape, the Vienna of the 1920s, when Kurt Godel arrived 
there as a student, was "the research laboratory for world 
destruction" in the famous words of one of its contemporary 
chroniclers, the journalist and satirist Karl Kraus. The novelist 
Herman Kesten saw it as a city of "brilliant creation in a 
nonetheless decaying culture." 
The teeming intellectual life of the city was carried out in 
broad sight, not only in university lecture halls and 
professors' offices but also in the numerous cafes that seem 
still to display the essence of Viennese life. Much had 
changed in the city, and the country as a whole, after the First 
World War and the collapse of the Hapsburg Empire in 
1916. But Vienna remained, in its feel, a small large city—
the undisputed cultural center of its country. The sense that it 
was almost an entirely self-enclosed entity within the greater 
country, sharing little in the way of outlook with the rest of 
the population, has perhaps a counterpart in contemporary 
New York City's relationship with the United States, though 
the discontinuity between city and general culture seems to 
have been far greater in the case of Vienna and Austria. 
In GodePs day, Vienna still had the only real university in 
Austria, and this was contained almost entirely in one build- 

Incompleteness 
69 
ing. This physical concentration of academic life was 
indicative of the intellectual life in general. It was a city 
whose thinkers all seemed to be at least marginally 
acquainted with one another, influencing each other's 
thinking across disciplines, so that mathematicians, physicists, 
historians, 
philosophers, 
novelists, 
poets, 
musicians, 
architects, and artists were engaged, in a sense, in the same 
conversation. The overall topic was the moral and intellectual 
death and decay of all that had come before, and the need to 
construct 
entirely 
new 
methodologies, 
forms, 
and 
foundations. It was this sustained theme in so many diverse 
fields that provoked the emergence of what we have come to 
call modernity, and even postmodernity: in literature, music, 
architecture, art, philosophy, psychology, and even, to some 
extent, science. 
Post-1918 Vienna provided a grand tier seat from which to 
view the rapid disintegration of anachronisms. The Hapsburg 
Empire, that elaborate variation on the themes of status quo 
and patriarchy, had imploded with the close of the Great War. 
Eleven different nationalities—Germans, Ruthenes, Italians, 
Slovaks, Rumanians, Czechs, Poles, Magyars, Slovenes, Croats, 
Transylvanians, Saxons, and Serbs—were joined in the 
ungainly empire; the resultant realm lacked, rather 
significantly, an accepted name. Its last leader was the long-
reigning Franz Joseph, Emperor of Austria since 1848 and 
King of Hungary since 1867. And the capital city of the 
nameless 
realm 
was 
Vienna. 
Though 
a 
unifying 
consciousness eluded the multifarious nationalities of the 
empire, the "City of Dreams," as Vienna was almost too aptly 
dubbed, was in fact able to achieve something like that 
supranational cosmopolitan consciousness entailed by the 
myth of empire. 
Vienna, at its height, had been an imperial capital that had 

70 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
ruled over some 50 million subjects. Now it was the capital of 
a small and ruined Alpine republic of a little over 6 million 
citizens, almost all German. (Many of the Czechs who had 
been living in the city left, which somewhat eased the housing 
shortage.) But if Vienna was vastly diminished in political 
terms, its importance as an intellectual capital of the world 
was unparalleled. The very sense of a spiritual and cultural 
collapse (whose imminence had been evident to the Viennese 
thinkers even while the Hapsburg dynasty tottered on) 
intensified the felt need for the search for new foundations. 
The collective consciousness of the city's most conscious 
citizens was suffused with a sort of nervous intensity, the rash 
of ideas erupting like the symptomatology of diseased genius. 
So we find in Vienna not only the birthplace of Zionism in 
the figure of Theodore Herzl but also of the most extreme 
manifestation of those ideas that had provoked Zionism as 
a response, Nazism. It provided the breeding ground for 
Freud's theory of the unconscious, repression, hysteria, and 
neurosis; it was where Klimt and Schiele and Kokoschka 
painted the lushly sensual canvasses of the Secession.4 Arnold 
Schonberg and Alban Berg brought forth atonal music and 
Adolph Loos designed a new sort of architecture, where form 
would be strictly determined by function, the excessive orna- 
4 The Secession was founded in 1897 by artists dissenting from the 
policies of the Viennese artistic establishment. An exhibition hall for the 
Secessionists was opened in 1898. Ludwig Wittgenstein's father, the 
enormously wealthy steel magnate, Karl Wittgenstein, was one of the 
three "benefactors" whose names are inscribed on the plaque inside the 
doors. The other two names belong to famous artists of the day: Rudolf 
von Alt and Theodor Hormann. 

Incompleteness 
71 
mentation and iiber-stuffed rooms of the Hapsburg 
bourgeoisie equated with moral rot. 
An influential voice (an acerbic one), sounding throughout 
Vienna's overlapping cultural circles, belonged to the journalist 
Karl Kraus, the tireless editor (and primarily the sole writer) of 
the satirical journal Die Fackel, or The Torch. Kraus used his 
journal to clobber every variety of Viennese hypocrisy, whether 
practiced by the old guard or the avante garde. (He was, for 
example, harshly critical of Freud.) Kraus focused much of his 
fierce crusading attention on language, blasting the deceit that 
lies curled up in the banalities of respectable forms of speech, 
the hollowness and insincere sentimentality in works of 
literature and the empty phrases of journalists. "Speaking and 
thinking are one," he declared in his book Die Sprache 
(Language): The road not only to better theories but to a better 
society is paved with linguistic precision. Kraus himself was a 
consummate stylist, skewering his targets in elegant epigrams: 
"The psychoanalyst picks our dreams as if they were our 
pockets." "The secret of the demagogue is to appear as dumb as 
his audience so that these people can believe themselves as smart 
as he is." "The esthete stands in the same relation to beauty as 
the pornogra-pher to love, and the politician stands to life." 
Kraus's attention to language as the single most important 
topic in his critique of thought will strike contemporary 
students of philosophy as so familiar as to seem a truism. 
Though Kraus was not himself a philosopher, he had a 
decided impact on Viennese philosophers, and thus on 
philosophers throughout the world. Ludwig Wittgenstein, in 
particular, was a regular reader of Die Fackel. 
Kraus's view that intellectual shoddiness is not only an 

72 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
offence against truth but also against morality had great 
cogency among his Viennese contemporaries. A sense of 
moral urgency underlay their discussion of intellectual and 
artistic questions, and the exhortatory tone of the Hebrew 
prophets of old, calling the tribe to repentance, often broke 
through into discussions of the most dryly abstract sorts of 
subjects, for example, the conditions for the meaningfulness 
of propositions. Discredited ideas, solecisms, half-truths, and 
elaborately phrased nonpropositions carry the fatal taint of 
moral failure; there is a moral imperative to break with the 
past and think clearly. 
The densely swirling culture of Viennese ideas was very 
much on public display, conducting itself across the round 
little tables of the city's many cafes. (This, by the way, had 
something to do with the bleak housing situation in Vienna. 
The ill-heated and generally inadequate domiciles inclined 
the Viennese to spend their hours elsewhere.) The literati 
and other artists favored such places as the Cafe Museum, the 
Herrenhof, or the Cafe Central, where Peter Altenberg, for 
example, answered so gratifyingly to the popular image of 
"the poet" in his brightly colored shirt, his wide-striped pants, 
and his prince-nez dangling poetically from a black ribbon. 
At another table, Alban Berg and other composers might be 
found discussing the exhaustion of tonality; or Adolph Loos, 
discussing the outrages of traditional architecture; or the 
novelist Franz Werfel, who wrote of the cafe's "shadowy 
realm" in his novel Barbara or Piety. Another writer, Alfred 
Polgar, propounded a "Theory of Cafe Central," explaining 
that the establishment was a veritable Weltanschauung, "a 
world-view, but one whose essence it was to avoid viewing the 
world." Its habitues were "for the most part people whose 
misanthropy 

Incompleteness 
73 
was only equaled by their longing for their fellow man, who 
want to be alone but need company for that." 
As for the mathematicians like Godel, there was the 
Akazienhof, only a three-minute walk from the university, 
as well as other places—the Arkadencafe, the Reichsrat, the 
Schattentor, the white marble tabletops providing a scribbling 
surface for equations. Not only location, but also the category of 
people the place attracted and their respective status, as well as 
the selection of periodicals and newspapers that were offered, 
influenced where a particular group would gather. 
In addition to cafe society, the intellectual life of Vienna was 
also organized into various Kreise, or circles, more or less formal 
discussion groups that met on a weekly basis, centered around 
the leading intellectuals of the city. Many of these circles 
overlapped. Some were connected with the university, others 
not. A large number were devoted to discussions of socialism 
(one, surrounding Max Adler, was Kant-focused), and others 
were oriented around the various factions within the 
psychoanalytic movement. A large number of the circles were 
meant for the discussion of philosophy, not only of Kant, but of 
such figures as Kierkegaard and Leo Tolstoy, who enjoyed an 
enormous influence at the time. The philosopher Heinrich 
Gomperz, in whose class Godel had become convinced of 
Platonism, had a discussion group centered on the history of 
philosophy. The intellectual geometry of Vienna was densely 
inscribed with circles. 
The Vienna Circle 
By far the most prominent of these circles was the one that 
revolved around the philosopher Moritz Schlick, first dubbed, 
accordingly, the Schlick Kreis, though it came eventually to be 

74 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
known, as an acknowledgment of its preeminence, as the Der 
Wiener-Kreis, the legendary Vienna Circle. It was from this 
group of thinkers that the influential movement known as 
"logical positivism" largely disseminated. The reforming 
edicts of the group reshaped attitudes of scientists, social 
scientists, psychologists, and humanists, causing them to 
reformulate the questions of their respective fields; the effects 
are still with us. 
Attendance at the meetings of the Vienna Circle was by 
invitation only. The philosopher Karl Popper, who went on to 
eminence and was even then an up-and-coming intellectual 
force, waited with impatience and in vain for an invitation to 
join the most important Kreis in town. 
Kurt Godel was invited to join while still an undergraduate 
and was a regular attendant at the weekly sessions between 
the years 1926 and 1928. Interestingly, 1928 is the year when 
he turned to mathematical logic, which would of course yield 
him his famous proof. No wonder he no longer had the time 
or the inclination for the weekly sessions. 
His association with the logical positivists has led to the 
misconception that he himself was a positivist and that his 
incompleteness theorems are a consequence of positivist 
principles. Godel's incompleteness theorems are still often 
tallied among positivism's greatest success stories: the 
revolutionary 
result 
of 
applying 
its 
principles 
to 
mathematics. So, for example, in the recent Wittgenstein's 
Poker, authors David Edmonds and John Eidinow write: 
The Circle's voice can still be heard in a number of 
philosophical eponyms. In 1931 Godel published his 
theorem that scuppered all attempts to construct a logical 
founda- 

Incompleteness 
75 
tion for mathematics. He showed that a formal 
arithmetical system could not be demonstrated to be 
consistent from within itself. His fifteen-page article 
proved that some mathematics could not be proved—that, 
whatever axioms were accepted in mathematics, there 
would always be some truths that could not be validated. 
Here Godel's two theorems are more or less correctly 
stated, though they are merged into one "theorem." But that 
the Circle's voice can be heard within Godel's theorems could 
not be further from the truth. The voice that Godel heard 
within his theorems was that of Platonism. Any metaphysical 
position, let alone Platonism, is downright anathema to a 
logical positivist. 
Godel had become a Platonist in 1925, a year before joining 
the discussion group. Their anti-metaphysical orientation 
had no influence on him, and, for their part, they never 
seemed to suspect—not for a long time at least—that he was 
not one of them. He apparently gave them little indication. It 
was not then, and never would be, in his nature to argue face-
to-face with those with whom he disagreed. His distaste for 
engaging in conflict was so extreme as to qualify as an 
eccentricity, though hardly among his most pronounced. 
He refused to oppose another person's viewpoint unless he 
had absolute certainty on his side, unless, that is, he had a 
proof. All his life, he wanted to have his mathematical proofs 
do all his speaking for him. (Perhaps it is no accident that this 
man, whose extreme reticence cloaked intense convictions, 
should have produced the most prolix mathematical results 
in the history of mathematics.) He was dismayed when 
others did not catch all that he was trying to say in them. 
He was dis- 

76 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
mayed until the end of his life that people still considered his 
views consistent with those of the Vienna Circle.5 
What were the views of the Vienna Circle? Logical 
positivism was first and foremost a movement that spoke in 
the name of the precision and progress associated with the 
sciences. It sought to appropriate the methodology that had 
served the sciences so well, to distill the essence of this 
methodology not only to cleanse science itself of its more 
mystically 
vague 
and 
metaphysical 
tendencies—no 
characterization carried more positivist opprobrium than 
"metaphysical"—but also similarly to cleanse all intellectual 
areas. It was a program for intellectual hygiene. 
In the Viennese spirit of the time, this group of thinkers 
from various fields—mathematics, philosophy, the physical 
and social sciences—were intent on giving the decaying 
remains of old ideas as hasty a burial as decency required and 
on resurrecting in their stead a system whose wholesome 
soundness would derive from the empirical sciences. Logical 
positivism disseminated out far beyond the little bare room 
where the group would meet and deeply penetrated the 
philosophical orientation of philosophers, scientists, and social 
scientists, many of whom were not even aware that they had 
a philosophical orientation. But the preferred absence of a 
specifically philosophical orientation was one of the major 
points emphasized by the logical positivists. It was a 
philosophical orientation meant to abolish all philosophical 
orientations, which might strike the reader as paradoxical. 
5 Jean Cocteau wrote in 1926 that "The worst tragedy for a poet is to be 
admired through being misunderstood." For a logician, especially one with 
Godel's delicate psychology, the tragedy is perhaps even greater. 

Incompleteness 
77 
Logical positivism is sometimes referred to as "logical 
empiricism" or "radical empiricism." Traditional empiricism, 
exemplified by the views of the Scottish philosopher David 
Hume (1711-1776), had sought to delineate the limits of 
knowledge. There were, on the one hand, the sort of questions 
that could be answered through a priori reasoning; these, 
according to Hume, had no ontologkal import. They were 
merely conceptual truths that do not tell us anything about 
the way the world really is; they merely reflect abstract 
relationships between concepts. Hume called them "relations 
of ideas." So the truth that bachelors are unmarried is 
analogous to the truth that ghosts are the disembodied 
spirits of the dead and to the truth that fat-free ice cream has 
no fat. Each is true regardless of whether its subject—
bachelors or ghosts or fat-free ice cream—actually exists. On 
the other hand, there are propositions that reach out beyond 
the merely conceptual and purport to describe the nature of 
the world, to say what things exist and what are the 
properties of, and relations between, things: According to 
traditional empiricism, any propositions that bear on the 
nature of the world—Hume called them "matters of fact 
and existence"—can only be shown to be true or false 
through the use of empirical means. Some evidence or other is 
of the essence. The faculty of a priori reason can tell us how 
our concepts are related to one another, but it cannot tell us 
what the world beyond our concepts is like. For that sort of 
knowledge we require some sort of experiential contact with 
the world. 
To use a favorite example, consider the question of the 
existence of God, defined as a transcendent Being who stands 
outside space and time, severely limiting the possibilities for 
experiential contact. (At the least, such experiences would have 

78 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
to occur in time.) Many traditional empiricists had declared 
the existence of such a trans-empirical God inviolably 
unknowable, since the cognitive means at our disposal are in 
principle inadequate for answering the question one way or the 
other. So remote a God—beyond our experience—may exist, 
but we'll never know. (Bertrand Russell, when asked what he 
would say were he to find himself before the pearly gates face-
to-face with the Almighty, quipped that his response would be, 
"Oh Lord, why did you not provide more evidence?") 
The logical positivists turned the empiricist theory of 
knowledge into a theory of meaning. According to the latter, 
the empirical means that would be relevant to discovering 
whether a particular proposition is true also provide the very 
meaning of the proposition. The positivist theory of meaning is 
therefore often called "the verificationist criterion for meaning-
fulness," and it legislates that the borders of empricial knowa-
bility map the borders of meaningfulness. If one cannot, in 
principle, imagine any possible set of experiences that would 
count as corroboration for the proposition, then what one has 
is the mere semblance of a proposition, hollowed out of 
meaning, what the positivists dubbed a "pseudo-proposition." 
By declaring the limits of knowability one and the same with 
the limits of meaningfulness, the positivists took the 
problematic aspect of such questions as the existence of God 
(or of moral values or of abstract entities) up a notch, so that 
now the unanswerably of certain questions no longer takes 
the measure of our cognitive inadequacies, but rather signals 
that the questions ought never have been posed at all. 
Unknowability is regarded as a sign that a mistake in the use of 
language has been made. If God (or moral values or universals 
or numbers) is so defined that no empirical data could 
possibly be relevant to 

Incompleteness 
79 
the question of his (or their) existence, then that question is 
exposed as ipso facto meaningless: nothing could count as a 
genuine answer to it. The putative answers—yes, God exists! or 
no, He does not! are both propositional poseurs. Anything that 
can legitimately be said can be said clearly, the conditions for its 
meaningfulness one and the same with the conditions for its 
verifiability (which is not to say that all meaningful 
propositions are true, of course, but rather that there would 
be some set of experiences—not forthcoming if the 
proposition is false—that would establish that the 
proposition is true). Precision (provided by the verificationist 
criterion of meaning) becomes the positivist analogue to 
prayer. 
The positivist transformation of the empiricist theory of 
knowledge into a theory of meaning meant that the single 
damning word "meaningless" was to be pronounced over the 
remains of much that had formerly passed for knowledge. 
Here was the single word with which to accomplish a 
program of cognitive hygiene such as the world had never 
seen. The Vienna Circle, which lasted from 1924 to 1930, 
ending with the tragic murder of Moritz Schlick by a 
psychotic former student,6 had an effect that rippled out from 
Vienna and 
6 The student, Johann (or Hans) Nelbock, had already twice been 
committed to a psychiatric ward for threatening Schlick. He had 
constructed a delusion in which the influential philosopher was responsible 
not only for Nelbock's romantic problems but also for his difficulties in 
finding employment. He shot Schlick on the center staircase of the 
university's main building (a brass inscription still marks the spot) as the 
philosopher was hurrying to deliver a lecture to his class. Interestingly, 
Vienna's Nazis— by 1930 a sizable presence—applauded the psychotic 
murderer as winning a victory in their own battle for demographic 
hygiene, with Schlick, a German Protestant, coruscated in the dailies as a 
godless Jew. Of course, it's 

80 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
is still actively circulating today, quite often in the 
introductory "philosophical" chapters of textbooks in science 
or social science. (The presence in these chapters of such 
phrases as "a meaningless question because empirically 
unanswerable" is a dead giveaway. In psychology, for 
example, the behaviorist school that held dominance for 
many decades of the twentieth century often asserted that all 
psychological terms that could not be reduced to the 
observables of stimulus and response were meaningless.) 
Dramatis Personae of the Vienna Circle 
Moritz Schlick, if not the most dynamic and innovative of the 
thinkers of the Circle, was a man whose positivist sincerity and 
organizational abilities seem to have been instrumental to its 
success. As philosopher Rudolf Carnap said, "The pleasant 
atmosphere at the meetings of the Circle was due above all to 
Schlick's personality, his inexhaustible friendliness, tolerance 
and modesty." Having trained as a physicist in Germany under 
the great Max Planck, he had come to Vienna in 1922 to take up 
the prestigious chair in the Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences 
at the university, the very chair that had been held both by Ernst 
Mach and by the towering physicist, Ludwig Boltzmann (for 
whom Mach's rejection of the molecular hypothesis had 
constituted both a professional and personal tragedy7). 
true that he was godless, but he wasn't the slightest bit Jewish. In fact, he 
derived from minor Prussian nobility. 
7 Boltzmann had succeeded in deducing the laws of thermodynamics 
from a statistical analysis of the behavior of a great many molecules. His 
work was under-appreciated because of the dominant Mach's positivistic 

Incompleteness 
81 
Schlick was sympathetic to the drift of the Viennese iiber-
conversation and his presence at the university soon attracted 
like-minded thinkers from across many disciplines. At first 
they gathered in an old Vienna cafe. But the numbers of those 
participating gradually grew and, in 1924, Schlick agreed to 
make the gatherings somewhat more formal, moving the 
group to a room at the university. 
Though all (or almost all) in the Circle held positivist views 
and everyone (even the clandestine Platonist) had either a 
connection to or a deep sympathy for the exact sciences, there 
was a diversity of interests and personalities and opinions 
among them. There was, for example, Rudolf Carnap, who had 
been trained as a physicist and mathematician at Jena, where he 
had been influenced by the logician Gottlob Frege (1848-1925). 
Carnap was "especially interested in the formal-logical 
problems and techniques," and would have been a happy 
man indeed to have seen every question reduced to a 
straightforwardly technical one—the recalcitrantly irreducible 
of course declared meaningless. He was said to have had a 
face, especially in his youth, "that almost seemed to exude 
sincerity and honesty." His intellectual earnestness impressed 
his fellow positivists; he worked and learned constantly. 
When anything came up in conversation that was new to 
him or that he wanted to follow up, he would produce a little 
notebook and jot down a few words. His ease in writing soon 
made him the leading exponent of the Circle's ideas. 
Otto Neurath was a social scientist and economist, a great 
big elephant of a man (he signed his letters with a picture of 
rejection of the reality of molecules. Boltzmann committed suicide, 
perhaps partly out of professional despair. 

82 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
an elephant) with elephantine resources of energy and 
capacities for enjoying life. Both Carnap (who was an 
introvert) and Neurath (who was not) had the instinct for 
political utopianism; and Neurath, in particular, tried to 
push the Circle in political directions, often making it seem, 
perhaps unintentionally, that there was more political 
homogeneity within the Circle than there in fact was. 
"Schlick especially seemed to resent this since in Vienna, the 
Circle was named after him, the Schlick-Kreis." 
Neurath and Carnap felt also that the Circle was intimately 
connected with other cultural movements, in particular arguing 
for an affinity between their point of view and the industrial-
design-inspired ideology of the Bauhaus. Both were an 
expression of the neue Sachlichkeit, the "fact-mindedness" 
that received the seal of approval from the sciences. And then 
in Germany there was the "Berlin Group," centered around 
the philosopher of science Hans Reichenbach, whose outlook 
was all but identical with that of the Schlick Circle. 
Neurath's sister, the blind, cigar-smoking Olga Neurath, 
was also an active member of the Circle. She was a 
mathematician with wide tastes that extended into logic. In 
her youth she had written three papers, one of which, on the 
algebra of classes, is described by Clarence I. Lewis in his 
Survey of Symbolic Logic as "among the most important 
contributions to symbolic logic." 
Olga Neurath was married to Hans Hahn, who was also an 
important member of the Circle. Hahn had been responsible 
for bringing Schlick from Germany to Vienna. He was a first-
rate mathematician, whose name prominently lives on in the 
useful Hahn-Banach extension theorem in functional 
analysis. Hahn's mathematical interests were wide, and 
eventually 

Incompleteness 
83 
he became interested in logic. It was he who brought the work 
in mathematical logic of the German Gottlob Frege and the 
English Bertrand Russell to the forefront of the Circle's 
attention. He had an unbounded admiration for Russell and 
did the Vienna Circle the great service of saving them the 
difficulty of reading through the monumental three-volume 
Principia Mathematica, explaining it all to them in his 
seminar of the academic year 1924-25. 
Hans Hahn is of particular interest in our story because 
when Godel decided to switch his focus from number theory 
to mathematical logic, Hahn became his dissertation advisor. 
Though Hahn's specialty was not logic (though he had done 
some significant work in set theory) his mathematical 
interests were certainly flexible enough to accommodate 
Godel's new interest. Godel had first come into contact with 
Hahn in 1925 or 1926, and he told Hao Wang that Hahn had 
been a first-rate teacher, explaining everything "to the last 
detail." 
Hahn's intellectual interests went far beyond mathematics 
as well. One of Hahn's extra-mathematical interests was in the 
empirical evidence for parapsychological phenomena, which 
was a hot topic in Vienna at this time; a large number of 
reputed mediums had appeared in the postwar years and 
eventually a committee was formed, which included Schlick 
and Hahn and other scientifically oriented thinkers, for the 
purpose of investigating their claims, the validity of which 
became a much-vexed bone of contention within the Circle. It 
was not that Hahn was a believer, but he kept an open mind, 
which was enough to enrage other members, for example his 
brother-in-law, Otto Neurath. "Who looks into these matters?" 
Neurath once demanded with his characteristic vigor, 
answering his own question in the sociological terms he 
favored: 

84 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
"Uncritical, run-down aristocrats and a few supercritical 
intellectuals such as Hahn. Studies of the kind further the 
belief in supernatural forces and serve only reactionary 
groups." 
Then there were also two of Schlick's young students, 
Frederich Waismann and Herbert Feigl, who as "favored 
students" were invited by Schlick to join the Circle. Hahn, too, 
would get two of his most talented students, Karl Menger and 
Kurt Godel, invited into the select company of Schlick's Circle. 
Noch Einmal: Man Is the Measure of 
All Things 
In 1929, when Schlick rejected an offer of a prestigious and 
lucrative professorship in his native Germany, the other 
members of the Circle decided to celebrate by publishing, in 
Schlick's honor, a booklet setting out the tenets and aims of 
their joint point of view. The result was a sort of positivist 
manifesto entitled Wissenschaftliche Weltauffassung: Der 
Wiener Kreis, or The Scientific Worldview: The Vienna Circle. 
"Everything," it proclaimed, "is accessible to man. Man is the 
measure of all things." The ancient Sophist's words were 
reiterated verbatim, only now given a scientifically minded 
twist: whatever question is, in principle, not susceptible to 
measurement, that is, empirical procedures, is no question at 
all. Since the limits of knowability are congruent with the 
limits of meaning, no meaningful matter can escape our 
grasp. We are cognitively complete. 
A few years later, Herbert Feigl (who went on to become a 
prominent philosopher of science in America) co-authored an 
article in the American Journal of Philosophy entitled "Logical 
Positivism: A New Movement in European Philosophy." The 

Incompleteness 
85 
article, Feigl writes, provided "our philosophical movement 
with its international trade name." 
The term "positivism" had long been in circulation, always 
connoting a pro-scientific attitude used as a standard for 
meaningfulness. It was first applied to the ideas of Auguste 
Comte (1798-1857) and Herbert Spencer (1820-1903). The 
Viennese physicist Ernst Mach (1838-1916) had demanded, 
in the name of positivism, that all meaningful propositions be 
reducible to constructs of sense impressions, thus adding 
much more substance to the positivism of Comte and Spencer. 
The "Introductory Remarks" chapter of his book Contributions 
to the Analysis of Sensation (1885) has the subtitle "Anti-
metaphysical." His positivism had led him to denounce both 
the reality of atoms and Einstein's relativity. The Schlick posi-
tivists acknowledged Mach as one of their guiding lights, 
although tempering his denunciation of relativity sufficiently 
to admit Einstein, too, as one of their inspirations (though 
ignoring the realist interpretation that Einstein conferred on 
his theory. The positivists, rather, were inspired by Einstein's 
redefinition of the concept of "the simultaneity of events" in 
terms of the speed of light). 
"Logical" was appended to "positivism," explains Feigl, to 
emphasize that the Viennese positivists excluded logical 
propositions (among which they included mathematics) from 
the otherwise exclusive disjunction: empirical or meaningless. 
The truths of pure mathematics (i.e. not including physical 
geometry or other branches of the factual sciences) are a 
priori indeed. But they are a priori because they are ... 
validated on the basis of the very meaning of the concepts 
involved in the propositions of mathematics. The Vienna 

86 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
Circle regarded, for example, the identities of arithmetic as 
necessary truths, based on the definition of the number 
concepts—and thus analogous to the tautologies of logic 
(such as "what will be, will be"; "the weather will either 
change or remain the same"; "you cannot eat your cake and 
not eat it at the same time"). 
In other words, the logical positivists believed that 
mathematics, just like logic, was devoid of any descriptive 
content. Mathematical propositions, if not quite tautologies, 
are analogous to them. (It's hard to make out this middle 
ground, but never mind for now.) Another way to put this 
point is that mathematics is merely syntactic; its truth 
derives from the rules of formal systems, which are of three 
basic sorts: the rules that specify what the symbols of the 
system are (its "alphabet"); the rules that specify how the 
symbols can be put together into what are called well-formed 
formulas, standardly abbreviated "wff," and pronounced 
"woof"; and the rules of inference that specify which wffs can 
be derived from which. 
To get a sense of what it means to describe mathematics as 
syntactic (though we will look more closely at the notion in 
the next chapter), it helps to contrast the view with 
Platonism. For those who believe that mathematics is 
syntactic, the phrase "is true" takes on a special meaning 
when it is applied to a mathematical proposition: A 
mathematical proposition is true relative to the stipulated 
rules, the syntax, of a formal system. Analogously, for a 
moral relativist, like Protagoras, "is true," when applied to an 
ethical statement, is shorthand for "is true relative to x" 
where x is a person or, more likely, a conglomerate of 
ethically agreeing persons. Moral truths are only true relative 
to the stipulated rules of a 

Incompleteness 
87 
society. They are, in the academic terminology du jour, social 
constructs. Similarly, 
according to 
the view 
under 
consideration, mathematical truths are formal constructs. 
A mathematical Platonist, on the other hand, uses the word. 
"true," even when applied to mathematical statements, in 
exactly the same way as we normally use the word, not as a 
shorthand for "relative to x" but to represent existing states of 
affairs, For a Platonist, mathematical truth is the same sort of 
truth as that prevailing in lesser realms. A proposition p is 
true if and only if p. "Santa Claus exists" is true if and only if 
Santa Claus exists. "Every even number greater than 2 is the 
sum of two primes," is true if and only if there is no even 
number greater than 2 that isn't the sum of two primes (even 
if we can never prove it).8 
The view, then, of the syntactic nature of mathematics—its 
lack of any descriptive content—was indicated in the very 
name "logical positivism." (And Godel, impassioned Platonist 
8 The Prussian mathematician Christian Goldbach (1690-1764) had 
conjectured that every even number greater than 2 is the sum of two prime 
numbers (i.e., a number which is only divisible by 1 or by itself). So, for 
example 4 = 2 + 2, 6 = 3 + 3, 8 = 5 + 3, and so on. Goldbach's conjecture 
has been confirmed for every even number that has ever been checked; 
however, no proof has of yet been discovered for the universal conclusion 
that every even number greater than 2 is the sum of two primes. The fact 
that Goldbach's conjecture remains unproved means (at least according to 
the Platonist) that lurking out there beyond the point where 
mathematicians have checked there might be a counterexample: an even 
number that isn't the sum of two primes. Then again (according to the 
mathematical Platonist), there may not be a counterexample: every even 
number may be the sum of two primes, without there being a formal way 
of proving that this is so. A Platonist asserts that there either is or isn't a 
counterexample, irrespective of our having a proof one way or the other. 

88 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
that he was, sat among the positivists and spoke not a word of 
dissent.) 
The scene for the meetings of the Vienna Circle was "a 
rather dingy room," on the ground floor of the building in the 
Boltzmanngasse that housed the mathematical and physical 
institutes of the university. (It is now the meteorological 
institute.) The room was filled with rows of chairs and long 
tables, facing a blackboard. When not being used by the 
positivists, it was a reading room sometimes used for 
lectures. Those who arrived first at the Thursday evening 
meetings would shove some tables and chairs away from the 
blackboard, which most speakers used. The chairs would be 
arranged informally in a semicircle before the blackboard, and 
there was a long table in the back used by anyone who wanted 
to smoke or take notes. People would stand around talking in 
groups until the signal from Schlick—a sharp clap of his 
hands. The conversations halted, everyone taking a seat, 
Schlick at the end of the table closest to the blackboard. He 
would announce the topic of the paper to be read or the 
discussion 
to 
be 
pursued, 
sometimes 
first 
reading 
communiques from colleagues, and the formal proceedings 
of the night would begin. 
At any one meeting there were usually no more than 20 
Viennese members, with foreign visitors sometimes 
attending. For example, John von Neumann (who, among his 
other prodigious abilities, managed to inhabit various far-
flung points on the globe simultaneously, including 
Budapest and Princeton) might grace the Circle if he were 
anywhere in the vicinity; the young Willard van Orman 
Quine, from America, who went on to dominate Anglo-
American analytic philosophy for many decades, from his 
position at Harvard; Carl Hempel, from Germany, who, 
among other distinctions, was 

Incompleteness 
89 
my first-year advisor when I was a graduate student; the great 
Polish logician Alfred Tarski (ne" Tannenbaum), from Poland; 
and the philosopher Alfred Jules Ayer, from England, all spent 
time with Schlick's group. Ayer, after spending some months 
in Vienna and imbibing the doctrines, went back to England 
and wrote up his imbibition in his highly influential polemic 
Language, Truth, and Logic, thus disseminating the ideas of 
Vienna's positivists in the English-speaking world: 
We shall maintain that no statement which refers to a 
"reality" transcending the limits of all possible sense 
experience can possibly have literal significance; from 
which it must follow that the labours of those who have 
striven to describe such reality have all been devoted to 
the production of nonsense. 
By far the most influential figure connected with the 
Vienna Circle was not even a member of it, and in fact 
steadfastly refused membership. This was the philosopher 
Ludwig Wittgenstein. Wittgenstein, at least according to the 
interpretation that I will propose, plays a significant, if 
ambiguous, role in the story of Godel's incompleteness 
theorems. Wittgenstein's almost mystical influence on the 
members of the Vienna Circle, the esteemed thinkers among 
whom the young logician first came to think rigorously about 
the foundations of mathematics, must have struck a person of 
Godel's persuasion as highly dubious. There are still-
smoldering 
remnants 
of 
Godel's 
resentment of the 
philosopher to be found in the Nachlass, written (though 
never exposed to the public) many decades after the Vienna 
Circle had ceased to be, only a few years before the 
logician's death. 

90 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
Godel's and Wittgenstein's views on the foundations of 
mathematics were, as we will see, at loggerheads, and neither 
could acknowledge the work of the other without renouncing 
what was most central in his own view. Each, I believe, was a 
thorn deep in the other's metamathematics. 
Wittgenstein and the Circle 
Wittgenstein came from one of the wealthiest and most 
culturally elite families of Vienna, "the Austrian equivalent of 
the Krupps, the Carnegies, the Rothschilds, whose lavish 
palace on Alleegasse had hosted concerts by Brahms and 
Mahler, Clara Schumann, and the conductor Bruno Walter."9 
He was, in his intensity, preoccupations, ambitions, and 
conflicts, indelibly stamped by the sensibilities of that intense, 
preoccupied, ambitious, and conflicted city. While studying 
aeronautical engineering at the Technische Hochschule in 
Berlin, he had learned of Russell's paradox, and became 
interested in the foundations of mathematics. 
Russell's famous paradox is of the self-referential variety. The 
liar's paradox—this very sentence is false—is of the same variety. 
We get into trouble because some linguistic item talks about 
itself, at least potentially, and by reason of this self-referentiality 
we end up both asserting that some statement is true and that it 
is also false, which is logically impossible if anything is. 
9 It was a highly musical family. The philsopher's brother, Paul, was a 
concert pianist who lost his right arm in the First World War. He managed 
to gain such proficiency with his left hand that he was able to continue his 
career. Ravel's famous Concerto for the Left Hand was written for Paul 
Wittgenstein. 

Incompleteness 
91 
Russell's paradox concerns the set of all sets that are not 
members of themselves. Sets are abstract objects that contain 
members, and some sets can be members of themselves. For 
example, the set of all abstract objects is a member of itself, 
since it is an abstract object. Some sets (most) are not 
members of themselves. For example, the set of all 
mathematicians is not itself a mathematician—it's an abstract 
object—and so is not a member of itself. Now we form the 
concept of the set of all sets that aren't members of 
themselves and we ask of this set: is it a member of itself? It 
either is or it isn't, just as the problematic sentence of the 
liar's paradox either is or isn't true. But if the set of all sets 
that aren't members of themselves is a member of itself, then 
it's not a member of itself, since it contains only sets that 
aren't members of themselves. And, if it's not a member of 
itself, then it is a member of itself, since it contains all the 
sets that aren't members of themselves. So it's a member of 
itself if and only if it's not a member of itself. Not good. 
Paradoxes have often been found lurking about in the 
deepest places of thought. Their presence is often the signal 
(like the canary dying?) that we have managed, sometimes 
unwittingly, to stumble on a deep and problematic place, a 
fissure in the foundations. Russell's discovery of his paradox 
had grievous consequences in the foundations of mathematics, 
and for one man in particular: Gottlob Frege. Frege had only 
just finished his monumental two-volume Grundgesetze der 
Arithmetic (The Fundamental Laws of Arithmetic), which was 
the first attempt to reduce arithmetic to a formal system of 
logic. The logic that Frege employed also includes set theory; 
in other words (to speak in the language of a logician) sets are 
included as individuals in the universe of discourse, over 
which the bound vari- 

92 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
ables of the system range. What this basically means is that the 
system can be interpreted as talking about sets. Numbers are 
then defined in terms of sets and the arithmetical laws are 
derived from the axioms and rules of set theory and logic. 
Frege's axioms of set theory allowed for the formation of 
the set of all sets that are not members of themselves, and 
since this set involves a contradiction—since that set both is 
and is not a member of itself—there was something 
fundamentally wrong with Frege's system. Although the 
system was adequate for the expression of arithmetical truths, 
it was also inconsistent, which is the very worst thing that a 
formal system can be. One can prove absolutely anything 
(and hence effectively nothing) from a contradiction.10 So an 
inconsistent system is worthless as a tool of proof. 
Russell and his collaborator, Alfred North Whitehead, 
devised a new formal system for expressing arithmetical truths, 
accomplished in their Principia Mathematica (the very work 
that appears in the title of Godel's 1931 paper, setting forth the 
proof for the first incompleteness theorem). However, to secure 
consistency, Russell and Whitehead had imposed ad hoc rules 
governing set formation. Their Theory of Types decrees that 
there are ascending orders in the universe of discourse—the 
types of things we interpret the formal theory as speaking 
10 Here is why you can prove anything from a contradiction. The rule 
of inference known as modus ponens says that from a conditional 
proposition of the form if p, then q (where p and q are any random 
propositions) and from the proposition p, you can deduce q. Propositions 
of the form if p, then q are false if p is true and q is false, and true in all 
other cases. Therefore if p is a contradiction, then ifp, then q will be true for 
whatever q one cares to choose. Therefore, from the assertion of a 
contradiction p anything at all can be made to follow. 

Incompleteness 
93 
about. Basic individuals constitute Type I; sets of individuals, 
Type II; sets of sets, Type III; sets of sets of sets, Type IV; etc. An 
item can be a member only of an item of a higher type. The 
question then of whether a set is a member of itself can't even 
arise. The rules of Principia Mathematica bar the formation of 
such paradox-breeding sets as the set of all sets not members 
of themselves. Russell and Whitehead called their rules the 
"Theory of Types," but the problem was that there was no real 
theory behind the rules at all, as they themselves ruefully 
acknowledged; there was no explanation at all as to why certain 
sets were allowable and others not,11 other than that if one 
allowed the unallowable very bad things would happen to one's 
system. Their formal system is consistent by fiat. 
Russell's and Whitehead's proffered challenge to logicians 
to come up with a less ad hoc solution to block the formation 
of paradoxical sets was what lured Wittgenstein away from 
aeronautical engineering. This problem that had stumped the 
great Lord Russell was obviously something worth thinking 
about. Wittgenstein went to Cambridge, where Russell was 
the most prominent philosopher on staff, and immediately 
made himself known to the distinguished philosopher, 
mathematician, political activist, and aristocrat.12 
11 Another paradox-breeding set is the set of all sets, known as the uni 
versal set. The mathematician Georg Cantor (1845-1918) had proved that 
the power set of a set (formed by taking all the subsets of the set) always has a 
higher cardinality than the set itself. But then consider the universal set. 
Clearly, no set could have a larger cardinality than the universal set. However, 
its power set would . . .  a contradiction. This is known as Cantor's paradox, 
and the rules of set theory must bar the formation of the universal set. 
12 He was, at least after the death of his older brother, the third Earl of 
Russell. His grandfather, Lord John Russell, introduced the Reform Bill of 

94 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
At first Russell was a bit wary before the strange intensity 
of the newcomer: "My ferocious German [sic] came and 
argued at me after my lecture," Russell wrote to his current 
lover, Ottoline Morrell, the aristocratic wife of the Liberal MP 
Phillip Morrell. During their affair Russell wrote to her on 
average three times a day, so there is a lot of useful 
documentation on which to draw from this period of his life. 
If only adultery regularly yielded such scholarly riches. "He 
is armour-plated against all assaults of reasoning. It is really 
rather a waste of time talking with him." But within a 
short span of time (while Wittgenstein was still an 
undergraduate) the "ferocious" convictions of the Austrian 
had a devastating effect on Russell's confidence in his own 
logical powers: 
We were both cross from the heat—I showed him a crucial 
part of what I had been writing. He said it was all wrong, 
not realizing the difficulties—that he had tried my view 
and knew it couldn't work. I couldn't understand his 
objection—in fact he was very inarticulate—but I feel in 
my bones that he must be right, and that he has seen 
something I have missed. If I could see it too I shouldn't 
mind, but, as it is, it is worrying and has rather destroyed 
the pleasure in my writing—I can only go on with what I 
see, and yet I feel it is probably all wrong, and that 
Wittgenstein will think me a dishonest scoundrel for going 
on with it. 
1832, and served as prime minister under Queen Victoria. Bertrand Russell 
was a political activist, in particular a pacifist. He was jailed twice: once, in 
1918, for six months for an allegedly libelous article in a pacifist journal; 
and again in 1961, at the age of 89, for one week, in connection with his 
campaign for nuclear disarmament. 

Incompleteness 
95 
The force of Wittgenstein's personality and his reforming 
attitude toward philosophy, the holy severity of the mission of 
disabusing his contemporaries of their presumptions (which 
had a great deal to do with his Viennese sense of the decadent 
exhaustion of old traditions13), transformed Anglo-American 
philosophy. Like Russell, the Cambridge philosophers and 
students of philosophy who came to surround Wittgenstein 
seemed not to have to understand him to know in their 
"bones that he must be right." His evident brilliance, 
oracularly (if inarticulately) dispensed against the backdrop 
of a fierce and formidably austere personality, made for a 
powerfully convincing display. Wittgenstein quite often gave 
way to lamentations that his Cambridge colleagues and 
students did not understand him. 
Partly it was the Viennese aspect in his thinking that eluded 
them. It was not just in his determination to seize hold of a 
methodology for sweeping away the decay of the old ways and 
making the entire field new again that he was a Viennese at 
heart. Wittgenstein's tormentedly dramatic way of pursuing 
his field, the cult of genius that he propagated, was also highly 
Viennese. He had read in his youth, and always retained a 
high respect for, the strange Viennese writer Otto Weininger 
(1880-1903), "a quintessentially Viennese figure" who had 
argued that the only way for a man to justify his life (for a 
woman there is no way) is by acquiring and cultivating 
13 Wittgenstein was not apologetic, but perhaps even perversely proud, 
of how few of the historical philosophical greats he had ever studied. On 
the other hand, the frontisquotes for his two books "were taken from 
authors who could hardly have been more typically Viennese—Kurnberger 
for the Tractatus, Nestroy for the Investigations." 

96 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
genius. Weininger had chosen to shoot himself to death in the 
very house in which Beethoven, the genius he revered above 
all others, had died. Wittgenstein himself was suicidal for nine 
years (his three older brothers committed suicide, also a quin-
tessentially Viennese act), until he came to Cambridge and 
was pronounced a genius by Russell. 
Back in Vienna, Wittgenstein, in absentia, was also producing 
a profound effect. His first published work, Tractatus Logico-
Philosophicus, partly written in the trenches of the First World 
War, had singularly impressed Schlick's group. As stylistically 
arresting as its creator, this work achieved in its austere elegance 
a sort of poetry.14 The traditional tool of the philosopher—the 
argument—is dispensed with; each assertion is put forth, as 
Russell once remarked, "as if it were a Czar's ukase." The poet's 
obscurity of meaning is preserved despite (by means of?) the 
formal precision of its elaborate numbering system, which 
hierarchically arranges its assertions: so that, say, proposition 
3.411 (In geometry and logic alike a place is a possibility: 
something can exist in it) is an elaboration of proposition 3.41 
(The proposi-tional sign with logical co-ordinates—that is the 
logical place) which is an elaboration of 3.4 (A proposition 
determines a place in logical space). The numbering system is 
borrowed from the mathematician Peano, who had used it in 
axiomatizing arithmetic, and it is the numbering system 
that Russell and Whitehead had also employed in Principia 
Mathematica. 
14 That it was a sort of poetry was the damning praise of Frege: "The 
pleasure of reading your book can therefore no longer be aroused by the 
content which is already known, but only by the peculiar form given to it 
by the author. The book thereby becomes an artistic rather than a scientific 
achievement." (From a letter from Frege to Wittgenstein, 16 September 
1919, translated in Monk 1990, p. 174) 

Incompleteness 
97 
The Cambridge philosopher G. E. Moore suggested the 
title, modeled on Spinoza's Tractatus Theologico-Politicus. 
Bertrand Russell wrote the introduction that finally, after 
much difficulty, secured the author a publisher. Wittgenstein 
detested the introduction, especially after it was translated 
into German: "All the refinement of your English style," he 
wrote Russell, "was, obviously, lost in the translation and what 
remained was superficiality and misunderstanding." Russell's 
and Wittgenstein's former intimacy cooled considerably over 
the following years. "He had the pride of Lucifer," was one of 
Russell's later summations of Wittgenstein's character. 
It was Kurt Reidemeister, a geometer associated with the 
Circle, who in 1924 or 1925, at Schlick's and Hahn's request, 
studied the Tractatus and suggested that the group read it 
together. 
And so the positivists began a joint study of the Tractatus, 
proposition by proposition, their Thursday-evening meetings 
now dedicated to Wittgenstein. They read it through not once, 
but twice, the endeavor taking the better part of a year. (These 
weekly readings of a portion of the Tractatus are reminiscent of 
the Jewish tradition of weekly readings from the Torah. It 
happens that 9 out of the 14 original members of the Circle 
were Jewish by birth, though of course not by conviction—all 
theis-tic utterances being regarded as paradigmatically 
meaningless.) 
The Viennese positivists interpreted the cryptic Tractatus 
as offering precisely the new, purifying foundations they 
sought. Proposition 4.003, for example, could not summarize 
more perfectly their fundamental conviction: 
Most of the propositions and questions to be found in 
philosophical works are not false but nonsensical. 
Consequently 

98 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
we cannot give any answer to questions of this kind, but 
can only point out that they are nonsensical. Most of the 
propositions and questions of philosophers arise from our 
failure to understand the logic of our language.... And it is 
not surprising that the deepest problems are in fact not 
problems at all. 
They ascribed to Wittgenstein their own verificationist 
criterion of meaningfulness, viz. that the meaning of a 
proposition is identical with the method for verifying it; 
or, alternatively, that the meaning of a sentence can be 
reduced to the specification of the experiences that would 
make the proposition known to be true. They read a 
vindication of their own positivism in such propositions as 
6.53, exhorting one to "say nothing except what can be said, 
that is, propositions of natural science," and 4.11, "the 
totality of all true propositions is the whole of natural science 
(or the whole corpus of the natural sciences)." 
They also believed that Wittgenstein had accounted for the 
truths of mathematics and logic, reducing them to 
tautologies, devoid of any descriptive content. Proposition 
4.461 states that "propositions show what they say: 
tautologies and contradictions show that they say nothing. A 
tautology has no truth-conditions, since it is unconditionally 
true; and a contradiction is true on no condition." There 
might be terms that refer to items in the world contained in 
such tautologies as, say, "Socrates is either mortal or he is 
not." But those referring words are irrelevant to the truth of 
the tautology. It is the meaning of the purely logical 
constants—or and not—that determine the truth of the 
tautology, and, "4.0132 My fundamental idea is that the 
'logical constants' are not representa- 

Incompleteness 
99 
tives; that there can be no representatives of the logic of facts." 
All logic is ultimately tautological: "6.1262 Proof in logic is 
merely a mechanical expedient to facilitate the recognition of 
tautologies in complicated cases." Because all logic is 
tautological, it says nothing: "5.43 But in fact all the 
propositions of logic say the same thing, to wit nothing." 
"6.125 Hence there can never be surprises in logic." (Godel, 
of course, was poised to deliver the greatest surprise in the 
history of logic, one which, in the logician Jaakko Hintikka's 
words, is "stranger than others by orders of magnitude." So 
the reader might already suspect, at this early point in the 
discussion, that Wittgenstein's views on the philosophy of 
logic, leading as they do to proposition 6.125, would put him 
starkly at odds with Godel's result. As we shall see, 
Wittgenstein never accepted that Godel had proved what he 
provably did prove. This, too, might strike the reader as 
verging on the paradoxical.) 
Wittgenstein's discussion in the Tractatus of mathematics, 
as opposed to logic, is brief. Mathematics, he says, is a method 
of logic (6.2 and again 6.234) and so, presumably, all that he 
has said of logic applies to mathematics. Mathematics, he says 
(6.2), also says nothing, has no descriptive content, though 
because it is expressed in equations it seems to: 
6.2323 An equation merely marks the point of view from 
which I consider the two expressions; it marks their 
equivalence in meaning. 
6.2341 It is the essential characteristic of mathematical 
method that it employs equations. For it is because of this 
method that every proposition of mathematics must go 
without saying. 

ioo 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
Mathematical propositions, just like the tautologies of 
logic, do not represent any facts because they are, in a certain 
sense, merely grammatical. "6.233 The question whether 
intuition is needed for the solution of mathematical problems 
must be given by the answer that in this case language itself 
provides the necessary intuition." (Proposition 6.233 also puts 
him starkly at odds with Godel's result, as we will see.) By 
language itself, Wittgenstein means syntax, the rules that 
stipulate that which can be said. Mathematics, like logic, is 
syntactic. Meanings are irrelevant to the determination of 
truth, even the meanings of the logical constants and the 
mathematical "=," for their "meanings" are nothing over and 
above the grammatical rules that stipulate how we use them: 
3.33 In logical syntax the meaning of a sign should never 
play a role. It must be possible to establish logical syntax 
without mentioning meaning of a sign: only the 
description of expressions may be presupposed. 
Interestingly, from this proposition alone, Wittgenstein 
claims to demonstrate the fundamental error of the Theory of 
Types: "3.331 From this observation we turn to Russell's 'theory 
of types'. It can be seen that Russell must be wrong, because he 
had to mention the meaning of signs when establishing the 
rules for them." The next two propositions, 3.332 and 3.333, 
"dispose of Russell's paradox." Thus Wittgenstein, at least, was 
satisfied, at least while writing the Tractatus, that he had solved 
the problem that originally lured him into philosophy of logic. 
Wittgenstein was later to reject many of the assertions of his 
Tractatus. In fact, the discontinuity in his thinking was judged 
so radical that he was bifurcated into "early" and "later" 
Wittgenstein. In place of the early monolithic logic of language, 

Incompleteness 
101 
the later Wittgenstein speaks of many different "language-
games," each with its own rules. In the early Wittgenstein the 
interesting nonsense (so to speak), characteristic of philosophy, 
derives from the violation of the rules that govern the bounds 
of all meaningfulness; in the later Wittgenstein, the interesting 
nonsense is a result of confusing the rules of one language-
game with those of another. (Consistent between the two 
Wittgensteins is the belief that all philosophical problems 
arise from confusion about syntax.) The homogeneous view 
of one language, with one set of rules, from which the posi-
tivists took solace, gave way to a postmodern-friendly 
pluralism of language-games. The later Wittgenstein came to 
place much more emphasis on the social aspects of rule-
following. Rules are embodied in social forms of behavior (also 
appealing to the postmodern sensibility). Even the law of 
noncontradiction wasn't to be regarded as an absolute: 
We shall see contradiction in a quite different light if we 
look at its occurrences and its consequences as it were 
anthropologically—and when we look at it with a 
mathematician's exasperation. That is to say, we shall look 
at it differently, if we try merely to describe how the 
contradiction influences language-games, and if we try to 
look at it from the point of the mathematical law-giver. 
Wittgenstein's attitude toward mathematical logic radically 
changed. The pluralistic theory of rule-following of the later 
Wittgenstein was meant to subvert monologicism: that there 
is but one logic and its name is Principia Mathematica. 
Whereas the early Wittgenstein had labored hard with Russell 
on problems of logic, the later Wittgenstein came to regard 
the entire field as a "curse" (while Russell, disheartened by his 

102 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN   . 
earlier labors with Wittgenstein—his inability to understand 
him—withdrew from the field and wrote bestsellers.15) 
Still, even between the early and the later Wittgenstein there 
is agreement enough on many issues, including fundamental 
questions in the philosophy of mathematics. Wittgenstein's 
view of rule-following changed, but he remained committed 
to the claim that the entire nature of mathematics enfolds 
from rule-following. All that happens in mathematics is a 
consequence of rule-following, which is why mathematical 
"intuitions" are figments of our obfuscation. If we saw clearly 
what we are doing when we do mathematics we would not 
resort to these figments. 
Both the early and later Wittgenstein are in agreement, 
then, that there can be no genuine surprises in mathematics. 
When, therefore, a surprise on the order of Godel's result 
arrived, the thing had to be argued away. 
Of What We Cannot Speak 
Though Wittgenstein may have believed he had summarily 
disposed of Russell's paradox, the very problem that had 
drawn him away from aeronautical engineering and into the 
world of philosophy of logic and language, the entire 
Tractatus constitutes a self-avowed paradox, as the 
philosopher himself freely admits. According to its own 
dictates, its 
15 His History of Western Philosophy, published in 1945, a very 
comprehensive and readable account of precisely what its title promises, 
became a longtime bestseller for Simon and Schuster. He turned to such 
popularizations of philosophy after giving up the more technical work to 
which he had devoted himself before Wittgenstein entered his life. 

Incompleteness 
103 
very own propositions are meaningless. Wittgenstein 
forbade talking about a language within the language. The 
syntactical nature, whether of logic or of mathematics, 
cannot really, without violating the syntax of the language, 
be spoken about, but must rather be shown. 
6.54 My propositions serve as elucidations in the following 
way: anyone who understands me eventually recognizes 
them as nonsensical, when he has used them—as steps—to 
climb up beyond them. (He must, so to speak, throw away 
the ladder after he had climbed up it.) 
(This last metaphor, for which Wittgenstein is famous, was one 
that Wittgenstein borrowed from the drama critic/philosopher 
Fritz Mauthner, of whose Sprachkritik Wittgenstein tended to be 
rather critical in the Tractatus. 4.0031: "All philosophy is a 
'critique of language' [though not in Mauthner's sense"].) 
Wittgenstein's attitude toward the inherent contradiction 
of the Tractatus is perhaps more Zen than positivist. He 
deemed 
the 
contradiction 
unavoidable. 
Unlike 
the 
scientifically minded philosophers who took him as their 
inspiration, he was paradox-friendly. Paradox did not, for 
Wittgenstein, signify that something had gone deeply 
wrong in the processes of reason, setting off an alarm to 
send the search party out to find the mistaken hidden 
assumption. His insouciance in the face of paradox was an 
aspect of his thinking that it was all but impossible for the 
very un-Zenlike members of the Vienna Circle to 
understand.16 
16 Perhaps this is why he found conversation with them so fruitless that 
on the occasions that he agreed to meet with some of them, he often just 
turned himself to the wall and read aloud the poetry of Rabindranath 

104 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
In his autobiography Carnap recalled how the Vienna 
Circle had struggled with Wittgenstein's dictum concerning 
the question of whether "it is possible to speak about 
linguistic expressions."17 Carnap asked Wittgenstein for 
elucidation on this point once too often and was summarily 
banished forever more from Wittgenstein's presence. 
Schlick and Waismann were permitted to meet with 
Wittgenstein in person on a regular basis, Waismann because 
he was writing a commentary on the Tractatus—although 
Wittgenstein eventually gave up on ever making Waismann 
understand him and the book was never completed. Waismann 
was, perhaps, of all the Wittgenstein-enchanted Circle, the pos-
itivist who suffered the deepest from philosophical infatuation. 
He changed his views every time Wittgenstein did, and, like 
some of the equally impressionable Cambridge students, began 
to mimic the philosopher's behavioral tics. At each Thursday 
meeting of the Circle he would update the other members with 
Tagore, "an Indian poet much in vogue in Vienna at that time, whose 
poems express a mystical outlook diametrically opposed to that of the 
members of Schlick's Circle." 
17 Carnap was to (prematurely) welcome Godel's incompleteness 
theorem as vindicating the Circle's insistence on meaningful metalanguage, 
and thus as making operable the Circle's positive program for eliminating 
all metaphysical elements. "By use of GodePs method," he set about to 
demonstrate how "even the metalogic of the language could be 
arithmetized and formulated in the language itself." But it was Godel 
himself who soon took the wind out of Carnap's sails, convincing him—or 
at any rate trying to— that the upshot of the result he had produced by 
means of his method was entirely at odds with the positivist program itself. 
"Although Godel had not persuaded Carnap on this fundamental issue, he 
did move Carnap in a strongly Platonist direction in his definition of 
analyticity, the capstone of the syntax program." 

Incompleteness 
105 
the breaking news of the philosopher's views, beginning with 
the disclaimer: "I shall relate to you the latest developments in 
Wittgenstein's 
thinking 
but 
Wittgenstein 
rejects 
all 
responsibility for my formulations. Please note that." Those 
members of the Circle whom Wittgenstein refused to meet 
were thus kept informed, through Schlick and Waissman, of 
the philosopher's ideas, which were often quoted in their 
papers. Some Austrian philosophers expressed doubts of the 
very existence of this "Dr. Wittgenstein" to whom Schlick's 
group so often made reference. Perhaps he was simply a 
figment of Schlick's imagination, "a mythological character 
invented as a figurehead for the Circle." 
Just as in Cambridge, Wittgenstein's effect on the logical pos-
itivists, particularly Schlick and Waissmann, almost defies 
explanation. Schlick's wife recalled her husband leaving the 
house to go to see Wittgenstein for the first time as if he were 
setting off on a religious pilgrimage. "He returned in an ecstatic 
state, saying little, and I felt I should not ask questions." 
Feigl, in later life, reported, "Schlick adored him and so did 
Waismann, who, like others of Wittgenstein's disciples, even 
came to imitate his gestures and manner of speech. Schlick 
ascribed to Wittgenstein profound philosophical insights that 
in my opinion were in fact formulated much more clearly in 
Schlick's own early work." 
The note of asperity in Feigl's tone is worthy of comment, 
since "Feigl had always had an unusual ability to get along 
with everyone," an ability born out in his memoirist article, 
where almost everyone he had ever crossed paths with is 
described as having only the most amiable personality, the 
acutest of abilities. Feigl's obliquely expressed distaste for 
Wittgenstein appears to be traceable back to Feigl's "limitless 

106 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
admiration for Carnap," a systematically precise and 
conscientious thinker. After banishing Carnap from his 
presence, Wittgenstein told Feigl, "If he doesn't smell it, I 
can't help him. He just has got no nose!" When Feigl's 
admiration for Carnap became clear, he, too, was banished. 
Wittgenstein's exasperation with his disciples even in his 
native Vienna, his insistence that although he might sound 
like a positivist he decidedly was not one, revolves around the 
meaning of the closing proposition of his Tractatus, 
numbered simply 7, the severely fulminating (so like a 
prophet of old): Wovon man nicht sprechen kann, daruber 
muss man schweigen, or: Of what we cannot speak we must 
remain silent. Schlick's Circle interpreted Wittgenstein as 
saying in his concluding statement, as well as throughout the 
book, that the misuse of the conditions of language not only 
(tautologi-cally) ends in nonsense, but also that outside the 
bounds of the sayable there is nothing at all; whereas for 
Wittgenstein there really was "that whereof we cannot speak." 
The ethical or—what amounts to the same thing for him—the 
mystical is that whereof we cannot speak. The ethical, the 
mystical, is both real and inexpressible. He believed that he 
had explained all that can be said in the Tractatus, but as he 
told one potential publisher (who ultimately passed) what he 
had not said in the Tractatus—because it could not be said—
was more important than what he had said: 
I once wanted to give a few words in the foreword which 
now actually are not in it, which, however, I'll write to you 
now because they might be a key for you: I wanted to write 
that my work consists of two parts: of the one which is 
here, and of everything I have not written. And precisely 

Incompleteness 
107 
this second part is the important one. For the Ethical is 
delimited from within, as it were, by my book; and I'm 
convinced that strictly speaking it can ONLY be delimited 
in this way. In brief, I think: All of that which many are 
babbling today, I have defined in my book by remaining 
silent about it. 
He took himself to have demonstrated how little one has 
actually said after one has finished saying all that can be said. 
The question is whether the requisite silence, imposed in 
proposition 7, hides nothing at all or rather all of the most 
important things. The positivists certainly interpreted 
Wittgenstein to be saying the former, which is almost 
certainly one of the reasons why he dismissed them as not 
understanding him in the least. 
Ironically, the Vienna Circle, united by their core distaste 
for mystery, were embracing a thinker committed to mystery, 
at least in so far as questions of ethics, aesthetics, metaphysics, 
the meaning of life—all the matters they had banished from 
the realm of reasonable consideration—were concerned. The 
"unsayable" is, for Wittgenstein, as the "unknowable" was for 
the traditional empiricists, a measure of our limits. By taking 
the measure of all that we can say, delimiting it, in his words 
from within, he is taking the measure of all that we can't say, 
indicating it without expressing it, since expression is in 
principle impossible. 
Of course, insofar as the sayable was concerned, he truly 
was propounding a doctrine compatible with positivism, 
banishing mystery: The meaning of a nontautologous 
proposition is its method of verification; and so far as 
mathematical truth goes, Wittgenstein did present a view 
compatible with 

io8 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
the positivists' own, dissolving the seeming mystery of its 
aprioricity and certainty into the rules of syntax. 
Though Wittgenstein raged at the positivists' insistence on 
fitting him to the procrustean bed of their precision, they 
mostly responded with adoration, at least in the early days, 
while Godel was still attending the Thursday-evening 
sessions. Olga Taussky-Todd, a mathematician who was 
Godel's age and who spent some time in the Vienna Circle, 
writes, "Wittgenstein was the idol of this group. I can testify 
to this. An argument could be settled by citing his Tractatus." 
The visiting A. J. Ayer, who would make good use of his 
three-months stay in Vienna, wrote back to England, to his 
friend Isaiah Berlin, in February of 1933, "Wittgenstein is a 
deity to them all." Bertrand Russell, whom they also 
respected as an empiricist in good standing, "was merely a 
forerunner to Christ (Wittgenstein)." 
Even the most sober-minded of the positivists, Rudolf 
Carnap, admits, in his autobiographical notes in the Schilpp 
volume in his honor, to a measure of near-religious awe: 
When he started to formulate his view on some specific 
philosophical problem we often felt the internal struggle 
that occurred to him at that very moment, a struggle by 
which he tried to penetrate from darkness to light under 
an intense and painful strain, which was even visible on his 
most expressive face. When finally, sometimes after a 
prolonged arduous effort, his answer came forth, his 
statement stood before us like a newly created piece of art 
or a divine inspiration. . . . The impression he made on us 
was as if insight came to him as through a divine 
inspiration, so that 

Incompleteness 
109 
we could not help feeling that any sober rational comment 
or analysis of it would be a profanation. 
It was into this oddly Wittgenstein-enchanted Circle (all 
the odder for being a circle of positivists, the sworn enemies 
of cognitive bewitchment) that Kurt Godel was to enter as a 
student, a reticent observer quietly taking in the opinions 
around him ... and drawing his own conclusions. 
Godel in the Vienna Circle: 
The Silent Dissenter 
Regardless of his profound, private disagreements with the 
positivists, Godel's association with the Circle led him into 
the most gregarious few years of his introverted life. He was 
meeting on a regular basis, not just on alternate Thursday 
evenings in the bare-bones room where the full Vienna Circle 
convened but also at late-night sessions in cafes in the 
garrulous city, men—and the occasional woman—who 
shared his interest in, if not his intuitions on, foundational 
issues. The ever-amiable Feigl reports: 
On the personal side, I should mention that Godel, 
together with another student member of the Circle, 
Marcel Natkin (originally from Lodz, Poland) and myself 
became close friends. We met frequently for walks through 
the parks of Vienna, and of course, in cafes had endless 
discussions 
about 
logical, 
mathematical, 
and 
epistemological 
and 
philosophy-of-science 
issues—
sometimes deep into the hours of the night. 

no 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
Karl Menger, in a course on dimension theory he was 
teaching, had a student by the name of Kurt Godel, "a slim, 
unusually quiet young man. I do not recall speaking with him 
at that time." It was through the regular meetings of the Circle 
that Menger began the acquaintanceship with Godel that, 
though tried, would persist until the end of GodePs life. 
Almost all who were present at those meetings described 
Godel in similar terms, as clearly brilliant (though one 
wonders if this clarity of brilliance emerged in hindsight, after 
the implications of the announcement of 1930 had fully 
penetrated) but always quiet, holding his own counsel. Godel 
was, according to Feigl, "a very unassuming, diligent worker, 
but his was clearly the mind of a genius of the very first 
order." "I never heard Godel speak in these meetings or 
participate in the discussions; but he evinced interest by 
slight motions in the head indicating agreement, skepticism, 
or disagreement," said Menger, who also reports: 
After one session in which Schlick, Hahn, Neurath and 
Waismann had talked about language, but in which neither 
Godel nor I had spoken a word, I said on the way home: 
"Today we have once again out-Wittgensteined these 
Wittgensteinians: we kept silent." "The more I think about 
language," Godel replied, "the more it amazes me that 
people ever understand each other." 
What did Kurt Godel think of these "Wittgensteinians?" We 
know, of course, even though they did not, that he disagreed 
profoundly with the logical positivists, most specifically on 
their interpretation of mathematical truth, but far more 
generally as well. A man whose soul had been blasted by the 
Platonic vision of truth would not be sympathetic to denun- 

Incompleteness 
m 
ciations of metaphysics. He would not accept a theory of 
meaning that branded as "meaningless" all descriptive 
statements that are in principle not empirically verifiable. 
The essence of mathematical Platonism is the claim that 
mathematics, 
though 
not 
empirical, 
is 
nonetheless 
descriptive. Godel was a backbencher among the positivists. 
Though he shared their commitment to precision, as well as 
their interest in the philosophical relevance of the logical 
advances of Frege, Russell, and Whitehead, he could not 
have been more at odds with their metaconvictions. He told 
Hao Wang many years later (21 November 1971) that the 
positivists were fundamentally in error in thinking that all 
meaningful thought could be reduced to sense perceptions: 
Some reductionism is correct, [but one should] reduce to 
(other) concepts and truths, not to sense perceptions. . . . 
Platonic ideas are what things are to be reduced to. 
In the unsent letter to the sociologist Grandjean, after his 
opening volley in which he pounced on the sociologist's 
ingratiating suggestion that his work had been "a facet of the 
intellectual atmosphere of the early twentieth century," he 
went on immediately to say: 
It is true that my interest in the foundations of 
mathematics was aroused by the "Vienna Circle," but the 
philosophical consequences of my results, as well as the 
heuristic principles leading to them, are anything but 
positivistic or empiricistic. See what I say in Hao Wang's 
recent book "From Mathematics to Philosophy" in the 
passages cited in the Preface. See also my paper "What 
is Cantor's Continuum Problem?" in "Philosophy of 
Mathematics" 

112 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
edited by Benacerraf and Putnam in 1964; in particular pp. 
262-265 and pp. 270-272.18 
I was a conceptual and mathematical realist since about 
1925. I never held the view that mathematics is syntax of 
language. Rather this view, understood in any reasonable 
sense, can be disproved by my results. 
There we have the matter, stated in an unposted letter. 
Godel had become a mathematical realist in 1925, had 
attended the Vienna Circle's meetings between 1926 and 
1928, and by 1928 had begun to work on the proof for the 
first incompleteness theorem which he interpreted as 
disproving a central tenet of the Vienna Circle, the very tenet 
that had caused them to append "logical" to the Machian 
viewpoint of positivism. He had used mathematical logic, 
beloved of the positivists, to wreak havoc on the positivist 
antimetaphysical position. Yet here he was, in 1974, still 
having to explain, in missives that he never mailed, that he 
was not a positivist, that the intended import of his 
celebrated theorems had been, in fact, to prove the 
positivists wrong. The positivists had 
18 In the pages referenced Godel forthrightly sets out his Platonist 
conviction, using the undecidability of Cantor's continuum hypothesis (that 
there is no set that is both larger than the set of natural numbers and smaller 
than the set of real numbers), a mathematical result which he helped to 
prove, as provocation: "For if the meanings of the primitive terms of set 
theory ... are accepted as sound, it follows that the set-theoretical concepts 
and theorems describe some well-determined reality, in which Cantor's 
conjecture must be either true or false. Hence its undecidability from the 
axioms being assumed today can only mean that these axioms do not 
contain a complete description of that reality. Such a belief is by no means 
chimerical, since it is possible to point out ways in which the decision of a 
question, which is undecidable from the usual axioms, might nevertheless be 
obtained." 

Incompleteness 
113 
endorsed the Sophist's man-measurement of truth. Godel had 
sought to vindicate the Sophist's implacable antagonist, Plato. 
Godel, unlike his friend Einstein, did not have a well-
developed sense of the ironic, which is, all things considered, 
a shame. 
Godel and Wittgenstein 
It is hard to imagine two more disparate personalities. 
Wittgenstein and Godel were both geniuses, both tortured 
geniuses, in fact. But how they presented that tormented genius 
to the world could not have been more starkly different. 
Wittgenstein had decided views on the nature and duties 
and privileges of genius. He had once spoken to Russell about 
Beethoven: 
[A] friend described going to Beethoven's door and hearing 
him "cursing, howling, and singing" over his new fugue; after 
a whole hour Beethoven at last came to the door, looking as 
if he had been fighting the devil, and having eaten nothing 
for 36 hours because his cook and parlour-maid had been 
driven away from his rage. That's the sort of man to be. 
And Wittgenstein was that sort of man, acting out the high 
drama of genius, so that Russell, when he was still enthralled, 
described him to Lady Ottoline as "... perhaps the most 
perfect example I have ever known of genius as traditionally 
conceived, passionate, profound, intense, and dominating." 
He was the sort of genius to attract disciples so fanatical they 
took to wearing their shirts unbuttoned at the top as he did and 
aping his tics and mannerisms, such as clapping their hands to 
their foreheads when struck by a philosophical insight or its 

ii4 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
lack. They may have disagreed with each other on the correct 
interpretation of Wittgenstein, but agreed that the correct 
interpretation, if only it could be attained, would almost of 
necessity be true. (This conviction persists still in significant 
pockets of Anglo-American philosophy.) Though he more 
pronounced than argued, still the pronouncements present 
themselves, singly and in configuration with one another, with 
the logical austerity craved by rigor-seeking thinkers. 
This austerity attached to his person as well, as if the purity 
of formal logic had been embodied in the man, its standards 
of absolute truth imposed on human behavior. An anecdote 
chosen almost at random (there are so many), this one told by 
Fania Pascal who had known him in Cambridge in the 1930s, 
bears this out: 
I had my tonsils out and was in the Evelyn Nursing Home 
feeling sorry for myself. Wittgenstein called. I croaked: I feel 
just like a dog that has been run over. He was disgusted: "You 
don't know what a dog that has been run over feels like." 
Just as standards of mathematics have made nonmathe-
maticians feel pitifully inadequate in comparison, so the 
mathematically severe behavioral standards Wittgenstein 
seemed to demand could easily make others feel fraudulent. 
Wittgenstein seemed, demonstrably, the real thing. His was 
genius turning itself inside out, with all the Sturm und Drang 
of supremely heightened consciousness exposed, and it was a 
sight before which a thinker, even a logical positivist, might be 
expected to swoon. 
In contrast to Wittgenstein's dramatic display of genius—his 
Cambridge students recalled that you could see the suffering of 
his thinking—we have Godel, indicating with slight motions of 

Incompleteness 
115 
his head when he agrees, disagrees, is skeptical. His hermetically 
sealed genius allowing next to nothing of the Sturm und Drang 
of its heightened consciousness to show, Godel breathed not a 
word of his fundamental dissent from the beliefs of the Vienna 
Circle until he had a rigorous mathematical proof to do all his 
talking for him, until he had mathematical theorems prolix 
enough to speak out his metaphysical convictions. 
It is intriguing to try to imagine the young Godel, 
observing his Wittgenstein-bedazzled elders, perhaps more 
than a little aggrieved or disapproving—not only of the 
views but also of the very style of the genius so at odds with 
his own, genius making such a fuss about itself, demanding 
that others, too, participate in the fuss. One wonders (almost 
blasphemously) whether there might not have been a bit of 
human emotion spurring the silent dissenter on to find a 
conclusive refutation, to confront the "divine inspiration" of 
the philosopher with a higher authority: mathematics. 
Such a motivation, however collateral, is conjectural, of 
course, given the opacity of Godel's inner life. And we have 
Godei's word that Wittgenstein had not influenced his work 
in mathematical logic at all. In one of the two drafts of the 
unsent reply to the sociologist Grandjean's questionnaire, in 
answer to the question, "Are there any influences to which you 
attribute special significance in the development of your 
philosophy?", after Godel had credited Professor Gomperz,19 
he 
19 In the alternative set of answers to the questionnaire, he answered 
the same question, "Are there any influences to which you attribute special 
significance in the development of your philosophy?" by including the 
"math[ematical lectures] by Phil. Furtwanger" as well as "philosophical] 
lectures (introductory) of Gomp[erz]." 

n6 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
gratuitously remarked on whom, specifically, had not 
influenced his work: "Wittg[enstein]'s views on the 
phil[osophy] of math had no influence] on my work nor did 
the interest of the Vienna Circle in that subj [ect] start with 
Wittgenstein] (but rather went back to Prof. Hans Hahn)." 
Of course influence, in a positive sense, is quite different 
from the sort of murkier incentive I am speculating about. And 
his adding the gratuitous disclaimer concerning Wittgenstein is 
telling, especially in so retentive a personality, of at least a 
retrospective resentment. The influence of the charismatic 
philosopher on the members of the Vienna Circle may have 
irked him, amused him (more doubtful), even helped to inspire 
him in the direction of his proof: we cannot really know. But 
the older Godel did leave behind, in the written record, some 
few scant hints of exasperated pique toward Wittgenstein. 
For example, in 1971, mathematician Kenneth Blackwell 
pointed out to Godel that there was a passage in Russell's 
Autobiography in which Godel is mentioned, with various 
inaccuracies (including his Jewish origins), as well as a rather 
facile and sarcastic reference to Godel's Platonism: 
Godel turned out to be an unadulterated Platonist, and 
apparently believed that an eternal "not" was laid up in 
heaven, where virtuous logicians might hope to meet it 
hereafter. 
Godel drafted a letter, which of course still lies unposted in 
the Nachlass, responding point by point to Russell's inaccuracies 
on the topic of Godel [including his alleged Jewishness: "I have 
to say first for the sake of truth that I am not a Jew (even though 
I don't think this question is of any importance)"] and ending: 

Incompleteness 
117 
Concerning my "unadulterated" Platonism, it is no more 
"unadulterated" than Russell's own in 1921, when in the 
Introduction [to Mathematical Philosophy, first published in 
1919, p. 169] he said " [Logic is concerned with the real world 
just as truly as zoology, though with its more abstract and 
general features]." At that time evidently Russell had met the 
"not" even in this world, but later on under the influence of 
Wittgenstein he chose to overlook it. 
Coming from Godel, these are pointed words, which is of 
course why they still languish in a folder in Firestone Library. 
Some more decades-smoldering resentment was allowed to 
escape—this 
time 
actually 
sent 
off—when 
his 
old 
acquaintance from the Vienna days, Karl Menger, pointed out 
to him some passages in Wittgenstein's posthumously 
published Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics, in 
which Godel is mentioned. Writes Menger: 
In the early 1970's I began writing a book on my 
recollections of the Schlick Circle. For the sake of 
completeness, I looked for ideas about Godel published by 
Wittgenstein. A few were in the latter's book Remarks on the 
Foundations of Mathematics, which appeared in 1956. 
Aside from noncommittal remarks in Part 5, the Appendix I 
of Part I ... contains a discussion of the problem-—
without, however, any adequate appreciation of Godel's 
work. In fact, Wittgenstein goes so far astray as to say that 
the only use of undecidability proofs is for "logische 
Kunststucken" [little logical articiflces or conjuring tricks]. 
After Menger pointed out the passages to Godel, Godel 
responded to Menger: 

u8 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
As far as my theorems about undecidable propositions are 
concerned, it is indeed clear from the passage that you cite 
that Wittgenstein did not understand it (or that he 
pretended not to understand it). He interprets it as a kind 
of logical paradox, while in fact it is just the opposite, 
namely a mathematical theorem within an absolutely 
uncontro-versial part of mathematics (fmitary number 
theory or combinatorics). Incidentally, the whole passage 
you cite seems nonsense to me. See e.g. the "superstitious 
fear of mathematicians" of contradiction.20 
These decidedly irked responses to Wittgenstein come after 
Wittgenstein's 
own 
reaction 
to 
Godel's 
famous 
incompleteness results; and the nature of Wittgenstein's 
reaction was such as to prompt umbrage even if none had 
existed before. Wittgenstein never came to accept that Godel 
had, through strict mathematics, achieved a result with 
metamathematical implications. That there could be a 
mathematical result with metamathematical implications 
went 
against 
Wittgenstein's 
conception 
of 
language, 
knowledge, philosophy, everything. The reticent logician's 
historically audacious ambitions were, according to the 
Wittgensteinian point of view, unrealizable in principle. No 
wonder 
the 
anything-but-reticent 
philosopher 
would 
dismiss Godel's theorems with the belittling 
20 Godel is here citing a parenthetical remark in passage I, 17: "Die 
aberglaubische Angst und Verehrung der Mathematiker von dem 
Widerspruch: The superstitious fear and awe of mathematicians in the face 
of contradiction." Godel also wrote to Abraham Robinson, a young 
mathematical logician of whom Godel thought very highly, that 
Wittgenstein's comments on his proof constitute a "completely trivial and 
uninteresting misinterpretation" of his results. 

Incompleteness 
119 
phrase "logische Kunststucken," a dismissal that many mathe-
matians have found, to this day, galling in the extreme, as 
apparently Godel himself did. (Nary a mathematician I have 
spoken with has a good word to say about Wittgenstein. One 
articulately incensed mathematician I know characterized 
Wittgenstein's famous proposition 7: Whereof we cannot speak 
we must remain silent as "accomplishing the difficult task of 
being at once portentous and vacuous." The logician Georg 
Kreisl, who as a student worked with Wittgenstein and later 
knew Godel, wrote: "Wittgenstein's views on mathematical 
logic are not worth much, because he knew very little and 
what he knew was confined to the Frege-Russell line of 
goods." Kreisl also decried the transformative influence 
Wittgenstein had had on students, including himself.) 
Yet at a deeper level than even the foundations of 
mathematics, there was more affinity between the early 
Wittgenstein's views and Godel's result than would be 
apparent from the Vienna Circle's (mis)understanding of 
Wittgenstein. Wittgenstein really was no positivist, as he 
insistently protested; and his proposition 7 of the Tractatus 
amounts to a version of his own incompleteness thesis. Of 
course, to fully appreciate both the substance of the 
disagreement and affinity between Wittgenstein and Godel, it 
is necessary to understand what Godel actually did. So we 
will come back to the thorny relationship between 
Wittgenstein and Godel later, after the proofs of the 
incompleteness theorems are presented. 
In any case, though Wittgenstein may have loomed large in 
the circle of men among whom Godel found himself in his 
fervently formative years, how seriously the young logician 
and confirmed Platonist ever took Wittgenstein is, in the end, 
unknowable. Beyond Wittgenstein towered the figure of the 

120 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
most influential mathematician of the day, David Hilbert, a 
figure Godel could not possibly dismiss as mathematically 
inadequate. Like Wittgenstein's, Hilbert's views on the nature 
of mathematics could not have been more incompatible with 
the mathematical result that the young Godel was soon to 
spring on an unsuspecting world. 

II  
Hilbert and the Formalists 
A Mathematician's Intuition 
e return to the subject of the tantalizing 
uniqueness of mathematics, pursuing its truth 
through a priori reason, establishing its 
conclusions so firmly that no empirical discoveries as to the 
nature of the world can overturn them. 
Since the earliest days of the ancient Greeks, mathematical 
knowledge has seemed to be on the one hand the least 
problematic area of human knowledge, in fact the very 
model toward which all knowledge ought to aspire: certain 
and unassailable, in short, proved. No wonder that 
epistemological Utopians, from Plato onward, have urged 
that the standards and methods of mathematics ought to be 
applied, insofar as is possible, to all of our attempts to know. 
Yet, on the other hand, mathematical knowledge has 
seemed, 
to 
darker-souled 
epistemologists, 
highly 
problematic, its very certainty, which emboldens the 
Utopians, making it suspect in warier eyes. How can any 
knowledge be certain and unassailable, in short: proved? 
Perhaps, some 
W 

122 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
epistemologists of the darker cast argue, it is because 
mathematical knowledge is not really knowledge at all; 
perhaps it is simply a game, played by stipulated rules, 
telling us nothing about anything. "There is no there, there," 
Gertrude Stein famously said of her birthplace, Oakland, 
California. So it is with mathematics, at least according to 
some. 
So the question is: Whence certainty? What is our source for 
mathematical certainty? The bedrock of empirical knowledge 
consists of sense perceptions: what I am directly given to 
know—or at least to think—of the external world through my 
senses of sight and hearing and touch and taste and smell. Sense 
perception allows us to make contact with what's out there in 
physical reality. What is the bedrock of mathematical 
knowledge? Is there something like sense perception in 
mathematics? Do mathematical intuitions constitute this 
bedrock? Is our faculty for intuition the means for making 
contact with what's out there in mathematical reality? Or is 
there just no "there"? 
Mathematical proofs must start from somewhere. Often 
proofs start with conclusions from other proofs and then deduce 
further conclusions from these. But not everything can be 
proved, otherwise how can we get off the ground? There must 
be, in mathematics just as in empirical knowledge, the "given." 
Given to us through what means? Mathematical intuition is 
often thought of as the a priori analogue to sensory perception. 
Intuitions. They are a tricky business, and not only in 
mathematics. An intuition is supposed to be something that 
we just know, in and of itself, not on the basis of knowing 
something else. (Sometimes, of course, the word is used in a 
weaker way, conveying the sense of having a vague feeling, 
lacking in any certainty. But it is in the stronger sense that it 
functions in epistemological debates.) Obviously intuitions— 

Incompleteness 
123 
or, more precisely, claims to intuitions—vary greatly among 
people; there are places on the planet right now where people 
are slaughtering one another because they make claims to 
fundamentally differing intuitions, patently nonmathemati-
cal. All genuine intuitions are (tautologously) true (tautolo-
gously, because we would not call them "genuine" unless they 
were true). But not all putative intuitions are genuine 
intuitions; and how is one to tell when one is in possession of 
the genuine article? Murky motivations—to believe, for 
example, propositions that would, if true, conduce to one's 
own self-importance, notoriously propositions asserting 
the innate superiority of one's own kind—not only abound 
but also tend to hide themselves. The resulting beliefs can 
feel intuitively obvious precisely because we are not 
prepared to face their real and suspect source in our own 
personal situations and egos. 
You might think that in mathematics—perched on its 
topmost turret of Reine Vernunft, far from the madding 
human scene below—-murky motives for beliefs are at a 
minimum. Still, even in mathematics we can get suckered. 
Accidental features can insinuate themselves into our most 
pristine 
mathematical 
reasoning, 
presenting 
us 
with 
propositions that seem intuitively obvious when they are not 
obvious at all—maybe not even true at all. 
To illustrate how our "intuitions" can insidiously lead us 
astray, consider the frequent use of sketches and diagrams to 
try to make our mathematical abstractions more concrete. 
These concretizations are almost unavoidable, even to the most 
mathematically acute minds. For example, David Hilbert, who 
as we will soon see tried as hard as anyone to impose the 
strictest rules on mathematics, wrote: 

124 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
So the geometrical figures are signs or mnemonic symbols of 
space intuition and are used as such by all mathematicians. 
Who does not always use along with the double inequality 
a > b > c the picture of three points following one another 
on a straight line as the geometrical picture of the idea 
"between"? Who does not make use of drawings of segments 
and rectangles enclosed in one another, when it is required to 
prove with perfect rigor a difficult theorem on the continuity 
of functions or the existence of points of condensation? Who 
could dispense with the figure of the triangle, the circle with 
its center, or with the cross of three perpendicular axes? 
Given that even the most rigorous of mathematicians rely on 
these aids to pure reason, it can happen that some entirely 
accidental feature of our sketch gets appealed to in the proof; 
or that the sketches make it appear that something is just 
plain obvious when it's not. 
Say, for example, you want to prove that the base angles of 
an isosceles triangle are equal, and by appealing to Sketch 1 
below this seems simply obvious, not requiring a proof. Or 
say you want to prove that all the angles of triangles are acute 
(less than 90 degrees) and because you have this "truth" in 
mind you only draw sketches of triangles (Sketch 2) that 
conform to it. Those are just the only triangles that occur to 
you. 
In other fields of thought as well-—for example, and 
notoriously, ethics—people can have the illusion of 
"intuitions." In ethics these illusory intuitions can create a great 
deal of havoc in the real world. Einstein and Godel were on that 
quiet little back road in Princeton precisely because it seemed 
so intuitively obvious to a great many people in Einstein's 
Germany and Godel's Austria that the right thing to do was 
to purify the 

Incompleteness 
125 
Sketch 1 
 

126 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
Aryan nations of the world of their non-Aryan elements. 
Mathematics is not the only area where things can seem 
intuitively obvious and be quite, quite false. But mathematics 
has seemed to be unique because it, and it alone, seems to offer 
a method for truth-purification: the axiomatic system. No 
wonder that a rationalist like the seventeenth century's 
Spinoza, whose Portuguese-Jewish family was living in 
Amsterdam for reasons similar to those that had brought 
Einstein and Godel to Princeton, had wanted to appropriate the 
axiomatic methods of mathematics and apply it to human ethics. 
The desire to universalize the truth-purifying rigor of the 
mathematical method is precisely what the epistemological 
movement known as rationalism is all about. But the prior 
question that must be addressed, before one can begin to think 
about the possibility of generalizing the mathematical method, 
is: what exactly is the axiomatic system, and how does it attain 
its enviable rigor? 
The idea behind the axiomatic (or "axiomatized"—I'll use 
the two terms interchangeably) system is that the manifold 
truths of some particular branch of mathematics, say 
geometry or arithmetic, can be organized into axioms, rules of 
inference, and theorems. The axioms are the basic truths of 
the system, intuitively obvious. We understand what they 
mean and that appears sufficient for knowing that they are 
true. They do not require any proof beyond this. We then 
use the truth-preserving rules of inference1 to obtain other, 
nonobvi-ous truths, the theorems, which flow from these 
givens. 
1 These rules of inference are perfect laws of truth-inheritance. The truth 
that belongs to the ancestors (the axioms) cannot help but be bequeathed to 
the descendents (the theorems). So, if you know that all x's are P's, and you 
know that some individual, i, is an x, then, by the rule of inference known as 

Incompleteness 
127 
For example, consider arithmetic, the simplest branch of 
all mathematics. Arithmetic concerns the structure of the 
natural numbers—again, the regular old counting numbers 
together with 0—and the relationships between them as given 
by the operations of addition, multiplication, and the 
successor relation, which takes you from any number n to the 
number immediately following it in the natural order (i.e., n + 
1). All other arithmetical operations, such as subtraction and 
division, can be defined in terms of these three. 
In 1889 Giuseppe Peano (1858-1932) reduced arithmetic 
to five axioms. Here are the first three: 0 is a number. The 
successor of any number is a number. No two numbers have 
the same successor. All three appear trivial, which is exactly 
how we want our axioms. The axioms are so trivial that we 
can assume that they are true without proving them, with all 
else following from them, like a huge twisting plant growing 
out of a simple seed. If we want the whole luxuriant growth 
to be certain then we want there to be no question possible 
about the truth of the axioms—and this "no question 
possible" is basically what we mean by "intuitively obvious" 
or "given" or "trivial" or "self-evident." 
The theorems of an axiomatic system, on the other hand, 
are only accepted as true once they are proved, derived from 
the axioms or derived from other theorems, using truth-
preserving rules of inference. Think of it this way, if you care 
to: Axioms are like the classic first-borns in families: adored 
sim- 
"universal instantiation," you know that i is a P. For example, say you know 
for certain that all mathematicians do their greatest work before the age of 
40, and you also know that Godel was a mathematician, then you also know 
that Godel did his greatest work before the age of 40. 

128 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
ply for being. Theorems are the children that come after, those 
who have to prove themselves worthy to gain acceptance. 
(First-borns can ignore the analogy. To me, a third-born, the 
metaphor has a certain appeal.) 
So in an axiomatic system (first devised by the ancient 
Greeks, in particular, Euclid), we begin with a few (the fewer 
the better) axioms, which are supposed to be intuitively 
obvious, and then proceed onward to prove whatever follows 
from these axioms. (The fewer the better, because we want to 
keep our appeals to intuition to a minimum to maximize 
certainty.) In place of a libertarian policy of "let's-just-
depend-on-the-good-intentions- 
(intuitions) 
-of-citizens- 
(mathematicians) -to-do-the-right-thing," the axiomatic 
system imposes some strict governmental controls. In place 
of random appeals to intuitions, there is to be general 
consensus on what is directly given, the bedrock, with 
everything else subjected to systematic rule-regulation. You 
can think of axiomatization as sort of "big government 
mathematics." The motive behind the axiomatic system is to 
maximize certainty by minimizing appeals to intuitions, 
restricting them to the few ineliminable axioms. But the latter 
are crucial because, after all, we do have to start somewhere. 
For much of the history of Western thought, at least since 
the time of Euclid, the axiomatized system was generally 
deemed to represent mathematics—and thus knowledge 
itself—in its most perfect form. Gottlob Frege, who further 
simplified Peano's axiomatic system for arithmetic by 
deriving Peano's five axioms from a single axiom, said: "In 
mathematics we must always strive after a system that is 
complete in itself." It is this system-building that accounts, 
Frege said, for the unique certainty of mathematics and "no 
science can be 

Incompleteness 
129 
so enveloped in obscurity as mathematics, if it fails to 
construct a system." 
The drive for limiting our intuitions went even further. 
The aim became to eliminate intuitions altogether. This aim is 
what brings us, at long last, to the notion of a formal system. A 
formal system is an axiomatic system divested of all appeals to 
intuition. 
Why take the drastic step of intuition-divestment? Well, 
intuitions, as we said before, are a tricky business. Though 
genuine intuitions are true, how can we tell when we are in 
possession of the genuine article? Maybe we can't. Maybe the 
feel, the urgent cogency that compels belief, is exactly the 
same whether the intuition is for real or is not. Then what 
good is the appeal to intuition? So, all things being equal, it 
would seem a good thing to rid ourselves of these appeals, 
especially when pursuing the "severest of all disciplines." 
In fact, all things were not equal, and the inequality was such 
as to give added impetus to the drive to ruthlessly eliminate 
intuitions from mathematics. The nineteenth century gave us 
mathematical developments that subverted our confidence in 
those intuitively obvious givens of our axiomatic systems. 
(Firstborns can go terribly wrong.) The most dramatic of these 
undermining events was the discovery of non-Euclidean 
geometry. This unanticipated mathematical development 
demonstrated that one of the givens of Euclid's geometry, the 
notorious parallels postulate, is not so axiomatic after all; in fact 
it is possible to construct self-consistent geometries in which it 
isn't even true!2 Then set theory, too, delivered us some nasty 
news about 
2 The fifth of Euclid's five postulates was the notorious parallels 
postulate, which states that through any point outside a line, only a single 
line can 

130 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
our putative intuitions. The givens of set theory, again so 
intuitively obvious, lead to the formation of such paradox-
infected sets as the set of all sets that are not members of 
themselves. 
Clearly the bedrock consisting of our mathematical 
intuitions was not much of a bedrock after all. If it was 
possible to 
be drawn parallel to the original line. Euclid himself wasn't all that happy 
with this last postulate, sensing how different it was from the others, with its 
covert reference to infinity, and he had avoided using it in his derivations 
whenever he could. Why does the parallels postulate invoke infinity? Two 
lines are parallel if and only if they'll never intersect. But if you take a finite 
region of space then you can draw more than one line through a point that 
will be parallel (i.e., won't intersect) the line. So the parallels postulate 
makes implicit reference to infinity, and we are always rightly suspicious of 
our intuitions about infinity. Euclid's suspicion about this one element of 
his system (his masterpiece was entitled The Elements) was duplicated down 
through the ages, with various mathematicians attempting to convert the 
problematic axiom into a theorem by deriving it from the other four 
axioms. Then, in the nineteenth century, mathematicians changed their 
tactics, attempting to show that the fifth postulate followed from the other 
four indirectly: by taking the four and the negation of the fifth and seeing 
whether a contradiction could be derived. Instead of a contradiction, an 
entirely new 
and 
self-consistent 
geometry 
was 
derived! Three 
mathematicians independently derived non-Euclidean geometry: the 
incomparable Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777-1855), known as "the prince of 
mathematicians"; Nicolai Ivanovich Lobachevsky (1792-1856); and the 
young Janos Bolyai (1802-1860), who on stumbling on this new 
mathematical world in 1823 wrote to his father, Farkas Bolyai, himself a 
mathematician and a friend of Gauss, "I have discovered things so 
wonderful that I was astounded. . . . Out of nothing I have created a 
strange new world." When Gauss was shown the results, he wrote, "I regard 
this young geometer Bolyai as a genius of the first order," but he had to 
inform the young genius that he was not the first to derive such a strange new 
world. He himself had done so, but had suppressed the results because he 
felt them to be too controversial. 

Incompleteness 
131 
purge our axiomatic systems of appeals to intuitions 
altogether then that was the way to go. 
The elimination of intuitions is accomplished by draining 
the axiomatic system of all meanings, except those that can be 
defined in terms of the stipulated rules of the system. The rules, 
in terms of which everything else is defined, make no claim to 
being anything other than stipulated. They make no pretense of 
being descriptive of some objective reality, of independent 
objects like numbers and sets. A formal system is precisely what 
we are left with after this meaning-drainage. This deprivation 
constitutes further "governmental controls," the most stringent 
that mathematicians could think of, so that no appeals to 
intuition come sneaking in. You can think of it as the 
Communist takeover of mathematics, abolishing private 
property (meanings), everything taken over by public rules. 
A formal system, then, is an axiomatic system—with its 
primitive givens (the axioms), its rules of inference, and its 
proved theorems—except that instead of being constructed of 
meaningful symbols—such as terms referring to the number 0 
or to the successor function—it is constructed entirely of 
meaningless signs, marks on paper whose only significance is 
defined in terms of the relations of each to one another as set 
forth by the rules. While pre-purged axiomatic systems were 
understood as being about, say, numbers (arithmetic) or sets 
(set theory) or space (geometry), a formal system is an 
axiomatic system that is not, in itself, about anything. We don't 
have to appeal to our intuitions about numbers or sets or space 
in laying down the givens of the formal system. A formal 
system is constituted of stipulated rules: that specify the 
symbols ("alphabet") of the system; that tell us how we may 
combine the symbols with one another to produce 
grammatical config- 

132 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
urations (wffs); and that tell us how we may proceed to deduce 
wffs from other wffs (the rules of inference). 
The formalization of axiomatic systems was meant to offer 
the highest standard of certainty so that we don't have to 
depend on our intuitions as to what is mathematically 
obvious and what is not. It was meant to obviate our 
reliance on mathematical intuition altogether, to turn our 
mathematical 
activity 
into 
processes 
so 
completely 
determined by clearly specified rules as to be purely 
mechanical, requiring no imagination or ingenuity, not even a 
grasp as to what the symbols mean. To follow the rules of a 
formal system—and a formal system consists of nothing but 
rules—is to engage in a combinatorial activity that, consisting 
purely of recursive functions (roughly speaking, functions 
that tell you how to arrive at a result by taking the result of 
another recursive function, or of a really simple basic 
function3), could be programmed into a computer, that is, that 
is computable. This activity amounts to figuring things out by 
using an algorithm,4 a sequence of operations that tells you 
what to do at each step, depending on what the outcome of 
the previous step was. 
As the previous paragraph aimed to indicate, a whole 
family of interrelated mathematical concepts makes its 
appearance with the move toward formalization. The 
concepts of a mechanical or an effective procedure, of 
recursive and computable functions, of combinatorial 
processes and of an algo- 
3 The very fruitful mathematical concept of a recursive function was 
first defined by Godel in his proof of the first incompleteness theorem. 
4 The word comes from the name of the ninth-century Persian mathe 
matician Abu Ja'far Mohammad ibn Musa al-Khowasizm, who wrote an 
important mathematical book in about AD 825 that was called Kitab aljabr 
w'al-muqabala. We also derive our word "algebra" from the title of his book. 

Incompleteness 
133 
rithm: this family of concepts all mean pretty much the same 
thing, revolving around the idea of rules that are applied to 
the results of prior applications of rules, all with no regard to 
any meanings except for what can be captured in the rules 
themselves. 
Intuition can get no dangerous foothold in a formal system. 
Intuitions tell us what to think about actual things—about 
space, about numbers, about sets. We don't have intuitions 
about made-up, meaningless symbols and the rigid rules we 
have set down for manipulating these. We don't need them. 
Everything our a priori reason needs to do in a formal system is 
specified by the rules, which is why the idea of a formal system 
is so closely connected with the idea of the computer, with what 
it is that computers can do and how it is that they do it. This is 
why the concept of the computable is part of the tangle of 
concepts surrounding the notion of formal systems. 
Formal systems, even if their implications are sufficiently 
convoluted so that real mathematical cunning is required to 
get to them, have a transparency that precludes intuition. 
Intuition is (reputedly) a way of trying to circumnavigate the 
essential opacity of actual things, a way of making contact 
with them, and it's a way that had proved itself to be 
eminently unreliable in mathematics just as elsewhere. A 
mathematics done formally is a mathematics purged of any 
"given" truths—those claiming an unquestionable source in 
the "true nature of things," in and of themselves. 
If it could be shown that logically consistent formal 
systems are adequate for proving all the truths of 
mathematics, then we would have successfully banished 
intuitions from mathematics. (The proviso of "logically 
consistent" is of course necessary, since from inconsistent 
systems one can 

134 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
prove anything at all.) We would have shown, too, that 
mathematics should not be considered as inherently about 
anything. By banishing intuitions we would be dissolving 
away the putative objects of mathematical descriptions. We 
would be showing mathematics not to be descriptive at all. 
The assertion of the possibility and desirability of banishing 
intuitions by showing formal systems to be entirely adequate 
to the business of mathematics is the metamathematical view 
known as formalism. 
In formalism's retelling, mathematics becomes chess raised 
to a higher order of intricacy. There is, we can all agree, no 
objective chess reality that the system of chess captures. The 
stipulated rules constitute the whole truth of chess. Similarly, 
according to formalism, the stipulated rules constitute the 
whole truth of mathematics. We win in mathematics by 
proving theorems—that is, by showing some uninterpreted 
string of symbols to follow from other uninterpreted strings of 
symbols, using the agreed-upon rules of inference. There is 
no external truth against which mathematics has to measure 
itself. 
Godel's 
first 
incompleteness 
theorem 
states 
the 
incompleteness of any formal system rich enough to express 
arithmetic. So Godel's conclusion, you might suspect, has 
something to say about the feasibility (or lack thereof) of 
eliminating all intuitions from mathematics. The most 
straightforward way of understanding intuitions is that they 
are given to us by the nature of things; again intuition is 
seen as the a priori analogue to sense perception, a direct 
form of apprehension. So Godel's conclusion, in having 
something to say about the feasibility (or lack thereof) of 
eliminating all appeals to intuitions from mathematics might 
also have a thing or two to say 

Incompleteness 
135 
about the actual existence of mathematical objects, like 
numbers and sets. In other words, the adequacy of formal 
systems—their consistency and completeness—is linked 
with the question of the ultimate eliminability of intuitions, 
which is linked with the question of the ultimate eliminability 
of a mathematical reality, which is the defining question of 
mathematical realism, or Platonism. It is because of these 
linkages that Godel's conclusions about the limits of formal 
systems have so much to say. This is how they got to be the 
most verbose theorems in the history of mathematics and 
how they were understood, at least by their author, to assert 
the meta-mathematical position to which he had given his 
heart and soul. The young student had found a proof for a 
theorem, the first incompleteness theorem, that had the rigor 
of mathematics and the reach of philosophy. 
Mathematical verbosity, as opposed to verbosity of any 
other sort, could not have better suited the personal 
eccentricities of Kurt Godel, a man who had so much to say 
on the nature of mathematical truth and knowledge and 
certainty, but wanted to be able to say it using only the 
rigorous methodology of mathematics. With a proof in 
hand, he would not have to involve himself in the sorts of 
combative human conversations he regarded with distaste, 
maybe even with horror. There never was a man, I'll wager, 
who combined so much conviction with so little inclination to 
argue his convictions by the normal means given to us, viz. 
human speech. 
The irony of course is that while his theorems were 
accepted as of paramount importance, others did not always 
hear what he was attempting to say in them. They heard— 
and continue to hear—the voice of the Vienna Circle or of 

136 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
existentialism or postmodernism or of any other of the 
various fashionable outlooks of the twentieth century. They 
heard everything except what Godel was trying to say. 
Math Goes Formal 
The leading advocate of formalism was David Hilbert, who was 
the most important mathematician of his day. "Mathematics," 
wrote Hilbert, "is a game played according to certain simple 
rules with meaningless marks on paper." His proposal to 
formalize one branch of mathematics after the other, 
starting with the most basic branch of all, arithmetic, came 
to be called the Hilbert program. The successful completion 
of the Hilbert program would offer significant vindication of 
formalism, explaining the sui generis aprioricity of 
mathematics as derivative from the stipulation of rules. 
Mathematicians, according to formalism, are not in the 
business of discovering descriptive truths, whether of the real 
world of things in physical space or the trans-empirical world 
of numbers and sets. They were never really meant to discover, 
for example, how many lines parallel to a given line can run 
through a given point in space that isn't on that line. They are 
simply in the business of manipulating the mechanical rules of 
self-enclosed formal systems that are complex enough to test 
the deductive skills of mathematicians. 
In spirit Hilbert's formalism was close to the antimystery 
attitudes of the Vienna Circle, and so the logical positivists 
very naturally embraced it, as Feigl tell us: 
With the formalists {e.g. Hilbert) we would consider 
mathematical proofs as procedures that start with a given set 
of 

Incompleteness 
137 
sign combinations (premises, postulates) and according to 
rules of inference (transformation rules) lead to the 
derivation of a conclusion. 
Formalism confirms, at least in the sphere of mathematics, 
what the positivists had declared in their manifesto: viz. that 
man is the measure of all things. We create our formal systems 
and all of mathematics follows. 
For centuries, Utopian epistemologists, like Descartes and 
Leibniz, had been inspired by the unique certainty and apri-
oricity of mathematics and had harbored dreams of 
extending those very features throughout the cognitive 
realm, obviating recourse to empirical evidence, which can 
give one, at best, mere probability. The special features of 
mathematical truth had led otherwise sober men, going back 
all the way to Plato, to near-mystical celebrations of its 
otherworldly reach. But now, with formalism, the nature of 
math's aprioricity and certainty were claimed to derive from 
nothing more mystical than the stipulated mechanical rules 
of meaningless formal systems, replicable by the soon-to-be-
invented electronic gadgetry. With the success of Hilbert's 
program, the foundations of mathematics would at last be 
laid cleared, the murkiness that had encouraged rationalist 
giddiness dispelled. 
In 1899, David Hilbert published Grundlagenen der 
Geometrie, or Foundations of Geometry, said to have been the 
most influential work in geometry since Euclid's. Its 
importance reached far beyond geometry. He had shown 
that geometry could be captured in a formal system—
conditional, that is, upon arithmetic's being formalized, since 
geometry, like all branches of mathematics, presumes 
the truths of 

138 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
arithmetic. (In this sense, arithmetic is the most basic of all 
mathematical systems.) 
In 1900, a year after he had published his Grandlagen der 
Geometric Hilbert gave the keynote address at the Second 
International Congress of Mathematicians, held that year in 
Paris. The date, inaugurating a new century, was important. 
In the talk, called "Mathematical Problems," Hilbert delegated 
himself the task of determining what the next century would 
bring by way of mathematical achievement. He laid out 10 
problems that he considered the most important to solve. 
In his introduction, which has the distinct tone of a pre-
game pep talk, Hilbert urges on his "team" of mathematicians 
with the assurance that no matter how difficult a particular 
problem may seem, victory is inevitable: 
This conviction of the solvability of every mathematical 
problem is a powerful incentive to the worker. We hear 
within us the perpetual call: There is the problem. Seek its 
solution. You can find it by pure reason, for in mathematics 
there is no ignorabimus. 
Hilbert describes this as a conviction "which every 
mathematician shares, but which no one has as yet 
supported by a proof." Then he stated the 10 problems. 
It is of some interest that Godel, even though a logician— 
merely a logician, according to the mathematical biases that 
persisted far into his own day (and dim echoes of which still 
sound today)—contributed enormously to the first two 
problems, as well as to the tenth, that Hilbert, the 
establishment figure in mathematics, determined as the 
most outstanding problems to be solved. 

Incompleteness 
139 
The first of these is the problem revolving around Cantor's 
continuum 
hypothesis. 
What 
is 
Cantor's 
continuum 
hypothesis? The great nineteenth-century mathematician 
Georg Cantor had proved that (roughly speaking) there are 
more real numbers than there are natural numbers, even 
though there are an infinite number of both. Cantor 
showed, by means of an elegant argument called the 
"diagonal argument," that in the infinite pairing of one 
natural number with one real number, every natural number 
will be paired with a real number, but some real number or 
other will forever be left out. The set of real numbers is thus 
of a higher ordinality (roughly speaking, there are more of 
them) than the set of natural numbers. Cantor hypothesized 
that there is no infinite set that intervenes between the set of 
natural numbers and the set of real numbers; that is, there is 
no set that has a higher ordinality than the natural numbers 
and a lower ordinality than the real numbers. This is 
Cantor's continuum hypothesis and Hilbert's first problem 
was to prove Cantor's continuum hypothesis true. Godel 
was to contribute to the solution to this problem, though 
not in a way that Hilbert welcomed. Godel, together with 
Paul Cohen, proved that the continuum hypothesis can be 
proved neither true nor false within current set theory. In 
other words, the status of the continuum hypothesis is 
what Hilbert claimed there could not be: an ignoramibus—
a claim that can neither be confirmed nor discredited, a 
claim about which we remain ignorant. 
But it is Hilbert's second problem which is of particular 
concern to us. Here, too, Godel's solution of this problem 
could not have been less welcome to Hilbert. 

140 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
Hilbert's Second Problem: 
The Consistency of Arithmetic (The Most 
Important Proof That Wasn't to Be) 
Hilbert's second problem was to prove the consistency of the 
axioms of arithmetic. For a system to be consistent means 
that it does not yield any logical contradictions. 
The urgency of the problem of consistency was a direct 
result of the veer toward formalism. When axioms were 
understood to be asserting true statements about actual 
objects, there was not as pressing a worry about inconsistency. 
When you said something was an axiom, you took it for 
granted that it was true in the most naive sense of "true": that 
is, that it described some state of affairs. This meant that 
neither the axiom, nor any theorem derived from the 
axiom, could possibly logically contradict any other axiom 
or theorem, because they were all true statements in the old-
fashioned, prosaic sense of "true": descriptive of actual things. 
True and precise descriptions about reality cannot be logically 
incompatible with one another. 
Think of it this way: If I am truthfully describing my 
apartment-—that it is located in New York City, that it has 
(alas) only one bathroom—I don't need to stop and worry 
whether some of these statements contradict each other, 
whether, for example, I will be able to derive that I live in 
suburban New Jersey and have four bathrooms. If all my 
statements are both unambiguous and truly descriptive, then 
they won't contradict each other, since the objective truth of 
the matter underpins them all. 
But in a formal system, with axioms drained of meaning, 
and truth amounting to nothing beyond provability, it cannot 

Incompleteness 
141 
be taken for granted that the axioms will not yield logically 
incompatible theorems. Our formal systems are constituted 
by stipulated rules. Who is to say that we—mere humans, 
after all—constructed these systems consistently, that the 
rules will not have contradictory implications? This is the 
downside of taking man as the mathematical measure of all 
things, with no independent reality to ensure the ultimate 
consistency of our axioms. 
Of course, if my axioms do lead to theorems that are 
logically incompatible, then my system is worthless, worse 
than the most speculative chain of barely probabilistic 
conjectures or of metaphysical artifices claiming to scope out 
the ends of Being and Ideal Grace. Anything at all can be 
deduced within an inconsistent system, since from a 
contradiction any proposition can be derived. You might say 
that on a strictly formalist interpretation, inconsistency loses its 
sting. What's so awful if, through the manipulation of 
meaningless wffs, we arrive at contradictory meaningless 
wffs? The game is ruined, of course, since it just isn't 
interesting to try to derive theorems if everything's derivable; 
but it's not as if inner contradictions are disastrously 
demonstrating that our systems can't be true—the 
elimination of the extra-systematic truth being the whole 
point of formalism. You might also say that the exigency 
with which Hilbert urged that mathematics be proved 
consistent showed that he wasn't really, deep down, a 
formalist after all. In any case, following the formalist agenda, 
if mathematics is to be successfully purged of intuitions in 
the service of certitude, then formal proofs of the consistency 
of the purged systems are a pressing necessity. 
The highest priority of all was to prove the consistency of 
arithmetic. Other systems of mathematics, for example geom- 

142 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
etry, had been shown to be consistent provided arithmetic, the 
most basic of all mathematical systems, is consistent. These 
sorts of proofs, which establish the consistency of one system 
as a consequence of the consistency of another system, are 
called relative proofs of consistency. All of these relative 
proofs of consistency were related to the consistency of 
arithmetic, which thus became the next step, the one that 
would provide the linchpin for the Hilbert program. The 
proof of arithmetic's consistency could not be relative, as the 
other consistency proofs were; it had to be an "absolute proof." 
The tone of Hilbert's 1900 talk to the mathematical troops 
is extremely optimistic; he felt pretty sure that an absolute 
proof of the consistency of arithmetic was imminent. But in a 
series of talks which Hilbert gave through the 1920s, his 
buoyancy modulated into something more guarded. His 
change in mood was brought about by the paradoxes of set 
theory, including most conspicuously Russell's paradox of 
1902, which brought the set of all sets that are not members 
of themselves to the horrified attention of mathematicians, 
adding insult to the injury of Cantor's paradox, involving the 
impossible universal set, the set of all sets.5 Hilbert regarded 
"the situation with respect to the paradoxes" with dismay: 
Admittedly, the present state of affairs where we run up 
against the paradoxes is intolerable. Just think, the 
definitions and deductive methods which everyone 
learns, teaches, and uses in mathematics, lead to 
absurdities! If mathematical thinking is defective, where 
are we to find truth and certitude? 
5 See note 11 in chapter I. 

Incompleteness 
143 
But he still continues to express his confidence that there is "a 
completely satisfactory way of escaping the paradoxes without 
committing treason" against the spirit of mathematics. 
"Treason" against the spirit of mathematics would consist 
of such acts as expelling the very notion of the infinite from 
mathematics in the way that mathematicians such as the 
Dutch Luitzen Brouwer were advocating. Brouwer was a 
leading exponent of the intuitionist school of mathematics, 
yet another metamathematical outlook.6 The intuitionists 
were the most fundamentally opposed to Platonism of all the 
non-Platonist schools. Even formalism can be interpreted in 
such a way so that it doesn't preclude a basically Platonic 
approach to mathematics, just so long as Platonically 
sanctioned intuitions do not in any way enter into 
mathematical practice. 
6 The intuitionists were the most severe of all when it came to the 
question of acceptable methods of proof. Mathematical proofs were to be 
limited, according to the intuitionist, to "constructive proofs," i.e., those 
that employed concrete operations on finite or "potentially" (but not 
actually) infinite structures. Reference to completed infinite structures 
were forbidden, as were indirect proofs making reference to the law of the 
excluded middle. Using the severe strictures of intuitionist mathematics a 
great deal of accepted mathematics, for example parts of classical analysis 
and even classical logic, would be deemed no longer acceptable. Brouwer 
himself renounced much of the former work he had done before becoming 
an intuitionist convert. "Intuitionism," by the way, might seem like a 
misleading name, considering the way we have been speaking of intuitions 
up until now, as just the sort of appeals to objective mathematical truth that 
formalists and intuitionists meant to eliminate. The intuitionists claimed 
that their finitary constructions were actually mental constructions, and in 
fact, the only sort of mathematical mental constructions that we, being 
finite, could actually perform. So they were claiming that their strictures 
on mathematical proofs actually corresponded to human psychology. 

144 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
Hilbert himself often sounds like a Platonist, albeit one who is 
very strict with himself. 
Hilbert certainly wanted to avoid the extreme limitations 
that the intuitionists would place on mathematical practice in 
order to avoid the possibility of paradoxes. The approach that 
Hilbert had in mind, when he spoke of "completely clarifying 
the nature of the infinite," lay within the reach of finitary 
formal systems.7 In other words, the way out of the morass 
visited upon mathematics by the paradoxes of set theory lay, 
according to Hilbert, in the purification process of formaliza-
tion—that is, in solving the problems of what Hilbert dubbed 
"proof theory." 
Chief among these was the problem that Hilbert placed 
second in his list in the 1900 talk, that of finding a finitary 
proof of the consistency of the axioms, first of arithmetic, 
then of progressively stronger axiomatic systems. It would all 
begin, then, with the "single but absolutely necessary" step of 
proving the formal system of arithmetic consistent. The work 
first of Gottlob Frege, and then, after the discovery of Russell's 
paradox, of Russell and Whitehead in Principia Mathematica, 
had prepared the ground for this ultimate sanctifying proof. 
The formal system laid out in Principia Mathematica was 
sufficient for expressing all the truths of arithmetic; it was 
also, presumably, consistent. The ad hoc rules of the Theory 
of Types barred the formation of inconsistency-breeding 
sets 
7 In speaking of formal systems so far in this book, we've been speaking 
of finitary formal systems only; i.e., formal systems with a finite or denu-
merable (or countable) alphabet of symbols, wffs of finite length, and rules 
of inference involving only finitely many premises. (Logicians also work 
with formal systems with uncountable alphabets, with infinitely long wffs, 
and with proofs having infinitely many premises.) 

Incompleteness 
145 
like the set of all sets not members of themselves. Still a 
formal proof of consistency was a necessity. Then, if it could 
be shown that such a formal system was both complete, 
allowing us to prove all arithmetical truths, as well as 
consistent, the linchpin of the Hilbert program would have 
been secured, the crisis posed by the paradoxes overcome. 
Enter Godel. 

 

III 
The Proof of Incompleteness 
Gddei in Konigsberg 
hat the logician Jaakko Hintikka had called 
Godel's Sternstunde, his shining hour, occurred 7 
October 1930. The scene was the third and last day 
of a conference in Konigsberg on "Epistemology of the Exact 
Sciences," which had been organized by the Gesellshaft fiir 
empirische Philosophic, the Organization for Empirical 
Philosophy, an association that overlapped both with the 
Vienna Circle and the Society for Scientific Philosophy, a 
Berlin discussion group, whose leading light was Hans 
Reichenbach, a philosopher of physics. The aims and 
activities of the Berlin group were similar to those of the 
Vienna Circle and close ties existed between the two groups 
from the beginning. Some of the most influential 
mathematicians, logicians, and mathematical philosophers 
had been invited to deliver papers at the conference. Godel, 
who had only just completed his Ph.D. dissertation, was not 
one of the big fish. He was scheduled, together with other 
small fry, to give a 20-minute talk on the second day of the 
conference. 
147 
W 

148 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
On the first day there were four speakers, each talking on 
behalf of a distinctive metamathematical position. The meta-
concern addressed was, as is almost always the case when 
discussing metamathematics, the tantalizing aprioricity and 
certainty of mathematics. How have we been allowed 
membership in the most selective cognitive country club 
going? 
Rudolf Carnap traveled by train from Vienna with Godel 
to deliver a paper entitled "The Main Ideas of Logicism," 
presenting the view that mathematical truths are ultimately 
reducible to the tautologies of logic. Arend Heyting, a Dutch 
mathematician, spoke on "The Intuitionist Foundations of 
Mathematics," urging the banishing of all but strictly con-
structivist proofs, not making reference to any notions that, 
are not strictly finite or at least denumerable. (The result 
would be to eliminate a great deal of beautiful 
mathematics.) David Hilbert, the leading spokesperson for 
formalism, did not travel from Gottingen, but his formalist 
point of view had an eminently worthy spokesman in John 
von Neumann. There was also a paper entitled "The Nature 
of Mathematics: Wittgenstein's Standpoint" by the long-
suffering Wittgensteinian epigone, Frederich Waismann. 
Logicism, intuitionism, formalism, Wittgenstein: there 
was no representative of Platonism to argue that point of 
view on the first day in Konigsberg. All the views 
represented there that day were committed to the claim 
that the notion of mathematical truth was reducible to 
provability; the disagreements between them were on the 
conditions of provability. 
It had been because Waismann was preparing for his talk in 
Konigsberg that Wittgenstein had been meeting with him and 

Incompleteness 
149 
Schlick, in Schlick's house, on a regular basis in the summer 
of 1930. The central points of Waismann's lecture, according 
to Wittgenstein's biographer Ray Monk, were:"... the 
application of the Verification Principle to mathematics to 
form the basic rule: 'The meaning of a mathematical 
concept is the mode of its use and the sense of a 
mathematical proposition is the method of its verification.'" 
Monk goes on to say: "In any event, Waismann's lecture, 
and all other contributions to the conference, were 
overshadowed by the announcement there of Godel's famous 
Incompleteness Proof." 
This is not, in point of fact, how it went at the conference 
in Konigsberg. It is understandable that Wittgenstein's 
biographer would assume that the announcement of 
Godel's "famous Incompleteness Proof" would have caused 
a sensation among the participants at the conference, who 
had heard talks on that first day incompatible with such a 
result as Godel's, each talk presuming that the concept of 
mathematical truth is, one way or another, reducible to 
provability. But Godel's "announcement" went almost 
unheard. 
It is true that Waismann's talk did not hold its own among 
the other three, but this is because, as Menger and others 
report, the other participants agreed that Wittgenstein's views 
were not yet ripe enough for debate. Waissman was not 
shoved into the shadows because Godel took the limelight. In 
fact, 
Godel's 
announcement, 
delivered 
during 
the 
summarizing session on the third and last day of the 
conference, was so understated and casual—so thoroughly 
undramatie—that it hardly qualified as an announcement, 
and no one present, with one exception, paid it any mind at 
all. 

150 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
Godel's First Great Overlooked Moment: 
A Triviality Not So Trivial 
The 20-minute talk that Godel had delivered on the second 
day of the conference had also attracted little attention. It was 
basically a precis of the work he had done the year before for 
his Ph.D. dissertation, work not on incompleteness but rather 
on completeness. What Godel had done was to prove the 
completeness of what is called the "predicate calculus" or 
sometimes "first-order logic" or again "quantificational logic." 
Never mind the ugly names, causing poetic souls to duck for 
cover. Let's rechristen the relevant system of formal logic 
"limpid logic." Godel proved that limpid logic is complete. Its 
axioms and rules of inference allow one to prove all logically 
true, or tautologous, propositions within it. But what is this 
notion of logically true or tautologous? 
Limpid logic's symbolism allows one to represent 
propositions so that they are stripped down to their naked 
logical form. It provides a way of symbolizing the logical 
form of propositions and displaying the logical connections 
between them. It has symbols for such words as not, and, or, 
if... then ..., if and only if as well as such "quantificational" 
concepts as all, none, and some. Words such as these are the 
logically relevant ones. It's the meanings of these terms, as 
defined by the rules of the system, that determine the logical 
form of propositions. Different sentences can share the same 
logical form and, from the point of view of limpid logic, 
these sentences are essentially the same, since they are 
logically the same (thus continuing the move toward logical 
generality, which is one and the same with the development 
of the science of logic fathered by Aristotle. 

Incompleteness 
151 
So, for example, consider the sentences "all married men 
are married," "all beautiful babies are beautiful," "all valid 
arguments are valid." All of these sentences are spun out from 
the more general proposition that if something has two 
predicates P and Q, say, being both a baby and being 
beautiful, then it has one of those predicates, say, being 
beautiful. 
Limpid logic categorizes whole hosts of sentences in terms 
of their shared logical form, stripping away all the meanings 
of specific predicates and subjects to get down to the naked 
logic. So far as the nonlogical terms go, these refer either to 
individuals—whether to specific ones or to any of them—and 
to predicates and relations between them. To refer to any of 
the individuals we use variables like x and y, and to refer to 
specific individuals we use constants, like a or b. Properties 
are designated by predicate constants like P and Q, and then 
there are relational terms like JR. The easiest thing we can say 
in limpid logic is that some individual has some predicate: 
P(a). We read this as: P of a. A slightly more complicated 
statement is that some individual bears a particular relation 
to another: R(a b). Then we might want to say something like: 
there is some individual or other that has a particular 
property. This is symbolized as 3 xP(x), and is read: there 
exists an x such that P of x. Or we might want to say that all 
individuals have P. In limpid logic this is symbolized as 
(x)P(x), and is read: given any x, P of x. A logically true 
proposition, or a tautology, is one that is true no matter what 
meanings we substitute for the nonlogical terms. (Since 
"logically true" thus makes reference to meanings—
something is logically true if it's true no matter what 
meanings we assign to its nonlogical terms—it's a semantic, 
rather than syntactic, notion.) 
So, for example, suppose we want to say that if something 

152 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
has two specific predicates then it has one of those predicates. 
We would symbolize this: 
 
This is read: given any x, if % has the property P and x also has 
the property Q, then x has the property Q. This is logically 
true and will generate a whole heap of true propositions, 
formed by substituting in particular meanings for P and Q. 
Here's another logically true proposition from limpid 
logic: 
 
This means: for all x, for all y, if x equals y, then x has the 
property P if and only if y has the property P. Of course it 
doesn't take too much thought to see that this has to be the 
case, that is, that if two things are really not two but rather 
identical, then all the properties of the one are the properties 
of the other. (What we really have in the case of identity, is 
one thing being designated, or picked out, in two ways.) 
From this last formally true proposition of limpid logic we 
can get out such verities as: If Godel is the author of the 
incompleteness theorems, then Godel is a Platonist if and 
only if the author of the incompleteness theorems is a 
Platonist. If Professor Moriarty is the mastermind behind all 
the crime in London then Professor Moriarty is a mathemati- 
1 Notice that parentheses are used for punctuation in limpid logic. ~(p 
& q), or "it is not the case that both p and q" is an altogether different 
proposition from ~p & q, or "not p is true and also q." So "it's not the case 
that the president is both good-natured and stupid" is not the same 
assertion as "the president isn't good-natured and he's stupid." 

Incompleteness 
153 
cian if and only if the mastermind behind all the crime in 
London is a mathematician. If the moon is the goddess 
Diana, then the moon is made out of green cheese if and only 
if the goddess Diana is made out of green cheese. Obviously, 
you can fill in anything at all for your predicate P and generate 
a trivially true statement, because
 
 is logically true. It's a tautology, its truth a function of 
the meanings of the logical terms that compose it. 
Godel's completeness theorem, the result he presented to the 
conference of logical luminaries, proved that all such logically 
true propositions are provable within the formal system of 
limpid logic. Another way of stating Godel's completeness result 
is that in limpid logic syntactic and semantic truth are 
equivalent: the truths that follow from the rules of the system 
(the syntactic truths) yield all the logically true propositions 
expressible within the system. Limpid logic is, then, not only 
consistent (its consistency had already been proved) but also 
complete. (Inconsistent systems are of course complete, 
because we can prove anything at all in them. They're 
overcomplete. It's of consistent systems that the question is 
posed: are they complete? Do their formal syntactic rules allow 
one to prove everything one would like to be able to prove? Do 
they allow one to prove all the truths that are expressible within 
the system?) 
Completeness is exactly what one would like from one's 
formal system of logic, and it was one of the problems for 
which Hilbert had demanded a solution. It was reassuring to 
have a proof, but since the conclusion had never really been in 
doubt, Godel's Ph.D. result hardly seemed exciting. The 
young man had taken the trouble to prove what everyone 
already took for granted. 
In hindsight, we can see that what Godel had proven in his 

154 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
dissertation was far more interesting—cause for far more 
concern among formalists and fellow travelers—than it had 
first appeared. Godel had proven the expected result— 
completeness—but 
the 
difficulty 
of 
proving 
it—the 
substantive proof, of many steps, it required—should have 
struck people as unexpected, even alarming. In showing how 
complicated it was to actually prove the completeness of 
limpid logic Godel was certainly creating room for the 
possibility that other consistent formal systems, those, for 
example, enriched by the axioms of arithmetic, might not be 
complete. The nontrivial-ity of the proof of completeness for 
limpid logic must have forcefully presented the possibility 
to Platonist Godel that there were propositions that were 
arithmetically true but not provable within a formal system of 
arithmetic.2 
2 Godel was many years later to write Wang that his completeness proof 
for the predicate calculus, i.e., his dissertation problem, had also been guided 
by his Platonist convictions: "The completeness theorem, mathematically, is 
indeed an almost trivial consequence of Skolem 1922 ["Some Remarks on 
Axiomatized Set Theory"]. However, the fact is that, at that time, nobody 
(including Skolem himself) drew this conclusion___ This blindness is indeed 
surprising. But I think the explanation is not hard to find. It lies in a 
widespread lack, at that time, of the required epistemological attitude 
toward metamathematics and toward non-finitary reasoning. Non-finitary 
reasoning in mathematics was widely considered to be meaningful only to 
the extent to which it can be 'interpreted' or 'justified' in terms of finitary 
metamathematics. (Note that this, for the most part, has turned out to be 
impossible in consequence of my results and subsequent work.) According 
to this idea metamathematics is the meaningful part of mathematics, through 
which the mathematical symbols (meaningless in themselves) acquire some 
substitute of meaning, namely rules of use. Of course, the essence of this 
viewpoint is a rejection of all kinds of abstract or infinite objects, of which 
the prima facie meanings of mathematical symbols are instances." 

Incompleteness 
155 
The Quietest Explosion: Godel Announces His 
Result 
Godel gave no indication of the revolution he was hiding up 
his sleeve until the last day of the conference, which had been 
reserved for general discussion of the papers of the two 
preceding days. He waited until quite late in the general 
discussion and then he mentioned, in a single immaculately 
worded sentence, that it was possible that there might be true, 
though unprovable, arithmetical propositions, and moreover 
that he had proved that there are: 
One can (assuming the [formal] consistency of classical 
mathematics) even give examples of propositions (and 
indeed of such a type as Goldbach and Fermat3) which are 
3 "Goldbach and Fermat" refer, respectively to "Goldbach's conjecture" 
and "Fermat's last theorem." Goldbach, as was mentioned in footnote 8 in 
chapter I, had conjectured that all even numbers greater than 2 are the sum 
of two primes. The French mathematician Pierre de Fermat (1601-1665) 
had written in a margin of a book, found after his death, that he had 
"discovered a truly marvelous demonstration of the proposition" that there 
are no integers x, y, z, n, with n > 2, such that xn + f = z", "which this margin 
is too narrow to contain." At the time of Godel's announcement, neither 
Goldbach's conjecture nor Fermafs last theorem had been proved either 
true or false, though generations of mathematicians had ardently tried. In 
1991, Andrew Wiles of Princeton University succeeded in demonstrating, 
in a complicated proof that required the results of many other 
mathematicians and took more than 150 pages, Fermat's last theorem. 
Goldbach's conjecture has still neither been proved nor disproved. 
(Disproof would be easy enough: finding an even number that isn't the 
sum of two primes.) The possibility that Godel was asserting in his 
Sternstunde was that such propositions as these two may, in fact, be true 
but unprovable within formalized number theory. What his famous proof 
does, of course, is to pro- 

156 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
really contextually [materially] true but improvable in the 
formal system of classical mathematics. 
That was it. The proof that was to become the "famous 
Incompleteness Proof" had apparently been accomplished 
the year before, when Godel was 23, and it was to be 
submitted in 1932 as his Habilitationsschrift, the last stage in 
the prolonged process of becoming an Austrian or German 
Dozent. It is one of the most astounding pieces of 
mathematical reasoning ever produced, astounding both in 
the simplicity of its main strategy and in the complexity of 
its details, the painstaking translating of metamathematics 
into mathematics by way of what has come to be called Godel 
numbering. It is a thoroughly ordered blending of several 
layers 
of 
"voices," 
both 
mathematical 
and 
metamathematical, counterpoint merging into harmonic 
chords never before heard. Music does seem to provide a 
particularly apt metaphor, which is why Ernest Nagel and 
James R. Newman in their classic explicatory work, GodeVs 
Proof, described the proof as an "amazing intellectual 
symphony." 
It must have been an extraordinarily exhilarating 
experience to have produced such mathematical music, 
especially since it is mathematics that sings, at least in the ear 
of its composer, of his beloved Platonism. But Godel had not 
let a single note of his symphonic proof escape until this 
muted moment in Konigsberg. Such a noiseless, inexpressive 
exterior enclosing such a swelling mathematical noise. Then, 
at long last, he pronounced one tersely precise sentence, 
dropped in medias 
duce such a proposition, one that can be seen to be true even as it is proved 
to be unprovable. 

Incompleteness 
157 
res on the last day of a conference, in the middle of the 
rehashing of the previous days' pronouncements. Godel 
brought it out with no fanfare, played it barely pianissimo. 
The idiosyncratic "announcement" is congruent with the 
logician's personality. The concise statement that composed 
his "shining hour," lasting maybe 30 seconds tops, is 
meticulously crafted, a miniature masterpiece. It says what it 
needs to say, and not a word more. He must have prepared it 
"to the last detail" (to echo the encomium he bestowed on 
Hahn's lectures) and given careful thought, too, as to the 
precise moment when he would launch it into the discussion: 
toward the end of the three days, as the conclusive refutation 
of all the metapositions heretofore argued. The man who 
indicated with slight movements of his head when he agreed, 
disagreed, or was skeptical, must have thought that the vast 
significance of his remark would emerge in stunning relief 
for the audience at Konigsberg. 
Delivery, even on the most rigorous subjects, can make quite 
a difference to the reception of one's ideas. Self-importance 
helps; a heavy, elaborately carved frame can make the sketchiest 
artwork seem important. We have no first-hand accounts of the 
manner of Godel's presentation that October day in 1930; of 
the sort of expressive framing he gave to what was the 
mathematical analogue to a painting representing the nature 
of beauty itself. But we know enough about the emphatically 
anti-charismatic Godel, with his aversion to external drama and 
his absolute faith in logical implication, to be able to imagine 
how it went. The somber and uninflected statement of the 
crux of the matter, with no rhetorical flourishes, no hyped-up 
context to help his listeners grasp the importance of what was 
being said. No Sturm und Drang, only zipped-up genius 
emitting an 

158 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
austere sentence that implied the existence of a proof of 
unprecedented nature and scope. 
"The more I think about language," he had remarked to 
Menger, walking home after an evening with the "Wittgen-
steinians," "the more it amazes me that people ever understand 
each other." Such pessimism about the possibilities for 
communication—even at this early age, before the decades that 
brought so much celebratory misunderstanding of his work—
must certainly have stoked his desire to find a strict 
mathematical proof to say all that he had to say on the nature of 
mathematical truth and knowledge. Now he had such a proof 
and he was announcing its result, or at least the first of the two 
theorems to follow from it. Had he anticipated that 
dumbfounded disbelief would follow the dropping of his 
bombshell, and then a violent volley of targeted questions? Had 
he prepared himself conscientiously for all the demands for 
further elucidation that would be expected quite naturally to 
follow, much as Wittgenstein's biographer had imagined the 
scene? 
Godel was always to be disappointed by the abilities of 
others to draw the implications he had scrupulously prepared 
for them, and his experience at Konigsberg must have been a 
magnificent disappointment, for the response was a 
resounding silence. The immaculately composed sentence 
was delivered ... and the discussion proceeded as if it hadn't 
been. The edited transcript of the discussion that day was 
published in the journal Erkenntnis (edited by Carnap and 
Reichenbach, and the main organ for the dissemination of the 
views of both the Vienna Circle and Reichenbach's Berlin 
group) and it does not include any discussion of Godel's 
remark at all. No mention of Godel made it into the account 
of the meeting written up by Hans Reichenbach either. 

Incompleteness 
159 
Even taking into account Godel's anti-charismatic mode of 
being in the world, shouldn't his remark have provoked a 
ripple of disturbance, an "Excuse me, Herr Godel, but I 
somehow thought you just said that you'd proved the existence of 
unprov-able arithmetical truths. Of course, you couldn't have 
been saying that because, besides flying in the face of all of our 
views on the nature of mathematical truth, that sounds like a 
contradiction in terms. How could you prove that there are 
arithmetical propositions that are both unprovable and true? 
Wouldn't that proof, in showing them to be true, constitute a 
proof of them, thus contradicting your claim that the proof 
proves them unprovable? Logician that you are, you couldn't be 
asserting a blatant contradiction like that. So what did you 
really say?" 
Godel's dissertation advisor, Hans Hahn, was present at 
Konigsberg. In fact, he chaired the last-day discussion at the 
conference. Had Godel shared nothing of his incompleteness 
proof with his advisor? We don't know for sure either way. Hao 
Wang writes that Godel completed his dissertation, the 
completeness proof for predicate logic (i.e., limpid logic), 
without showing it to Hahn. That result was being prepared for 
publication at the time of the conference (and, presumably, 
Hahn had read it by then). In his introductory remarks to the 
dissertation, which for some unknown reason were deleted 
from the published version, Godel had raised the possibility of 
the incompleteness of arithmetic, though he gave no 
indication that he had proved it. Hahn must have read that 
remark and not taken it seriously. Maybe it was he who 
advised the young author to delete it. Maybe he didn't want his 
student to go out on a fragile limb with no proof to support 
him, having assumed, from all that Godel had told him (or, 
more relevantly hadn't), that there was no supporting proof. 

160 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
Another person at the conference who might have been 
expected to react to Godel's remark was Rudolf Carnap. 
Carnap had had more time than the others to digest Godel's 
news, since Godel had confided his result to Carnap several 
weeks before. On 26 August 1930, according to Carnap's 
Aufzeichnungen in his Nachlass, he had met with Godel, Feigl, 
andWaismann in the Cafe Reichsrat in Vienna to discuss their 
travel plans to Konigsberg. After settling the practicalities, the 
discussion turned, in Carnap's words, to "Godel's Entdeckung: 
Unvollstdndigkeit  des   Systems   der  PM;   Schwierigkeit  des 
Widerspruchsfreiheitbeweises: Godel's discovery. The 
incompleteness of the system of Principia Mathematica. The 
difficulty of proving consistency." (Note that he says 
"difficulty" here, not yet impossibility. Godel didn't fully prove 
his second incompleteness theorem until after the 
conference.) Then again, three days later, Carnap records 
that the same four met at the same cafe and that before Feigl 
and Waismann arrived "erzahlt mix Godel von seiner 
Entdeckungen—Godel told me about his discoveries." Still, 
at the conference Carnap had pushed his old line, that 
consistency was the sole criterion for judging the adequacy of 
formal theories of mathematics, with the question of 
completeness not even raised. How, given Godel's 
Entdeckungen, could he not have questioned his former 
thinking? 
The answer seems to be that Carnap had not understood the 
nature of Godel's discovery at all. The idea that the criteria for 
semantic truth could be separated from the criteria for 
provability was so unthinkable from a positivist point of view 
that the substance of the theorem simply could not penetrate. 
This delay in grasping the significance of what Godel was 
trying to tell him is born out from another entry in Carnap's 

Incompleteness 
161 
journal, dated 7 February 1931, after Godel's famous paper 
had already been published. "Godel Her. Uber seine Arbeit, ich 
sage, dass sie doch schwer verstandig ist. Godel was here. About 
his work, I say that it's very difficult to understand." 
The thundering silence greeting Godel's announcement 
seems, in retrospect, a classic example of the sort of 
insensibility that Thomas Kuhn discusses in The Structure of 
Scientific Revolutions: 
In science . . . novelty emerges only with difficulty, 
manifested by resistance, against a background provided 
by expectation. Initially only the anticipated and usual are 
experienced even under circumstances where anomaly is 
later to be observed. 
Von Neumann Takes the Hint 
There happened to have been one person present at Konigsberg 
who picked up on the anomalous remark of the young 
logician, and that was John von Neumann. His appreciation 
of Godel's terse remark is all the more impressive if we 
consider that von Neumann's own views were entirely in 
keeping with Hilbert's—he had been the designated 
spokesman in Konigsberg for formalism—and that he 
harbored the sort of strongly positivist bent that would make 
Godel's reference to semantic truth, independent of a formal 
system, perhaps seem dangerously metaphysical. Nonetheless 
he buttonholed Godel after the discussion ended for the day 
and pumped him for details. Godel must have told him enough 
about how he had arrived at his conclusion for von Neumann 
to take what he heard seriously. He went back to Princeton, to 
the Institute for Advanced 

162 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
Study, 
and 
continued 
to 
ponder 
the 
astounding 
pronouncement he'd heard in Konigsberg. 
Some time in the course of his pondering, von Neumann 
happened on a remarkable corollary to what Godel had told 
him. Von Neumann had seen from what Godel had told him 
that Godel's proof was conditional: what it says is that if a 
formal system S of arithmetic is consistent, then it's possible 
to construct a proposition, call it G, that's true but unprovable 
in that system. So if S is consistent, G is both true and 
unprovable. Trivially, then, if S is consistent then G is true. 
Von Neumann had also understood from what Godel told 
him that this proof can itself be carried out in a system of 
arithmetic. (This is the trick that's accomplished by Godel 
numbering.) So if the consistency of S could be proved in S, 
then G would have been proved in S—since it follows from 
the consistency of S that G is true. But this contradicts that 
G is unprovable. The only way out of the contradiction is to 
deny that S can be formally proved to be consistent within the 
system of arithmetic. So from Godel's result another 
impossibility follows: it is impossible to formally prove the 
consistency of a system of arithmetic within that system of 
arithmetic. 
Von Neumann got in touch with Godel, informing him of 
this corollary, and Godel politely told von Neumann that the 
older man had indeed drawn the correct conclusion, one 
which Godel had already rigorously proved. (One can 
imagine Godel's slight crooked grin in imparting this 
information to the intellectual titan, von Neumann.) This 
corollary is known as Godel's second incompleteness 
theorem, and though it's merely a consequence of the first, 
it's the one that first received attention, with von Neumann 
talking it up at the Institute. Hilbert's program had provided 
the context for per- 

Incompleteness 
163 
ceiving the significance of Godel's second incompleteness 
theorem. Godel had proved that Hilbert's second problem 
could not be solved: there would never be a finitary formal 
proof of the consistency of the axioms of arithmetic within 
the system of arithmetic. There would never be the proof that 
was to serve as the linchpin for Hilbert's program. The 
consequences for formalism were stark and devastating. 
It's clear from the semantic point of view—that is, when we 
think about what the strictly formal system of arithmetic 
means—that arithmetic is consistent, since it has a model in the 
natural numbers. We give a model of a formal system, also called 
an interpretation, by specifying a universe of discourse, also 
called a domain of individuals, over which the variables range, 
and by interpreting what the predicate and relational terms 
mean, and stipulating which members of the domain the 
individual constants refer to. When the formal system of 
arithmetic is endowed with the usual meanings, involving the 
natural numbers and their properties, its axioms are seen to be 
clearly true and thus must be consistent since true statements 
can't have false consequences. It isn't that the consistency of 
arithmetic was really in doubt—that is, if one really does 
believe in numbers. The question concerns how consistency 
can 
be 
proved—an 
important 
question 
from 
any 
metamathematical point of view, an urgent question for all but 
the Platonist. 
The consistency of a system amounts to the proposition 
that using the rules of the system no contradiction can be 
derived. This proposition is itself combinatoric; it concerns 
simple rules of symbol manipulation—rules that determine 
which string of symbols follow from which strings of 
symbols. This combinatoric proposition is, precisely because 
it is combinatoric, equivalent to something arithmetical. 
Thus it 

164 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
can itself be formulated within the system—and so the 
question naturally is whether it can be proved within the 
system, and the answer is that it can't be. The syntactic 
features of formal systems—which were meant to obviate 
intuitions, those breeders of paradox—can't capture all the 
truths about the system, including the truth of its own 
consistency. Godel had proven that consistency, the very 
thing whose proof was supposed to secure the foundations of 
Hilbert's program (which had been meant to preclude the 
formation of paradoxes in mathematics) transcended the 
grasp of that program. 
The possibility of paradox, meant to be forever eliminated 
by Hilbert's program, reasserted itself. And one of the strangest 
things about the odd and beautiful proof that subverted 
Hilbert's defense against paradox was the way in which paradox 
itself was incorporated into the very structure of the proof. 
The First Incompleteness Theorem: 
The Overall Strategy 
The twenty-odd pages of Godel's famous proof are densely 
compact. There are 46 preliminary definitions. There are also 
preliminary theorems that must be proved before the main 
event can take place: the construction of an arithmetical 
proposition that is both true and unprovable within the formal 
system under consideration. The lines of reasoning in the 
proof are highly compressed, composed of a hierarchy of 
interconnected levels of discourse, the blended voices of the 
symphony.4 
4 There are, first of all, the statements within the formal system S under 
consideration (call them S-sentences); when you interpret these S-sentences 
under the natural interpretation (i.e., as being about the natural numbers) 

Incompleteness 
165 
Though the details of the proof are difficult, the overall 
strategy is—happily!—almost simplicity itself. Simple but 
strange, as one would expect of a proof that draws so close to 
the edge of self-contradiction, proving that there are true 
arithmetical propositions that are not provable. One of the 
strangest things of all about the proof is that it co-opts the 
very 
structure 
of 
self-referential 
paradoxes, 
those 
abominations to reason, and reshapes that structure to its 
own ends. The overall strategy of the proof—the delightfully 
accessible part of the proof—can be grasped in the context of 
the oldest known paradox of all, the liar's paradox.5 We can 
convey the 
they turn into arithmetical statements (call them A-sentences). The S-
sentences each get numbered with the so-called Godel numberings. Then 
there are the metamathematical statements about the S-sentences and about 
the formal system (call them M-sentences). M-sentences, which describe the 
purely formal relationships between the elements of the formal system, are 
combinatoric statements, so in a sense you might almost think of them as 
already mathematical statements. But it takes the ingenious encoding 
system of Godel numbering to transform the M-sentences into A-
sentences, so that in talking about the formal system of arithmetic (M-
sentences) you are also making arithmetical statements (A-sentences). 
5 In Godel's famous paper of 1931, in which the proof is first set forth, he 
mentions the liar's paradox and Richard's paradox, offering them to us as 
heuristic grips for hoisting ourselves up into the strange country of his proof. 
We are already acquainted with the liar's paradox. Richard's paradox was the 
creation of French mathematician Jules Richard. It's rather a complicated one 
to state, requiring, much like Godel's proof itself, a certain sort of mapping. 
One orders the properties of the natural numbers and assigns a number to 
each of the properties. The number assigned to a property may or may not 
actually have that property. So, say, 22 corresponds to the property "being an 
even number." Then 22 itself has the property to which it corresponds in the 
Richardian ordering. Now define this property: "not having the property 
assigned to itself in the Richardian ordering." Call this property "being 

166 
REBECCA GOIDSTEIN 
gist of the proof in a breezy, easy way, which we will now 
proceed to do. Then in the next few sections we will 
concentrate on filling in a few more of the details, indicating 
how the hard work gets done. 
By tradition, the liar's paradox is attributed to the Cretan 
Epimenides, who reputedly said something implying: All 
Cretans are liars. This sentence, in itself, isn't paradoxical, except 
insofar as it suggests that what Epimenides was saying was 
something like this: 
This very sentence is false. 
Now that sentence, as we've already seen, is true if and only 
if it's false—not a good situation, logically speaking. Godel's 
strategy involves considering an analogue to that paradoxical 
sentence, viz. the proposition: 
This very statement is not provable within this system. 
Let's call this sentence G. G, unlike its analogue, isn't 
paradoxical, though it is, like all self-referential propositions, 
somewhat strange. (Even the nonparadoxical self-referential 
This very statement is true is mystifyingly strange. What's it 
saying? Where's its content?) 
Richardian." The paradox-generating question is: is the number that 
corresponds to being Richardian itself Richardian? 
All other formulations of his proof—for example, those by Alan Turing 
and GJ. Chaitin—have incorporated features of paradoxes, though different 
paradoxes from GodePs—into their own versions of the proof. These 
paradoxes, though different from one another, are all of the self-referential 
variety. The affinity between the incompleteness result and self-referential 
paradox is therefore very deep, since every proof of incompleteness has some 
version of self-referential paradoxicality lurking around in the background. 

Incompleteness 
167 
Through the system of encoding we have come to call 
"Godel numbering" (of course self-effacing Godel didn't 
name it so) G can be rendered in arithmetical notation, so 
that it also makes an arithmetical statement. Here is one of 
the places where the hard work comes in, and a bit later on in 
this chapter we'll dip a little deeper into this aspect of the 
proof. Godel found an ingenious way of making an 
arithmetical language speak of its own formalism. The 
upshot of the technique is that G is simultaneously making 
two different statements, asserting an arithmetical claim and 
also asserting its own unprovability. In other words, what G 
has to say, in addition to its straightforward arithmetical 
content (it's going to be a weird arithmetical proposition, 
what with all the fid-dlefaddling that gets us to it) is: 
G is improvable in the system. The negation of G thus 
amounts to the proposition: G is provable in the system. 
If G were provable then its negation—which, after all, says 
that G is provable—would be true. But if the negation of a 
proposition is true, then the proposition itself is false. So if G 
is provable then it is false. But if G is provable, then it is also 
true. After all, what else does a proof show, assuming of 
course that the system is consistent (since in an inconsistent 
system all propositions are provable). So, assuming the 
consistency of the system, if G is provable then it is both true 
and false—a contradiction—which means that G is not 
provable. Thus if the system is consistent, then G is not 
provable in it. But that is exactly what G says: that it isn't 
provable. So G is true. Therefore, G is both unprovable and 
true, which is pre- 

168 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
cisely the famous conclusion of Godel's proof, that there is a 
true but unprovable proposition expressible in the system if 
the system is consistent. And because G also has a 
straightforwardly arithmetical meaning which, of course, is 
true if G is true (because it is G) Godel's proof shows that 
there are arithmetical truths (for example, G!) that cannot be 
proved within the formal system, assuming the system to be 
consistent. The formal system is either inconsistent or 
incomplete. 
What is more, the proof demonstrates that should we try to 
remedy the incompleteness by explicitly adding G on as an 
axiom, thus creating a new, expanded formal system, then a 
counterpart to G can be constructed within that expanded 
system that is true but unprovable in the expanded system. 
The conclusion: There are provably unprovable, but 
nevertheless true, propositions in any formal system that 
contains elementary arithmetic, assuming that system to be 
consistent. A system rich enough to contain arithmetic 
cannot be both consistent and complete. 
That's really the overall strategy. In some sense (once one 
assimilates the strange idea of a single proposition that can 
speak simultaneously of itself and of arithmetic), it is simple. 
Of course, the devil is all in the details; and it's to the 
diabolical details that we will now turn. 
Step One: Lay Out a Formal System 
Godel begins his proof by laying out his formal system, which 
consists, as do all formal systems, of an alphabet of symbols, 
rules for combining these symbols into wffs, a special set of 
wffs called the "axioms," and a deductive apparatus for deriv- 

Incompleteness 
169 
ing (as "logical consequences") wffs from other wffs that must 
be either axioms or consequences of axioms. 
In most systems of formal logic, it is convenient to have 
symbols for "and"(conjunction) and "or" (disjunction), as 
well as for the expressions "if... then ..." (material 
implication) and ". . . if and only if. ..". There are also 
symbols that express the quantificational notions of "all" and 
"some." However, it will be more convenient to have as few 
basic symbols as possible. We can eliminate conjunctions in 
favor of disjunctions since "p and q" means the same thing as 
"it's not the case that p is false or q is false." So I want to eat 
and I want to be thin is equivalent to It's not true that either I 
don't want to eat or don't want to he thin. Then we can take our 
elimination one step further since disjunction can be 
eliminated in favor of material implication because "if p, then 
q" means the same thing as "not-]? or qV We can also 
eliminate the notion of "some," by using the notion of "all" 
since "there are some x's that are F" is the same as "it is not 
the case that all x's are not i7." So Some logicians are rational is 
equivalent to Not all logicians are irrational. After our 
eliminations, we're left with nine primitive concepts, and 
corresponding symbols, with which to express all of 
arithmetic in a formal system. 
Step Two: Godel Numbering 
The next step in the proof is to devise a mechanical method of 
assigning a unique number to every proposition of the 
system. It's by assigning these numbers that the blending of 
the voices is accomplished, with arithmetical statements also 
making metamathematical statements. 

170 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
The logician Simon Kochen beautifully described Godel's 
proof to me as bearing a marked similarity to Kafka's work 
(which Godel happened to admire). In both Kafka and Godel, 
there is a certain Alice-in~Wonderland quality, a sense that 
one has entered a strange universe where things morph into 
others, including meanings themselves. Yet everything 
proceeds stepwise according to the most rigorous rule-
bound logic. (The rigorous logic of Kafka is under-
appreciated.) So much of the work in Godel's proof 
amounts, in Kochen's words, to "bookkeeping." This double 
aspect of the proof mirrors something, Kochen also said, 
essential about Godel's mind as well, the wild leaps of 
imagination coupled with a sort of legalistic ploddingness. 
Both of these aspects emerge in the Godel numbering. Here's 
the basic idea: 
The formal system, remember, involves a variety of types of 
objects: the symbols of the alphabet, the combinations of 
symbols into wffs, and special sequences of wffs (in other 
words, proofs). Everything is built out of the basic symbols of 
the alphabet: a wff is a sequence of these symbols, and a proof 
is a sequence of wffs (with the conclusion simply the last 
entry in the sequence). 
The Godel numbering thus begins by assigning each 
primitive symbol of the alphabet a number. Once each of the 
primitive symbols has a number, one continues with a rule for 
assigning numbers to the wffs themselves, based on the 
corresponding numbers of their constituents. Then, once we 
have a Godel number for each wff, the Godel numbering is 
completed with a rule for assigning numbers to sequences of 
wffs, which, of course, are what proofs are. 
Furthermore, once every wff has been assigned a 
corresponding number, we will be able to analyze the structural 
relation- 

Incompleteness 
171 
ships between the propositions by merely analyzing the 
arithmetical relationships between their corresponding 
numbers. Or vice versa. For example, one wff will be a 
consequence of another one precisely in case the Godel numbers 
of the wfifs are arithmetically related to each other in just the 
right way. In other words, two different sorts of descriptions 
will be collapsed into one another: arithmetical descriptions, 
setting forth relationships between numbers that are 
expressible within the formal system; and metadescriptions 
about the logical relationships holding between the wffs in the 
system. These metastatements are purely syntactic, as they are 
simply the consequences of the syntax of the formal system, that 
is, its rules. 
The idea of Godel numbering is basically the idea of 
encoding, which allows you to move back and forth between 
the original propositions and the code. In elementary school, 
my friends and I had a similar code we'd use to pass notes in 
class, assigning each letter of the alphabet a number between 
1 and 26, with "A" assigned 1, "B" assigned 2, etc. "Meet me" 
was rendered as: 13 5 5 20 13 5. 
The encoding system Godel used had to ensure that the 
same Godel number wouldn't be assigned to different things, 
say to both some wff as well as to a sequence of wffs (a proof). 
The rules for encoding give us an algorithm (which is, 
remember, a set of rules which tell us, at each step, how to 
proceed, often based on the result we get from a previous 
application of rules in the set) for getting from any wff, or 
sequence of wffs, to a unique Godel number. There is also an 
algorithm for the reverse process: given any Godel number, we 
can effectively figure out what formal object in the system it 
stands for. The Godel numbering must obey one further 
condition: the translation of syntactic descriptions of the 
logical relationships 

172 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
between wffs in the system into arithmetical propositions that 
it provides must be such that these arithmetical propositions 
are themselves expressible within the system. 
The spirit of Godel numbering can be conveyed simply, 
though were we to be rigorous, as Godel of course was, there 
would be nothing simple about the encoding. The modern 
positional notation is so familiar to us that we forget it is itself 
a coding system, requiring proof in the formal system. So, for 
example, the usual digital symbol 365 is shorthand for 3 times 
10 squared, plus six times 10, plus five. Godel's system of 
encoding used the exponential products of prime numbers 
and relied on the prime factorization theorem which states 
that every number can be uniquely factored into the product 
of primes. The prime factorization theorem ensured that there 
was an algorithm for getting from any wff or sequence of wffs 
to a Godel number and vice versa. The digit juxtaposition we 
use below would, if made rigorous, be every bit as complicated 
as the system that Godel used. But we won't be rigorous. 
First, we'll arbitrarily assign a natural number to each 
symbol of the alphabet of the formal system. We can do all 
we need to do in setting out a formal system of arithmetic if 
we restrict ourselves to just nine symbols, to each of which 
we'll assign a Godel number: 
 

Incompleteness 
173 
 
The quantificational notion of "all" is represented by using 
parentheses and variables. So, for example, (x)F(x) means: all 
x's are F. The prime allows us to generate additional variables: 
x, x', x", x"\ etc. Since we have a symbol for 0, and a way of 
indicating successors, we have a way of indicating all the 
natural numbers. 
We now specify a rule for assigning Godel numbers to wffs, 
which of course are just sequences of the symbols of the 
alphabet. We adopt the easiest rule possible, reminiscent of 
the encoding my friends and I used in elementary school. We 
simply plug in the Godel number for each symbol in the wff 
and that will be the Godel number for the wff. 
So consider this wff: 
(Pi)
 
Assuming our universe of discourse (the objects to which the 
variables are interpreted to be referring) is the natural 
numbers, what Pj says is that if two numbers have the same 
successor, then they're the same number. Or, in other words, 
that one number can't be the successor of two different 
numbers. More literally: for all x and for all x', if the successor 
of x is identical to the successor of x, then x is identical to x. 

174 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
Now we're going to turn this wff into a number by just 
consecutively going along and replacing each symbol in the 
wff by its Godel number. Every symbol in the formula px has 
been assigned a number: the open parenthesis a 7, the x a 3, 
the close parenthesis an 8, the tilda a 0. Replacing each 
element of the formula with the corresponding Godel 
number yields a large number, which is the Godel number for 
the wff. Abbreviating "the Godel number of the proposition 
p^' by GN(p),we obtain: 
GN(px) = 738739877673846739882734398 
In this way Godel numbers are assigned to wffs, which are 
sequences of symbols, and hence to propositions, which are 
just special wffs. In the same way, Godel numbers can be 
assigned to sequences of propositions, and in particular to 
potential proofs, which are, after all, just sequences of 
propositions, using the Godel numbers already assigned to 
propositions. Bookkeeping! In our simplified version, the 
Godel number of a sequence of propositions (a potential 
proof) is obtained basically by putting the Godel numbers of 
the sequenced propositions together; however, since it is 
important to be able to unambiguously extract from the 
number obtained the original sequence of propositions, 
we'll need some sort of signal that will indicate where one 
proposition ends and the next one begins—sort of like a 
carriage return on a typewriter. We'll let 0 function as our 
carriage return, indicating that we now go to a new line in the 
proof. 
So, let us say that in a particular sequence of propositions, 
p, is followed by p2, where p2 is defined as: 
(p2) 
s(0) = s(0) 

Incompleteness 
175 
The Godel number that will correspond to the sequence of 
Pj followed by p2 is 
GN(pj p2)= 7387398776738467398827343980675846758 
Through Godel's inspired contrivances, all of the logical 
relations that hold between propositions in the formal 
system become arithmetic relations expressible in the 
arithmetical language of the system itself. This is the essence 
of the heart-stopping beauty of the whole thing. So if, for 
example, wff1 logically entails wff2, then GN(wff1) will bear 
some purely arithmetical relation to GN(wff2). Suppose, say, 
that it can be shown that if wff1 logically entails wff2, then 
GN(wff2) is a factor of GN(wff1). We would then have two 
ways of showing that wff1 logically entails wff2: we could use 
the rules of the formal system to deduce wff2 from wffp or we 
could show that GN(wff1) can be obtained from GN(wff2) by 
multiplying by an integer. Suppose that GN(wff1) = 195589 and 
GN(wff2) = 317. 317 is a factor of 195589, since 317 multiplied 
by 617 = 195589. So that wff1 logically entails wff2 could be 
demonstrated either by using the formal rules of proof to arrive at 
wff2 from wff1 or, alternatively, by using the rules of 
arithmetic to arrive at GN(wff1) = 195589 by multiplying 617 
by 317 = GN(wff2). The metasyntactic and the arithmetic 
collapse into one another. 
Once one has this sort of collapse between logical 
implication and arithmetical relationship, we can go on and 
demonstrate that certain sequences of wffs—precisely those 
that constitute proofs—have an arithmetical property 
expressible in the system. Proofs, of course, are built up out 
of logical entailments. So deriving this arithmetical property 
(of the Godel numbers of all and only the proofs in the 
system) is going to be a consequence of the sort of collapse 
discussed in 
 

176 
RBBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
the previous paragraph. The Godel number of those strings 
of wffs that are valid proofs within the system will have some 
sort of arithmetical property, say, they'll all be even or they'll 
all be odd or they'll be prime numbers or the squares of 
primes or, more likely, a property a good deal more 
complicated. In other words, the metasyntactic relationship of 
prov-ability will become an arithmetical relationship; that a 
string of wffs is a proof will be some property of numbers. 
From this it becomes possible to show that all and only the 
provable wffs in the system, the theorems, have a certain 
arithmetical property. You can see where we're heading: 
toward arithmetical propositions expressible in the system 
that also speak to the issue of their own provability within 
the system. The Godel numbering allows some propositions 
to engage in an interesting sort of double-speak, saying 
something arithmetical and also commenting on their own 
situation within the formal system, saying whether they're 
provable. 
The double-speak of these propositions could be 
compared to the sort of thing that sometimes happens 
within a dramatic play, in particular when the play presents 
actors as characters, with their own "real-life" relationships, 
and then presents these characters as actors in a play within 
the play. Through careful contrivance, the lines that the 
actors speak, in the play within the play, can also be 
interpreted as having a real-life meaning in their relationships 
outside the play within the play (in the play proper). Godel's 
strategy asks us to grasp something analogous to what the 
country audience in Leoncavallo's opera I Pagliacci grasp 
when they understand the actors to be delivering lines that, as 
well as making sense within the play, have a meaning in their 
offstage lives (in the opera). In Godel's inspired stage 
production, lines speak both 

Incompleteness 
177 
to the formal relationships within the system, the play within 
the play, and also reveal real-life arithmetical relationships. The 
proposition that Godel's proof constructs, the one that will 
simultaneously announce both its own (provable) unprovabil-
ity and a true (unprovable) arithmetical relationship, has the 
same sort of double-entendre as Pagliacci's final tragic cry, 
"la commedia &finita\"—the comedy is over. 
Step Three: Create a Proposition That's True 
Because It Says That It's Unprovable 
Having established his ingenious layers of meaning, Godel now 
conjures a rather amazing arithmetical property, which we'll 
designate as "Pr," for "provable." Because, although Pr is a 
purely arithmetical property, it's also that very property toward 
which all the contrivances have been heading. It's an 
arithmetical property that is true of all and only the Godel 
numbers of the provable propositions of the system. I choose the 
verb "conjures" deliberately because even though the collapse 
of the metasyntactic and arithmetical was heading toward "Pr," 
there is still a sense of magic about the entrance of Pr. 
Before getting to the property, one little technical point about 
the way in which properties are specified: by propositional 
functions of one variable. These can be thought of as of the 
form F(x). These are expressions in the formal system involving 
a single variable—the x which is a dummy standing for a 
whole range of possible values (the domain of individuals) that 
can be plugged in; if you plug in a value for the variable, you 
end up with a wff that is either true or false, in other words a 
proposition. F(x), just as it is, is neither true nor false. So say 
¥(x) were to mean: x is the successor of 1. This is neither true 
nor false; it 

178 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
isn't a proposition, a definite statement, since what it says 
depends upon what x actually represents. Plugging in 2 for the 
variable x yields a true proposition, and plugging in anything 
else yields false propositions. That's how properties are 
designated in the system, by propositional functions of one 
variable. 
Now onward to Pr(x), which is a somewhat complicated 
property of numbers. Remember, first of all, that each of the 
wffs in the formal system have been assigned numbers 
through the wonders of Godel numbering. So for every wff p, 
we have some GN(p), some natural number or other. The 
theorems are a special subset of the wffs of the system, the 
provable propositions. Given any natural number n, then, it 
may or may not be the case that it corresponds to some 
theorem in the formal system, that is, it may or may not be 
the case that n = GN(p) for some proposition p which is a 
theorem of the formal system. 
Now we are in position to define Pr(x). The possible values 
for this propositional function, the things we plug in for the 
dummy x, are (the expressions for) the natural numbers. For 
any natural number n, if n = GN(p) for a theorem p of the 
system then we say that n satisfies the property Pr(x), that is, 
that Pr(rt) is true. Godel showed that this property is one that 
can in fact be expressed in the formal system, that is, that it's an 
example of an F(x). Pr(x) is a formally expressible arithmetical 
property, albeit one that is extremely complicated, not anything 
that we can explicitly give here. But by means of this property 
Godel is able to take metasentences about the system, stating 
which propositions are theorems of the system, and transform 
them into arithmetical sentences within the system: "p is a 
theorem" is transformed into "Pr(GN(p))." To say of some 
particular n 

Incompleteness 
179 
that it has the property Vr(x) is to say that this number 
corresponds to a theorem in the formal system. 
Now perhaps you're thinking something like this: That a 
particular number n has the property Pr(x) isn't a real 
property of n. The number n, for example, may be even or it 
may be odd; if it's divisible by 2 then it's even. Let's say it is. 
Then its evenness is a real arithmetical property; n couldn't 
be the number it is if it weren't even. In contrast, looking at 
this property Pr(x) metasystematically, it doesn't seem at all 
a proper sort of numerical property. A number n has this 
property only arbitrarily, since the proposition with which n 
is associated is arbitrary, a consequence merely of the way in 
which the Godel numbering was set up, the inspired 
contrivances.6 True enough, but, arbitrary though it may 
be, Pr(x) is nonetheless a real arithmetical property, and a 
number n either will or won't have it. And n wouldn't be the 
number that it is unless it either did or didn't have it. Just 
because Pr(x) has a metameaning doesn't detract from its 
arithmetical character. This property Pr(x) is, in fact, 
stupendous, and it allows us to take the plunge into the heart 
of the proof. 
What we use next is something called the diagonal lemma. 
It's a general statement, a particular case of which is what we 
need to prove Godel's theorem. (Godel didn't actually use it, 
but rather derived the particular case.) Making use of this 
6 Compare this to Richard's paradox (footnote 5 above), which Godel 
cites, together with the liar's paradox, as a heuristic aid to understanding 
his proof. Richard's paradox also has the (illusive) feel of attributing a 
contrived, or unreal, property to numbers (the property of being 
Richardian) which a number will or won't have because of the arbitrary 
assignments of numbers to properties. 

180 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
general lemma (which, of course, we're not going to prove) 
will simplify matters enormously. 
The diagonal lemma states that the Godel numbering is 
such that for any propositional function F(x) of one variable, 
there exists a number n such that the Godel number of F(«), 
the proposition we get when we plug n into the function F(x), 
turns out to be n itself. (That there must exist such a number 
for each F(x) may suggest what superhuman efforts went into 
the Godel numbering.) In other words, the diagonal lemma 
asserts that for any F(x) there is an n such that 
 
The number you get out is the same number you started with, 
and so the special n associated with a given F corresponds 
precisely to where the graph of y = GN(F(x)) intersects the 
diagonal, the graph of y = x, namely where x = n. Hence the 
name, the "diagonal lemma." 
(N.B. The statement n = GN(F(n)) is in the metalanguage. 
It's a "normal statement" (i.e., not a formal statement) and n 
on the left denotes a (normal) natural number. However, the 
n on the right represents the expression in the formal system 
that represents the number n, namely s(s(s( . . . s(s(0))))), 
with n occurrences of s.) 
Notice that the number n that the diagonal lemma 
associates with the propositional function F(x) is such that 
the proposition with Godel number n (namely F(«)) says that 
n itself has the property F. It is, roughly speaking, of the 
form; this very sentence is F. Soft whispers of self-
referentiality a? e hovering in the hushed air. 
Now let's go back to that stupendous property that Godel 
produced, Pr, which is true of all and only the Godel numbers 

Incompleteness 
181 
of the theorems, the provable wffs, of the system. A number 
will have the arithmetical property Pr if and only if it 
corresponds to a provable proposition under the Godel 
numbering. In other words: 
 
We have the metasyntactic sense of what Pr(x) means 
(though not what its arithmetical meaning is; you just have 
my assurance that it has an arithmetical meaning). Now let's 
look at the property: 
 
This second property will be true of all and only the Godel 
numbers of nontheorems; that is, it is true of the Godel 
numbers of objects that are not propositions provable in the 
system. In other words: 
 
What kind of sentence is (1)? It is a metamathematical 
sentence. It's not itself a sentence of the formal system, nor an 
arithmetical sentence. But by means of (1) we can transform 
some metamathematical sentences into arithmetical sentences. 
Now the diagonal lemma concerns any prepositional 
function F(x), so let's apply it to
. The 
diagonal lemma, remember, states that for any propositional 
function F(x) of one variable, there exists a number n that is 
the Godel number of the very proposition we get when we 
plug n itself into the function. We're now considering the 
propositional function
According to the diagonal lemma 
there is some number, let's call it g, such that: 

182 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
 
We arrived at (2) by replacing F by ~Pr and n by g in (0). 
Equation (2) says that g is the Godel number of the 
proposition that states that the number g lacks the arithmetical 
property Pr (which belongs to all and only those numbers 
which are Godel numbers of provable propositions). 
Now we're ready to frame our proposition G. Let 
 
The proposition G states that the number g lacks the property 
Pr. Moreover, by (2) and (3), we have that: 
 
Now we go back to (1) and make some substitutions. Here's 
(1) again: 
 
Letting p = G in (1), and using the fact that GN(G) = g, we 
obtain: 
 
That is, using again (3), G if and only if G is not provable. What 
(4) is saying is that G is true if and only if G is not provable! 
G is, of course, a purely arithmetical statement, but it's also 
simultaneously talking about itself, and what it's saying is that 
it's not provable. Is what it's saying true? Well, it could hardly 
be false since then it would have to be provable and hence 
true anyway. That is, unless, of course, the formal system of 
arithmetic is inconsistent, so that all its propositions would be 
provable, even contradictions. This is the point in the proof 

Incompleteness 
183 
where that presumption of the consistency of the formal 
system is being called upon to stand up and deliver. And it 
does. G is both unprovable and, given that that's what it 
says, it's also true. We haven't shown that it's true by 
finding a proof for it within the formal system, using the 
purely mechanical rules of that system, that is, by deducing 
it. Rather, we've shown it's true by, ironically, going outside 
the system and showing that no proof for it can be produced 
within the formal system. We've shown that G is true by 
showing that it can't be proved, just as it says. 
Moreover, Godel in fact showed how to construct a true 
but unprovable proposition, not just for the formal system of 
arithmetic we have been discussing but for any formal system 
whatsoever containing arithmetic. So if we should try to 
weasel our way out of Godel's first incompleteness theorem 
by constructing a new formal system that has G appended as 
an axiom, a new problematic proposition can be constructed 
for that system. And so on, ad infmitum. There are provably 
unprovable but nonetheless true propositions in any formal 
system that contains elementary arithmetic, assuming that 
system to be consistent. 
And that is Godel's first incompleteness theorem. 
The Second Incompleteness Theorem 
The second incompleteness theorem states that the 
consistency of a formal system that contains arithmetic can't 
be formally proved within that system. It would seem to 
follow, pretty straightforwardly, from the first. Remember 
that the first incompleteness result has the form of a 
conditional statement: if the formal system of arithmetic is 
consistent, then G 

 

Incompleteness 
185 
about self-contradictions (it has four bathrooms) lurking in 
the description.) In other words, when the formal system of 
arithmetic is endowed with the usual meanings, involving the 
natural numbers and their properties, the axioms and all that 
follow from them are true and, therefore, consistent. This sort 
of argument for consistency, however, goes outside the formal 
system, making an appeal to the existence of the natural 
numbers as a model. This is not the kind of reasoning to offer 
solace to a formalist, however much it might gladden the 
heart of a Platonist like Godel. Finitary formal systems 
were, according to Hilbert, anschaulich, transparently pure. 
With everything reduced to either stipulation or the logical 
consequences of the stipulated mechanical procedures, there 
is no place for obscurity (possibly infected with paradox) to 
creep in. Finitary formal systems were, according to Hilbert's 
program, the means for draining the paradoxical substance 
out of the notion of the infinite: 
Operating with the infinite can be made certain only by the 
finite. The role that remains for the infinite to play is purely 
that of an idea—if one means by an idea, in Kant's 
terminology, a concept of reason which transcends all 
experience and which completes the concrete as a 
totality—that of an idea, moreover, which we may 
unhesitatingly trust within the framework erected by our 
theory. 
Hilbert's program—to expunge all reference to intuitions— 
was most particularly directed toward our intuitions of infinity; 
not surprisingly, finite creatures that we are, it is these intuitions 
that have proved themselves, from the very beginning, to be the 
most problematic. The deep uneasiness that even Euclid felt 

186 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
toward his fifth postulate and which was replicated down 
through the ages, stems from our altogether appropriate lack of 
confidence on all matters infinite. Yet one can't do any 
mathematics at all, not even basic arithmetic, without referring 
implicitly to the infinite. If we could tame infinitude by 
capturing it within our finitary formal systems then we would 
have effected the perfect compromise. The infinite would, in 
Hilbert's words, "be made certain by the finite." 
Godel's result, in effect, proclaims the robustness of the 
mathematical notion of infinity; it can't be drained of its 
vitality and turned into a ghostly Kantian-type idea hovering 
somewhere over, but without entering into, mathematics. The 
mathematician's intuitions of infinity—in particular, the 
infinite structure that is the natural numbers—can no more 
be reduced to finitary formal systems than they can be 
expunged from mathematics. 
Another way of seeing the robustness of our intuition of 
infinity is to consider that it follows from Godel's work that 
there are "nonstandard models" of arithmetic. Specifically, 
Godel's completeness theorem—that Ph.D. thesis that turned 
out to be not as humdrum as it had first seemed—tells us, 
among other things, that every consistent formal system has a 
model. There is a way of specifying a universe of discourse 
and interpreting the predicates and relations and constants so 
that all the theorems of the formal system are true 
descriptions. It follows from this, together with Godel's first 
incompleteness theorem, that there is at least one 
nonstandard model of arithmetic: a model that satisfies all 
the axioms of the formal system of arithmetic but in which 
some of the truths of standard arithmetic—G, for example—
will be false. 

Incompleteness 
187 
So this nonstandard model isn't going to consist of the 
natural numbers as we know and love them.8 
The natural numbers transcend the formal system of 
arithmetic, in the sense that that formal system does not 
uniquely pick out the natural numbers as its model; as 
being, that is, what the formal system is about. The same 
thing happens to be true of any larger formal system 
containing arithmetic. There remains something—always—
that eludes capture in a formal system. It was in this metalight 
that Godel viewed his incompleteness theorems. 
Godel's second incompleteness theorem, the direct 
consequence of the first, as von Neumann was quick to 
realize, effectively demolished Hilbert's program for 
mathematical transparency, since finitary formal systems 
could only be proved consistent by resorting to arguments 
that couldn't be expressed within the formal systems 
themselves, no matter how they were modified and extended. 
The second incompleteness theorem put formalism in an 
impossible bind: the formalist incentive was to banish the 
opacity of the nature of the thing in itself (space, numbers, 
sets) for 
8 The study of model theory—interpretations both standard (with the 
natural numbers as the universe of discourse) and nonstandard—as 
distinct from proof theory—the study of the purely syntactic features of 
formal systems—was opened up as a result of Godel's incompleteness 
proof. Not only had Godel's proof put logic, in the words of Simon 
Kochen, "on the mathematical map," but it also had pointed the way to new 
and distinct regions of technical research. Godel himself never showed 
much interest in doing research in the areas his proof engendered, not so 
surprising in light of his audacious ambition to restrict himself only to 
mathematics with metamathematical implications. 

188 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
the transparency of formal systems. But it's of the highest 
priority that a formal system—drained of the descriptive content 
that would, so long as the axioms were truly descriptive, 
ensure its consistency—be proved consistent. This can only be 
done by going outside the formal system and making an appeal 
to intuitions that can't themselves be formalized. (The last 
article that Godel was to publish in his life showed how 
arithmetic could be shown to be consistent provided one makes 
certain assumptions about objective mathematical reality.) The 
purely syntactic aspects of formal systems—the transparent 
aspects—aren't sufficient unto themselves, neither in being 
able to prove all the true arithmetical propositions expressible 
within the system (the first incompleteness theorem) nor in 
providing a proof of internal consistency (the second 
incompleteness theorem). 
What was Hilbert's reaction to the logical wrench thrown 
into his beautiful plan? The mathematician, Paul Bernays 
(1888-1977), who had come to Gottingen to serve as Hilbert's 
assistant, reveals in a letter that he had, sometime before 
Godel's proof, himself become "doubtful . . . about the 
completeness of the formal systems" and had "uttered [his 
doubts] to Hilbert." Hilbert, according to Bernays, became 
angry; and he was angry when Godel's proof became known to 
him. 
But a proof is a proof, as Hilbert, of all people, appreciated. 
Wittgenstein and Incompleteness 
Wittgenstein's reaction to Godel's proof was notably different 
from Hilbert's. He did not live to accommodate himself to 
Godel's work, as Hilbert did, no matter how unpalatable to his 
philosophical outlook, to his entire program, it was. There is 
a logical incompatibility between Wittgenstein's views on the 

Incompleteness 
191 
our linguistic systems cannot exhaust all that there is to non-
mathematical reality. All that can be said can be said clearly, 
according to the Tractatus; but we cannot say the most 
important things. We cannot speak the unspeakable truths, but 
they exist. Again, we see why Wittgenstein fulminated against 
the positivists, why he sometimes became so enraged with 
his would-be disciples that he turned his back to them and 
faced the wall, reciting the poetry of a mystic Indian (an act 
hostile to positivists, if ever there was one: curious that its 
latent hostility seems to have passed them by). 
For Godel, for each formal system there will be truths 
expressible in that system that will not be provable; and one 
of the most important truths about the system, that it is 
consistent, will not be provable within the system. So both 
Godel and the early Wittgenstein are united against the 
positivists' reiteration of the ancient Sophist's slogan that 
man is the measure of all things. Both men assert a 
fundamental incompleteness that takes the measure of man. 
Wittgenstein's is, by far, the more radical statement of 
incompleteness. For Godel's there is expressible knowledge 
which cannot be formalized. The limits of formalization, of 
our attempt to reduce all mathematical knowledge to the 
specified rules of a system, are not congruent with the limits 
of our knowledge. Our mathematical knowledge exceeds our 
systems. For early Wittgenstein there is no expressible 
knowledge that escapes the limits he delineates. On the other 
side of meaningfulness lies all the most important subjects: 
ethics and aesthetics and the meaning of life itself. "There 
are, indeed, things that cannot be put into words. They make 
themselves manifest. They are what is mystical." 
Wittgenstein's unpositivistically positive attitude toward the 

192 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
idea of the mystical—even though it is the meaningless 
mystical—might have struck a responsive chord in Godel. 
Godel was even receptive to the suggestion that his 
incompleteness theorems had consequences in the mystical, or 
at least religious, sphere. In a letter to his mother on 20 
October 1963 he remarked with regard to an article that she 
had sent him, and which he had not yet read, concerning the 
implications of his work: "It was something to be expected that 
sooner or later my proof will be made useful for religion, since 
that is doubtless also justified in a certain sense." At the very 
least, Godel believed his first incompleteness theorem 
supported Platonism's insistence on the existence of a 
suprasensible domain of eternal verities. Platonism isn't of 
course tantamount to religion or mysticism, but there are 
affinities. 
For early Wittgenstein, as for Godel, the attempt to 
systematize reality, to capture it all within our limpid 
constructions designed to keep out all contradictions and 
paradox, are doomed to failure. Godel's first incompleteness 
theorem tells us that any consistent formal system adequate 
for the expression of arithmetic must leave out much of 
mathematical reality, and his second theorem tells us that 
no such formal system can even prove itself to be self-
consistent. Of course, Godel believes that these systems are 
consistent, since they have a model in the truly existent 
abstract realm. Wittgenstein so ardently embraces the futility 
of attaining both completeness and self-consistency that he 
allows the Tractatus itself to bare its self-contradiction in 
plain sight, speaking of that of which one cannot speak, even 
while pronouncing the very statement that forbids it. 
Godel would most likely not have known that, on some 
level, he and (the early) Wittgenstein shared a profound con- 

Incompleteness 
193 
viction of incompleteness, a shared rejection of the logical 
positivists' endorsement of the Sophist's "measure of all 
things." After all, as he reported on his Grandjean 
questionnaire, he never studied Wittgenstein for himself. His 
acquaintance with the philosopher was, by his own 
estimation, superficial, presumably because he was not 
sufficiently excited by what he heard to study the philosopher 
for himself; he knew only what he learned by way of the 
discussions of the Vienna Circle. And the logical positivists, 
studying the precisely obscure Tractatus proposition by 
proposition, were intent on systematically ignoring those 
aspects that would have been congenial to Godel, speaking to 
his own conviction of a reality always escaping our ordered 
attempts at precision. 
Of course, Godel and Wittgenstein located the escaped 
parts of reality in irreconcilably different ways. Godel's 
conviction, the metamathematical interpretation he gave his 
incompleteness theorems (as well as his work on the 
continuum hypothesis), was that it was aspects of 
mathematical 
reality 
that 
must 
escape 
our 
formal 
systematizing 
(although 
not 
our 
knowledge), 
and 
Wittgenstein's view on the foundations of mathematics 
would not countenance this conviction. For Wittgenstein, at 
least early Wittgenstein, all of knowledge, a fortiori 
mathematical 
knowledge, 
is 
systematizable; 
what 
systematically escapes our systems is the unsayable, which 
includes all that is important. Godel believed our expressible 
knowledge, demonstrably our mathematical knowledge, is 
greater than our systems. Whereof we cannot formalize, 
thereof we can still know, the mathematician might have said, 
had he had any inclination toward the oracular. 
Wittgenstein never allowed Godel's result to tamper with his 
views on metamathematics, which subject increasingly obsessed 

194 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
him in the years after the Tractatus was published and 
subsequently renounced by its author. His aim, as he said, was 
to bypass Godel's proof. This is both interesting in itself and 
interesting because of its galling effect on Godel. The 
philosopher had spoken of necessary silence. Godel, one 
suspects, would have liked that silence to envelope the 
philosopher himself. 
The Spreading Incompleteness 
The incompleteness proof opened up entirely new areas of 
research, most notably model theory and recursion theory. 
Godel was never interested in pursuing the problems of those 
fields for himself. Much like his soulmate Einstein, he was 
interested in pursuing what Einstein called problems of 
"genuine importance," that is problems that lay in the 
interstice between exact science and philosophy, problems 
that radiated meta-implications. He left the "mop-up work" 
(in Thomas Kuhn's colorful terminology) to others. The 
vaulting 
intellectual 
ambition 
and 
confidence—so 
incongruously coupled with worldly fearfulness and self-
effacement—may have meant that he left behind fewer 
results than he might have, but it also meant that the reach of 
his results was vast. 
Godel's incompleteness theorems do not stun us simply 
because they open up promising new areas of technical 
research. Deep discoveries in the exact sciences quite often do 
exactly that. What makes Godel's results so stunning is the 
sheer volume of all that they have to say. The passionate 
Platonist, who had sat mum among the positivists, not 
murmuring a word of demurral, had produced the most 
loquacious theorems in the history of mathematics. 
It was because of their volubility that a philosopher like 

Incompleteness 
195 
Wittgenstein could not accept them, that his self-assigned 
task was not to discuss them but to bypass them. 
(Wittgenstein was to carry on his extended argument 
against the very possibility of such a result as Godel's with the 
young English logician Alan Turing, who would go on to 
produce a proof that has great affinity with Godel's. Turing, 
too, would manage to give sharp mathematical expression to 
meta-mathematical concepts and to appropriate the structure 
of self-referential paradoxicality to his own ends. Alan 
Turing had spent the academic year 1936-37 at the Institute 
for Advanced Study, where Godel's incompleteness theorems 
were very much the topic of the day among von Neumann 
and his circle. (Von Neumann did more than anyone else to 
disseminate the news of Godel's accomplishments.9) Turing 
returned to Cambridge, with his mind dwelling on Godel's 
proof. His first semester back in England, he gave a course in 
Cambridge on the "Foundations of Mathematics." That same 
semester Wittgenstein was also giving a course there entitled 
"Founda- 
9 For example, the logician Stephen Kline recounted how Godel 
"entered my intellectual life.. .. One day in the fall of 1931 the speaker in 
the mathematics colloquium at Princeton was John von Neumann. Instead 
of talking on work of his own (of which there was plenty) he spoke on the 
results of GodePs 1931 paper, which had recently come out in the 
Monatschafte, but which Church and we in his course had not yet noticed. 
Von Neumann had had a preview of the first of those truths (accompanied 
by intellectual intercourse with Godel) at the Konigsberg meeting of 
September 1930. After the colloquium, Church's course continued 
uninterruptedly concentrating on his formal system; but on the side we 
read GodePs paper, which to me opened up a whole new world of 
fascinating ideas and perspective. The impression this made on me was so 
much the greater because of the conciseness and incisiveness of GodePs 
treatment." 

196 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
tions of Mathematics," but the two courses could not have 
been more dissimilar. While Turing's course was, in effect, an 
introduction to mathematical logic, Wittgenstein devoted his 
course primarily to arguing against the possibility of 
mathematical logic in general, and against its implications for 
meta-mathematics 
in 
particular. 
Turing 
attended 
Wittgenstein's lectures, at least for a while, and Wittgenstein 
was so intent on changing Turing's mind that, while the 
logician attended, Wittgenstein's lecture was focused entirely 
on that aim; when Turing once mentioned that he would not be 
able to attend the seminar the next week, Wittgenstein 
remarked that then the discussion that week would be 
"parenthetical."10 Eventually 
10 The crux of the raging debate carried on between Turing and 
Wittgenstein that semester was whether contradictions and paradoxes can 
have any significance. Wittgenstein maintained that they cannot. Take, for 
example, the case of the liar's paradox. Wittgenstein's view about it was: "It is 
very queer in a way that this should have puzzled anyone—much more 
extraordinary than you might think: that this would be the thing to worry 
human beings. Because the thing works like this: if a man says 'I am lying' we 
say that it follows that he is not lying, from which it follows that he is lying 
and so on. Well, so what? You can go on like that until you are black in the 
face. Why not? It doesn't matter." But Turing, being committed to 
mathematical logic and aware of the use to which Godel had put traditional 
paradoxes such as the liar's paradox, was very much under the impression that 
the liar's paradox—that paradoxes and contradictions in general—do matter, 
and that they are sometimes pointing the way to almost necessarily 
surprising truths. When Wittgenstein remained adamant that a contradiction 
in a system was no cause for concern, since everything reduced ultimately 
to the arbirtrari-ness of language-games, Turing stopped attending the 
lectures. Soon after this, Turing produced his metamathematical proof. 
Where Godel had subjected the concepts of "provability" and "completeness" 
to his transformative techniques, Turing would give mathematical 
expression to the concepts of "decidability" and "computability." A 
mathematical question of a certain type 

Incompleteness 
197 
Turing stopped attending, and soon after produced his own 
important metamathematical result.) 
(that includes an infinite number of specific questions) is decidable if and only 
if there exists an algorithm—one single computable series of operations—for 
determining, for any such question, whether the answer is yes or no, without 
necessarily explaining why the answer is yes or no. You don't have to 
understand why an algorithm works for it to be an algorithm and for it to 
work. In particular, there is the sort of mathematical question that asks 
whether or not a proposition is formally provable. It's not hard to see, though 
a little beyond the scope of this footnote, that Hilbert's formalism—or more 
precisely the notion, shown to be false by Godel, that for every mathematical 
proposition either it or its negation admits of a proof—implies that the 
question of whether a proposition is provable is in fact decidable. If one had 
an algorithm for showing whether a proposition or its negation was provable, 
then, given Hilbert's formalism, one would have an algorithm for 
mathematical truth. Such an algorithm would provide a purely finitary 
combinatoric method for capturing the concept of mathematical truth (just 
as the concept of mathematical provability had been captured). Turing proved 
that no such algorithm exists, providing yet another frustration to Hibert's 
formalist hope. His proof is so closely allied with Godel's that it is possible to 
derive an alternative proof of GSdel's first incompleteness theorem from it. 
Godel was so gladdened by Turing's work that, in 1963, when his famous 
paper of 1931 was republished, he appended a paragraph stating that his own 
two incompleteness theorems had been strengthened by Turing's work. "In 
consequence of later advances, in particular of the fact that due to A.M. 
Turing's work (Turing [1937] 'On computable numbers, with an application 
to the Entscheidungsproblem,' Proceedings of the London Mathematical 
Society, 2nd series, 42, 230-65) a precise and unquestionably adequate 
definition of the general notion of formal system can now be given, a complete 
general version of Theorems VI and XI is now possible. That is, it can be 
proved rigorously that in every consistent formal system that contains a 
certain amount of finitary number theory there exist undecidable arithmetic 
propositions and that, moreover, the consistency of any such system cannot be 
proved in the system." Unfortunately, Turing and Godel never met. Turing 
died at the age of 42, a suicide. 

198 
REBECCA GOLDSTBIN 
And it was because of their volubility that Hilbert's 
program was abandoned. Hilbert had tried to inoculate 
mathematics against paradox by eliminating all appeals to 
intuition. Godel had proved that appeals to intuition could not 
be eliminated; he had undermined formalism's inoculation 
program. In particular, our intuitions about infinity—as 
susceptible as they are to invalidating fallacies, as the 
infamous paradoxes make all too clear (and which we can 
only avoid by adopting such ad hoc rules as Russell and 
Whitehead had devised)— nonetheless cannot be replaced by 
the semantics-free mechanical processes of mindless symbol-
manipulation. 
Such metamathematical conclusions, emerging from an a 
priori mathematical proof, are extraordinary enough in 
themselves. If these metamathematical results constituted all 
that followed from Godel's incompleteness theorems it would 
still be sufficient to mark his work as singularly gabby. But 
Godel's incompleteness theorems have been heard as 
addressing, in their irrepressible effusiveness, issues that 
range far beyond even metamathematics. Eminent thinkers 
have interpreted the incompleteness theorems as having 
something to say on the central question of the humanities, 
viz. what is it that makes us human? For mathematical 
theorems to have anything at all to say on such a subject as 
this—embedded deep in the messy matter of the human 
predicament—is to take what is already extraordinary and 
raise it to an altogether higher order of astoundingness. 
The formalists had tried to certify mathematical certitude 
by eliminating intuitions. Godel had shown that mathematics 
cannot proceed without them. Restricting ourselves to formal 
syntactic considerations will not even secure consistency. But 
these mathematical intuitions that cannot be eliminated and 

Incompleteness 
199 
cannot be formalized: what are they? How do they come to be 
available to the likes of us? We are once again thrown up 
against the mysterious nature of mathematical knowledge, 
against the mysterious nature of ourselves as knowers of 
mathematics. How do we come to have the knowledge that we 
do? How can we? Plato himself had argued that the very fact 
that our reasoning mind can come into contact with the 
eternal realm of abstraction suggests that there is something 
of the eternal in us: that the part of ourselves that can know 
mathematics is the part that will survive our bodily death. 
Spinoza was to argue along similar lines. 
Few scientifically minded, post-Godel thinkers would 
perhaps be ready to follow Plato and Spinoza into drawing 
conclusions of our immortality from our capacity for 
mathematical knowledge. After all, we are not only living 
with the truth of Godel but also the truth of Darwin. Our 
minds are the products of the blind mechanism of evolution. 
Still, many scientifically minded, post-Godel thinkers have 
testified to hearing, within the strange music of Godel's 
mathematical theorems, tidings about our essential human 
nature. They have argued from Godel's incompleteness 
theorems to conclusions about what we are; or rather, to be 
more precise, about what we are not. Godel's theorems tell us, 
according to this line of reasoning, what our minds simply could 
not be. 
In particular, what our minds could not be, so goes the 
reasoning, are computers. The mathematical knowledge that 
we possess cannot be captured in a formal system. That is 
what Godel's first incompleteness theorem seems to tell us. But 
formal systems are precisely what captures the computing of 
computers, which is why they are able to figure things out 
without having any recourse to meanings. Computers run 
according to 

200 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
algorithms and we, it seems, do not, from which it 
straightforwardly follows that our minds are not computers. 
The first of the arguments claiming a connection between 
Godel's first incompleteness theorem and the nature of the 
mind was published in 1961 by the Oxford philosopher 
John Lucas: 
Godel's theorem seems to me to prove that Mechanism is 
false, that is, that minds cannot be explained as machines. 
So also has it seemed to many other people: almost every 
mathematical logician I have put the matter to has 
confessed to similar thoughts, but has felt reluctant to 
commit himself definitely until he could see the whole 
argument set out, with all objections fully stated and 
properly met. This I attempt to do. 
Lucas's argument was stalwartly straightforward. No 
matter how complicated a "thinking" machine we engineer, 
he argued, this machine will run according to hard-wired 
rules that can be stated in a formal system, and when we ask 
this machine to tell us what the true propositions are it will 
be able to do this only by seeing which propositions follow 
according to the rules of the system. There will therefore be a 
proposition that eludes its grasp of truth, which is nothing 
but rule-determined provability—a proposition that our 
minds will nonetheless be able to grasp as true. No matter 
how we strengthen the machine, by adding in the previously 
elusive propositions as axioms, there will be yet another 
proposition that will elude it... but not us: 
This formula the machine will be unable to produce as 
being true, although a mind can see that it is true. And so 

Incompleteness 
201 
the machine will still not be an adequate model of the 
mind. We are trying to produce a model of the mind which 
is mechanical—which is essentially "dead" —but the mind, 
being in fact "alive," can always go one better than any 
formal, ossified, dead system can. Thanks to Godel's 
theorem, the mind always has the last word. 
The mathematician Roger Penrose, also an Oxford don, 
has published two books, The Emperor's New Mind and 
Shadows of the Mind, arguing the case that Godel's 
incompleteness theorems entail the falsity of mechanism, the 
dead-endedness of the field of artificial intelligence, if 
artificial intelligence presumes to fully explain our thinking. 
His argument is much the same as Lucas's, though he does 
an even more thorough job of trying to anticipate and answer 
all possible objections. 
What did Godel's theorem achieve? It was in 1930 that the 
brilliant young mathematician Kurt Godel startled a group 
of the world's leading mathematicians and logicians, at a 
meeting in Konigsberg, with what was to become the 
famous theorem. It rapidly became accepted as being a 
fundamental contribution to the foundations of 
mathematics—probably the most fundamental ever to be 
found—but I shall be arguing that in establishing his 
theorem, he also initiated a major step forward in 
philosophy of mind. 
Among the things that Godel indisputably established 
was that no formal system of sound mathematical rules of 
proof can ever suffice, even in principle, to establish all the 
true propositions of ordinary arithmetic. This is certainly 
remarkable enough. But a powerful case can also be made 
that his results showed something more than this, and 

202 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
established that human understanding and insight cannot 
be reduced to any set of rules. It will be part of my purpose 
here to try to convince the reader that GodePs theorem 
indeed shows this, and provides the foundation of my 
argument that there must be more to human thinking than 
can ever be achieved by a computer, in the sense that we 
understand the term "computer" today. 
Penrose believes that even though the mind is not a 
computer, it is nevertheless a physical system. The mind is 
identical with the brain. Therefore, the nonmechanistic 
nature of the mind following, he claims, from GodePs first 
incompleteness theorem, should direct our thinking toward 
nonmechanistic physical laws of just such a sort as are 
suggested by quantum mechanics. The mathematically 
intuiting mind, which demonstrably can't be captured 
mechanistically, is nonetheless a physical system; we should, 
therefore, look toward developing a nonmechanistic, 
radically new sort of science—the mysteries of quantum 
mechanics should be our guide here—so that the 
noncomputational aspects of mind can be accommodated. 
The noncombinatorial but nevertheless physical nature of 
thinking shows us the noncombinatorial nature of basic 
physical laws. 
Godel himself was far more reserved about drawing 
conclusions concerning the nature of the human mind from 
his famous mathematical theorems. What is rigorously 
proved, he suggested in his conversations with Hao Wang as 
well as in the Gibbs lecture that he gave in Providence, Rhode 
Island, 26 February 1951 (which he never published), is not a 
categorical proposition as regards the mind. Rather what 
follows is a disjunction, an "either-or" sort of a proposition. 
That is, he 

Incompleteness 
203 
was admitting that nonmechanism doesn't follow, clean and 
simply, from his incompleteness theorem. There are possible 
outs for the mechanist. 
According to Wang, Godel believed that what had been 
rigorously proved, presumably on the basis of the 
incompleteness theorem, is: "Either the human mind 
surpasses all machines (to be more precise it can decide 
more number theoretical questions than any machine) or else 
there exist number theoretical questions undecidable for the 
human mind." 
What exactly did Godel have in mind with this second 
disjunct? I think that what he is considering here is the 
possibility that we are indeed machines—that is, that all of 
our thinking is mechanical, determined by hard-wired rules—
but that we are under the delusion that we have access to 
unfor-malizable mathematical truth. We could possibly be 
machines who suffer from delusions of mathematical 
grandeur. What follows from his theorem, he seems to be 
suggesting, is that just so long as we are not delusional as 
regards our grasp of mathematical truths, just so long as we 
do have the intuitions that we think we have, then we are not 
machines. If indeed we truly have the intuitions that we do, 
then it is impossible for us to formalize (or mechanize) all of 
our mathematical intuitions, which means that we truly are 
not machines. Of course there is no proof that we know all that 
we think we know, since all that we think we know can't be 
formalized; that, after all, is incompleteness. This is why we 
can't rigorously prove that we're not machines. The 
incompleteness 
theorem, 
by 
showing 
the 
limits 
of 
formalization, both suggests that our minds transcend 
machines and makes it impossible to prove that our minds 
transcend machines. Again, an almost-paradox. 
So Godel was cautious about the consequences for human 

204 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
nature of his incompleteness theorem. Though he did have 
intuitions concerning the nature of the mind, he did not, 
scrupulous logician that he was, deduce any such conclusions 
from his incompleteness theorems alone. For Godel, the 
distinction between intuitions and rigorous proof was always 
vividly clear. After all, it was the unavoidability of that very 
distinction that had been so strongly suggested by his famous 
proof. 
The second disjunct in Godel's disjunctive conclusion 
concerning our mathematically knowing minds, then, 
consists in this possibility: we are delusional in our claims to 
a mathematical knowledge that exceeds all formalization. This 
possibility—its being precisely the possibility that gave 
Godel pause—is particularly interesting when we consider an 
aspect of Godel's opaque inner life that we have touched 
upon before: his own serious delusions. 
Godel's theorems are darkly mirrored in the predicament 
of psychopathology: Just as no proof of the consistency of a 
formal system can be accomplished within the system itself, 
so, too, no validation of our rationality—of our very sanity— 
can be accomplished using our rationality itself. How can a 
person, operating within a system of beliefs, including beliefs 
about beliefs, get outside that system to determine whether it 
is rational? If your entire system becomes infected with 
madness, including the very rules by which you reason, then 
how can you ever reason your way out of your madness?11 
11 The dark mirroring is reflected in a remark of Furtwangler's, who had 
been Godel's favorite mathematics professor at university, reported by Olga 
Taussky-Todd in her memoir of Godel. "Auguste Bick has supplied me with 
an amusing remark by Fiirtwangler concerning Godel's result, when the 
latter had one of his paranoia attacks: 'Is his illness a consequence of 
proving the nonprovability or is his illness necessary for such an 
occupation?'" 

Incompleteness 
205 
As one textbook on psychopathology puts it: "Delusions 
may be systematized into highly developed and rationalized 
schemes which have a high degree of internal consistency once 
the basic premise is granted. . . . The delusion frequently may 
appear logical, although exceedingly intricate and complex." 
Paranoia isn't the abandonment of rationality. Rather, it is 
rationality run amuck, the inventive search for explanations 
turned relentless. A psychologist friend of mine put it this 
way: "A paranoid person is irrationally rational.... Paranoid 
thinking is characterized not by illogic, but by a misguided 
logic, by logic run wild." 
It's ironic to conclude this very chapter, conveying some 
small sense of the superhuman beauty of Godel's 
incomparable proof, with remarks on the tragic parallel 
between the limitations of proof ingeniously demonstrated 
by 
Aristotle's 
successor 
and 
the 
predicament 
of 
psychopathology. 

 

IV 
Godel's Incompleteness 
Pink Flamingo 
here it was, inconceivably, K. Goedel, listed just like any 
other name in the bright orange Princeton community 
phonebook. 
It was a sweetly surreal moment. I had just arrived as a 
graduate student at Princeton and, just for the thrilling 
improbability of it, had looked up the name of the town's 
most dazzling mind, the reigning, if reclusive, god at the 
fabled Institute for Advanced Study, a bucolic three-minute 
stroll from where I was living. 
It seemed almost axiomatic to me in those days that the 
greatest mathematical mind, which happened at that moment 
in history to be identical with Kurt Godel's mind, was 
necessarily identical with the greatest of all minds. K. Goedel. 
It was like opening up the local phonebook and finding B, 
Spinoza or I. Newton. 
The Princeton community phonebook had offered me the 
unbelievable largesse not only of a telephone number but also 
of a street address for Godel. Of course, once I had this infor- 
207 
T 

208 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
mation there was nothing else for me to do but to hop on my 
bike and peddle my way over to see the house on 145 Linden 
Lane. It was a simple wooden affair, orthogonally situated in 
relation to the street, unlike all the other forward-facing 
houses, and this singularity seemed somehow just right. The 
place itself was compact and modest, vaguely "European" 
with its red-tiled roof. By comparison, the house at 115 
Mercer Street where Einstein had lived had been a mansion 
(and it wasn't). 
The neighborhood certainly wasn't Princeton's choicest. It 
was a hot September day and the street was treeless, depress-
ingly exposed to the high noon sun. There wasn't a soul 
stirring around the Godel house, but the visit did manage to 
deliver yet another surreal wallop. The sliver of a front yard 
was completely dominated by one of those pink, plastic 
flamingoes that stands poised on one skinny leg. 
I stared in disbelief at the bird. How could a man who had 
produced one of the most exquisite masterpieces of human 
thought have planted a pink flamingo on his front lawn? 
Of course, there was a Mrs. Godel, a former cabaret dancer, 
by popular report. Visions of Die Blaue Engel danced through 
my head, and I hastily attributed the lawn ornament to a 
Marlene Dietrich-type turned unlikely New Jersey Hausfrau. 
I was hardly the only Princeton denizen who was 
fascinated with the elusive celebrity of pure thought in our 
midst. I once found the philosopher Richard Rorty standing 
in a bit of a daze in Davidson's food market. He told me in 
hushed tones that he'd just seen Godel in the frozen food 
aisle, pushing his food cart. I went tearing through the aisles, 
but the phantom of logic had vanished. 

Incompleteness 
209 
"What was he buying?" I asked Rorty, for the rumor was 
that the man ate next to nothing. Rorty shook his head 
lugubriously and said he'd been too stunned to notice. 
"But I guess we can assume it was something frozen." 
I remember more than one party in which we, graduate 
students 
and 
faculty 
members 
alike'—philosophers, 
mathematicians, physicists—sat in a circle and traded 
stories of Godel. Someone had noticed that every book 
related to Leibniz in Firestone Library had been checked out 
to a K. Goedel The library slips quickly disappeared, the 
lucky ones who got there first carrying them off as trophies. 
At one party, a fellow graduate student alleged that someone 
had snuck up on Godel as he sat reading in his office, to peer 
over his shoulder at the book, which was (uncorroborated) 
Ovid's love poetry in the original Latin. This same graduate 
student (now a prominent philosopher who shall go unnamed) 
at one party in which things got a bit out of hand, actually 
called Godel at home, when the question arose as to whether 
the international phone system could become sufficiently 
complex to become conscious. I think I remember that he 
slammed down the phone when he heard Mrs. Godel call out 
"Kurtsy!" 
We all speculated about what our hero might be working 
on. There were strange rumors about a proof for God's 
existence—which turned out to be veridical. Godel, like 
Leibniz, believed that some version of the infamous 
"ontological proof for God's existence" was valid. This is an 
argument that tries to deduce the existence of God from the 
right definition of God.1 
1 The earliest version of the ontological argument was St. Anselm's, and 
it goes something like this: God is, by definition, that than which nothing 

210 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
He mentioned to at least one colleague at the Institute, the 
philosopher Morton White, that there remained just one step 
to be clinched before his new version of the ontological 
argument for God's existence could be published. 
The tone of our fascination with Godel wasn't consistently 
reverential. There was even a decided undercurrent of 
flippancy. We found it hilarious, for example, that the 
greatest logician since Aristotle deluded himself into 
believing that God's existence could be proved a priori, that 
he was perhaps contemplating the day when atheists would 
be brought round by a good stiff course in quantificational 
logic. The stories we swiped were gratifying in the way that 
stories of geniuses acting oddly are always gratifying; we cut 
our prodigies down to human size, domesticate their grandeur 
into cuddliness with tales of their quotidian weirdness. 
Sometimes we miss seeing what is truly human within these 
prodigious talents, yet one more irony that Godel's story 
suggests. 
Godel's story has forced me to confront a more personal 
irony, too, since it has required me to reacquaint myself with a 
field, mathematical logic, in which I had once been so much 
more deeply immersed and fluent. Years of a different kind of 
immersion, in the shadowy realm of fiction, interceded. It's 
not that fiction forsakes hard logic, though fiction's is not 
logic as we formally understand it; and it's not that fiction's 
logic isn't as elusive, complex, and startling as mathematical 
logic. Still, the logic of fiction is something quite different 
greater can be conceived. God, therefore, cannot be conceived of as not 
existing, for otherwise we can conceive of Him as being greater, viz. by 
existing. It is therefore inconceivable that God not exist; ergo He exists. 

Incompleteness 
211 
from formal proofs, and I know that I was the better 
mathematician in my youth, when I sat with others and 
callowly swapped stories of Godel's genius and looniness. Yet 
I wonder whether I could have understood his story in quite 
the same way, back in the days when I was more blinded by 
lucidity. 
Godel, recluse though he was, made a rather surprise 
appearance once at an Institute garden party held for new 
temporary members in 1973, and, as Oskar Morgenstern wrote 
in his journal, the logician was in especially droll form that 
evening, ending up "holding court in the midst of a group 
of young logicians." I was there in that group, one of the 
acolytes agape at the god. There was a giant tent spread on 
the lawn behind Olden Farm, the domicile of the president of 
the Institute, who was then Karl Kaysen. It was a balmy 
October afternoon and Godel, dapper in a dark suit, was also 
muffled in a long woolen scarf. I read somewhere that his height 
was 5' 6", but he seemed even smaller to me, and of course he 
was bird-thin. We all knew that the man barely ate. He was, as 
Morgenstern described it, in rare form (only I did not yet 
know how truly rare it was), clearly trying to make the 
youngsters feel welcome. We were mostly awed into stupidity 
(certainly I was). So we didn't ply him with the questions that 
we all wished we had, as we commiserated with one another 
after he had, with a brief nod and good wishes for our future 
work, disappeared into the falling dusk. I remember 
particularly regretting that I had not gotten up the nerve to ask 
him what he thought of the paper that the Oxford philosopher 
John Lucas had published, claiming that conclusions in the 
philosophy of mind followed from the first incompleteness 
theorem. 
We all agreed that we wished we had asked him about what 

212 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
he was working on now. He was said to go almost every day to 
his office at the Institute, to sit quietly there and work. What 
conceptual revolutions had the gnomish logician laid in wait 
for us? Though the number of his publications didn't amount 
to much—the sum total of pages equalling less than 100—in 
content each one had been far more than merely remarkable. 
But the last time he had published had been in 1958: a 
consistency proof for arithmetic in the journal Dialectica.2 
This particular issue of the journal was a Festschrift in 
honor of the seventieth birthday of the mathematician Paul 
Bernays, the former Hilbert assistant who had not found, 
since having been dismissed as a non-Aryan from Gottingen, 
any academic post commensurate with his ability. It was Paul 
Bernays who had first presented a fully worked-out proof of 
the second incompleteness theorem, having learned the 
details on board the SS Georgia from his shipmate, Godel. 
And Bernays had improved on von Neumann's axiomatiza-
tion of set theory in a way of which Godel highly approved 
and had used in his own work on set theory. So it was 
altogether fitting that Godel should overcome his reluctance 
to publish in order to contribute something to the Festschrift. 
Godel had written about a new sort of proof for the 
consistency of arithmetic, one which was not finitary, and so 
therefore was consistent with his second incompleteness 
theorem. (But since it wasn't finitary it didn't meet the 
requirements of Hilbert's challenge.) He had lectured on this 
new sort of proof for consistency at Yale and at the Institute 
back in 1941. The 1958 paper was a beautifully concise 
statement of those ideas. Still the article hadn't contained any 
new results. 
2 This was in fact the last thing he published in his lifetime. 

Incompleteness 
213 
People reported that there were notebooks upon 
notebooks of ideas that he had never published.3 And why 
was he so reluctant to publish? There is much evidence that 
Godel suspected that his ideas would be greeted skeptically 
and dis-missively. Hao Wang wrote: "Godel would probably 
have published more if he found himself living in a more 
sympathetic philosophical community. For instance, he 
declined to speak to what he expected to be a hostile 
audience." 
More and more reclusive, once he lost the great friend of 
his life in Einstein, he was not inclined to air his views in a 
climate he judged to be perhaps as positivist as what he'd 
known back in the grungy room at the University of Vienna 
where the Schlick group had met on Thursday evenings at six. 
His sense of a world increasingly under the sway of the long-
scattered Vienna Circle wasn't entirely unfounded. As Feigl 
recounts in his essay "The Wiener Kreis in America," 
positivists such as 
3 In the Nachlass there's a sheet of paper on which Godel had listed, 
probably in 1970 according to Hao Wang, all his unpublished work, from 
1940 on. It reads something like: 
1. About one thousand 6 x 8-inch stenographic pages of clearly written 
philosophical notes (= philosophical assertions). 
2. Two philosophical papers almost ready for print [His paper on rela 
tivity and Kant's philosophy and his paper on syntax and mathemat 
ics,  originally  intended  for  the  Carnap  Festschrift,   but  never 
published by him. ] 
3. Several thousand pages of philosophical excerpts and [notes on the] 
literature. 
4. The clearly written proofs of my [his] cosmological results. 
5. About six hundred clearly written pages of set theoretical and logical 
results, questions and conjectures (to some extent outstripped by 
recent developments). 
6. Many notes on intuitionism and other foundational questions. 

214 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
himself and men like Hans Reichenbach and Peter Hempel, 
who had come to America to flee the Nazis, had had much 
success in bruiting their ideas abroad. In England there was 
the highly influential A. }. Ayer, whose Language, Truth, and 
Logic had largely been constructed out of what he'd heard 
in Vienna. Harvard's Willard Van Orman Quine, who had 
also visited with the Vienna Circle and imbibed their general 
outlook (though he was to disagree with them on specifics in 
such articles as "Two Dogmas of Empiricism" in his From A 
Logical Point of View) became the most dominant force in 
American philosophy. Wittgenstein's name posthumously 
loomed ever more prominently, the awed inclination to accept 
him a priori (prior even to understanding what he might have 
meant) persisting in analytic circles, even in the absence of his 
persuasive presence. And in physics departments the posi-
tivistic outlook of Niels Bohr and Werner Heisenberg had 
pretty much become the party line, where it still waxes strong. 
(It might be an interesting study to compare the figures of 
Niels Bohr and Ludwig Wittgenstein, both of them as 
charismatic as they were obscure, their obscurities pointing 
toward the same sort of conclusion: a prohibition against 
asking the sorts of questions that seek to make a connection 
between the abstract thought of their respective disciplines 
and objective reality.) 
So Godel wasn't being particularly paranoid in judging the 
climate of ideas as inimical to his own, though he perhaps 
both overestimated the degree of "positivism" in American 
universities and also underestimated his own reputation 
within the community and the commensurate respect that 
would have been accorded his views, the degree to which he 
might perhaps have even influenced the prevalent ideology 

Incompleteness 
215 
had he braced himself to enter the fray. But that had never 
been his way. He certainly had never been afraid to privately 
dissent from the dominant views of his day; but there was a 
rigid reluctance to publicly voice his adversarial position in 
any terms other than conclusive proof. 
I mentioned to the philosopher Morton White that I had 
come, in writing this book, to regard Godel as an intellectual 
exile, or, at least, as someone who had felt himself to be in 
exile. White thought for several moments and came up with 
this story. When he had been on the faculty at Harvard, he 
had been instrumental in having Godel invited to deliver the 
prestigious William James series of lectures and had been 
chagrined when Godel declined. This would have been in the 
1960s. When White himself came to the Institute as a 
permanent member in 1970, he remembers having asked 
Godel why he had turned down the invitation. Godel's 
answer had come in two parts. 
First of all, he'd said, the Harvard department was too 
"empiricist," and he thought they'd have been critical of what 
he had to say. Second of all—and this part of the answer, 
White told me, had really interested him—Godel felt he 
would have been doing an injustice to the ideas themselves, 
because he hadn't yet completed them; to expose them 
prematurely to an unsympathetic audience would be acting 
unjustly toward them. 
So it seems, at least from this story, that his reluctance to 
voice his unfashionable intuitions in any form that fell short 
of a proof was not only a matter of his own distaste for 
intellectual wrangling but also connected with a perceived 
ethical obligation toward the ideas themselves, which is 
appropriate for an impassioned Platonist. 

216 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
In 1964, Paul Benacerraf, of Princeton University's 
philosophy department, and Hilary Putnam, of Harvard's, 
edited a book entitled Philosophy of Mathematics and they 
wanted permission to include two of Godel's articles, 
"Russell's Mathematical Logic" and "What is Cantor's 
Continuum Problem?" In the latter essay, revised and 
expanded for this volume, Godel allows himself to state in 
clear and distinct terms the metaphysical Platonism to which 
he had subscribed, even as he'd sat, a backbencher among the 
positivists, quietly listening to the members of the Vienna 
Circle proclaiming the everlasting end of metaphysics, that is, 
of any assertions of existence that go beyond the empirically 
verifiable: 
[T]he objects of transfinite set theory . . . clearly do not 
belong to the physical world and even their indirect con 
nection with physical experience is very loose __  
But despite their remoteness from sense experience, we 
do have something like a perception also of the objects of 
set theory, as is seen from the fact that axioms force 
themselves upon us as being true. I don't see any reason 
why we should have less confidence in this kind of 
perception, i.e. in mathematical intuition, than in sense 
perception, which induces us to build up physical theories 
and to expect that future sense perceptions will agree with 
them and, moreover, to believe that a question not 
decidable now has meaning and may be decided in the 
future. The set-theoretical paradoxes are hardly any more 
troublesome for mathematics than deceptions of the senses 
are for physics. 
Godel explains in the article how Cantor's continuum 
hypothesis has been shown to be independent of the axioms 
of set theory, and his reasons for believing that the hypothesis 

Incompleteness 
217 
is actually false. (His was the part of the proof [of the unde-
cidability of the continuum hypothesis] that showed that the 
continuum hypothesis can't be proved false on the basis of 
present axioms of set theory, in other words that it's 
consistent with the axioms of set theory, so his believing that 
it's nonetheless false is particularly interesting. Paul Cohen 
proved that the continuum hypothesis, on the basis of the 
axioms of set theory, can't be proved true either. So together 
they proved the undecidability of the continuum hypothesis.) 
He connects his Platonist belief in the objective truth or 
falsity of such undecidable propositions as the continuum 
hypothesis with his own incompleteness result: 
What, however, perhaps more than anything else, justifies 
the acceptance of this criterion of truth in set theory is the 
fact that continued appeals to mathematical intuition are 
necessary not only for obtaining unambiguous answers to 
the questions of transfmite set theory, but also for the 
solution of the problems of finitary number theory (of the 
type of Goldbach's conjecture [which, you may remember, 
asserts that every even number larger than two is the sum of 
two primes]) where the meaningfulness and unambiguity 
of the concepts entering into them can hardly be doubted. 
This follows from the fact that for every axiomatic system 
there are infinitely many undecidable propositions of this 
type. 
Benacerraf recounted for me how Godel would call either 
him or Putnam every day to voice his ambivalence and 
misgivings about having his articles included in their 
volume, extending his permission one day only to 
withdraw it the next, and then rethinking the withdrawal 
the day after that. He was afraid that the two "positivist" 
editors would use their 

218 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
introduction to attack his ideas. Only when the two, singly 
and repeatedly, had promised him that they intended only to 
place each of the articles in its proper context and had no 
intention whatsoever of evaluating any of the chosen 
contributions did he finally agree to have his articles 
included. 
Was there any basis, I asked Benacerraf, for Godel's 
thinking that either he or Putnam was a positivist? 
"Well, Putnam, at some stage at least, sure. After all, his 
dissertation advisor had been Reichenbach." 
The Benacerraf /Putnam volume was divided into four 
sections: Part One: The Foundations of Mathematics; Part Two: 
The 
Existence 
of 
Mathematical 
Objects; 
Part 
Three: 
Mathematical 
Truth; 
and 
Part 
Four: 
Wittgenstein 
on 
Mathematics. Though the volume includes the writings of 
Frege, Hilbert, Godel—all the leaders in foundations—only 
Wittgenstein, who had never accepted Godel's theorems as 
important, is judged sufficiently significant to merit an entire 
section. How, one wonders, did Godel react to his author's 
copy? 
Godel had clearly expected that the full implications of his 
theorems would be as transparent to others as they had 
seemed to him, and he was not beyond the perfectly normal 
human reactions of disappointment and even resentment 
(though this was usually hidden behind the opacity of his 
thick reserve). He'd complained to Olga Taussky-Todd, as she 
reports in her memoir of him, that Hilbert still, even after 
Godel's proof, had continued to espouse formalism. "He 
spoke to me about this, I think in Zurich, and lashed out 
against Hilbert's paper 'Tertium non datur' [Goettinger 
Nachr. 1932], saying something like 'how can he write such a 
paper after what I have done?'" 
He seemed to have felt increasingly alone and embattled in 

Incompleteness 
219 
the highest turret of Reine Vernunft and took refuge in the 
sort of profound isolation that few spots on earth can afford 
with such abundant completeness—if that's what one is 
after—as the Institute for Advanced Study. 
The Coffee Is Wretched 
Godel first came to the Institute for the academic year 1933-34, 
which was the first year of its operation. The mathematician 
Veblen, one of Flexner's first appointments to the nascent 
Institute, had met the young logician in Vienna and had been 
sufficiently impressed to bring him to New Jersey for a 
temporary visit. Of course, von Neumann, who was also 
spending at least some of his time at Princeton, was quite 
interested in the logician who had spoken of his revolutionary 
theorems in one crisp compressed sentence delivered in 
Konigsberg. Godel had not wanted to lecture his first semester 
in America, being still uncertain of his English, but by the 
second semester he gave a series of lectures on incompleteness. 
This is how it came to be that the talk among von Neumann and 
his circle was filled with references to Godel when Alan 
Turing came to spend the academic year 1936—37 in 
Princeton, so that he returned to Cambridge determined to 
pursue Godelian lines of reasoning, with such successful 
results. 
Sometime in the course of this first stay, Godel met Einstein. 
Einstein had already moved permanently to Princeton, since 
Nazified Germany was no longer a possibility for him. It was 
Veblen who introduced them, but the famous friendship didn't 
begin until several years later when Godel himself moved 
permanently to Princeton. 
Godel, as a classified Aryan, went back to Vienna at the end 

220 
RBBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
of the academic year. Menger noted that when Godel returned 
he seemed even more fragile: 
Godel was more withdrawn after his return from America 
than before; but he still conversed with visitors to the 
Colloquium. . . .  To all the members of the Colloquium 
Godel was generous with opinions and advice in 
mathematical and logical questions. He consistently 
perceived problematic points quickly and thoroughly 
and made replies with greatest precision in a minimum 
of words, often opening up novel aspects for the 
inquirer. He expressed all this as if it were completely a 
matter of course, but often with a certain shyness whose 
charm awoke warm personal feelings for him in many a 
listener. 
Godel in fact spent a few weeks in a sanatorium after 
returning to Vienna, where the psychiatrist Julius Wagner-
Jauregg, who had won a Nobel prize in 1927, diagnosed a 
nervous breakdown brought on by overwork. Of course, it 
might not have been just overwork. Godel's crisis came soon 
after Moritz Schlick had been shot dead on the stairs of the 
university. This event was profoundly unsettling for even the 
most stable of people. The murder signified the effective end 
of the Vienna Circle, although its influence would continue to 
spread, especially with most of its former members soon 
required to find refuge outside Europe. In any case, Godel 
recovered sufficiently, after a few weeks in the sanatorium, and 
returned to teaching his course on topics in mathematical logic. 
Godel's position at the University of Vienna was rather a 
lowly one. He became a Privatdozent in Vienna in 1933. A 
Privatdozent is granted the right to lecture, though he receives 

Incompleteness 
221 
no salary. For the honor, a candidate has to write a second 
dissertation. Godel's proof of the completeness of the 
predicate calculus (limpid logic) had constituted his Ph.D. 
dissertation. His proof of the incompleteness of arithmetic 
was 
submitted 
for 
his 
second 
dissertation, 
the 
Habilitationsschrift. The commission to consider Godel's 
application met on 25 November 1932. A candidate for the 
Dozentur requires a sponsor, and Hans Hahn, his dissertation 
advisor, served as Godel's sponsor. Hahn testified to the 
committee that Godel's dissertation was of great scientific 
worth and that the Habilitationsschrift was "an achievement 
of the first rank" that had "attracted the greatest attention in 
scientific circles" and was already destined to go down in the 
history of mathematics (which seems, on the whole, rather 
faint praise) .4 Hahn made the not terribly audacious 
judgment that Godel's work far exceeded the requirements 
for the Habilitation and the committee unanimously agreed. 
However, this wasn't the last hoop a candidate had to jump 
through before being declared a Privatdozent. The entire faculty 
had to take a vote, not only on the candidate's scientific worth 
but also on his personal worthiness as well. "The results, as 
recorded by the dean in his report of 17 February 1933 to the 
ministry of instruction were, on the question of his character, 
fifty-one in the affirmative and one 'no.' On the question of his 
4 Time magazine, in commemoration of the end of the last millennium, 
devoted a few special issues to the 100 greatest minds of the last century. 
Kurt Godel was cited as the century's greatest mathematician. Interestingly, 
Ludwig Wittgenstein and Alan Turing also made the list, and Albert 
Einstein was chosen as the greatest mind of the century. 

222 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
scientific merit, there were forty nine cyes>s and one quite 
astounding 'no.' " (Two professors must have left between the 
two vote-takings.) John Dawson writes that in a private 
communication, "Dr. Werner Schimanovich has reported that 
the naysayer was Professor Wirtinger, who thought that the 
incompleteness paper overlapped too much with the 
dissertation," an almost inconceivably wrongheaded appraisal, 
since the dissertation had proved the completeness, not 
incompleteness, of a formal system, viz. that of the predicate 
calculus (or limpid logic).5 But that there should have been any 
dissent at all on the question of whether Godel's 
incompleteness theorems were worthy of earning him a place 
on the lowest rung of the University of Vienna is bizarre. What 
was Godel's inner response, one wonders, to the less-than-
unanimous vote? Disdain, resentment, an increased sense of 
insecurity? Godel, of course, knew the significance of his 
theorems in all their mathematical and metamathe-matical 
splendor. But his intellectual audacity was so strangely coupled 
with diffidence that, again, it would be foolhardy to try to guess 
the affect behind the opacity. 
Godel was never to learn the most elementary of lessons with 
regard to maneuvering for position and status. One can well 
imagine that any Viennese professor trying to judge the 
importance of the mathematical work from the self-
importance of the mathematician would have been misled. It 
was to be no different at the Institute. It was only in 
1953—after he had 
5 Wirtinger was a mathematician who had reportedly become 
embittered and withdrawn after his colleague, Professor Furtwangler, got a 
prize for an important result in algebraic number theory. What a way to 
earn a footnote in the story of the most important mathematical result of 
the twentieth century. 

Incompleteness 
223 
received an honorary degree from Harvard, which cited the 
incompleteness 
theorems 
as 
the 
most 
important 
mathematical discovery of the past century, and had also been 
elected to the National Academy of Sciences—that he was, at 
long last, made a permanent member of the Institute. Once 
again, the impetus came from von Neumann, who is 
reported to have said, "How can any of us be called professor 
when Godel is not?" Given his lack of worldly status, it is 
perhaps no wonder that his wife always considered his older 
brother the more successful of the two, since he was a medical 
doctor. 
Godel had married Adele Nimbursky (nee Porkert) in 
1938. Hao Wang, who in the spring of 1976 (the year of 
Godel's death) had decided to write a precis of Godel's 
intellectual development, giving the logician the opportunity 
to comment on it, writes (in an endnote): "G married Adele 
Porkert on 20 September 1938. He asked me to delete this 
information from an early draft on the ground that his wife 
has no direct influence on his work." The Godel marriage was, 
according to just about everyone, weird. Godel's mother, in 
particular, found her son's matrimonial choice inexplicable. 
His father had already died; but then he had never been close 
to his father. His relationship with his mother, however, was 
entirely different, so his unexpected choice in a bride was 
some cause for vexation. 
The catalogue of maternal complaints against Adele were 
primarily these: she was a divorced woman of the wrong 
religion (Catholic), wrong class (lower), wrong age (six years 
older than Godel), wrong appearance (she had a port-colored 
stain on the side of her face), and, perhaps most seriously, 
wrong occupation (she'd been a cabaret dancer; she would tell 
people it had been ballet, but it hadn't). 

224 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
Princeton's "society" for the most part concurred with 
Godel's mother. When Adele arrived in Princeton, Oskar 
Morgenstern described her as a typical Viennese washerwoman 
and correctly predicted that she would be a dismal social 
failure. "Of course Godel himself is half crazy," he recorded in 
his journal. The verification of Morgenstern's prediction 
caused Adele Godel much grief, though of course her husband 
could not have cared less. Godel was as indifferent to the snubs 
as he was indifferent to the causes for them. He had married 
a Hausfrau-caretaker and Adele proved as capable of caring 
for his frail body and soul as could be expected of a mere 
mortal. Adele told a neighbor friend that even back in 
Vienna, when she first became involved with Godel, she used 
to taste his food for him, foreshadowing the dark sieges of 
paranoia that would increasingly seize hold of him. 
Soon after his marriage in Vienna, Godel set sail, without 
his bride, once more for Princeton, where von Neumann had 
drummed up great interest in Godel's theorems. He lectured 
that semester at the Institute on his discoveries in set theory 
(concerning both the axioms of choice6 and the continuum 
6 The axiom of choice is concerned with collections of sets, particularly 
infinite collections. There are various ways of stating the axiom. In fact 
there's a whole book, by H. Rubin and J. Rubin, entitled Equivalents of the 
Axiom of Choice. A simple version of the axiom is: For any set of 
nonempty disjoint sets (sets that have no members in common), there 
exists a set consisting of exactly one member of each of the non-empty 
sets. In other words, if you have a bunch of sets that don't overlap with 
each other, then, roughly speaking, you can form a set by choosing one 
member of each set in the bunch. (You really need the axiom only when 
the bunch is infinite.) Another way of stating the axiom of choice is: For 
any set of nonempty sets, there exists a function that assigns to each one 
of these non- 

Incompleteness 
225 
hypothesis). After spending the autumn term at the Institute, 
he went on to South Bend, Indiana, to spend the spring term 
at Notre Dame. His visit to Notre Dame was due to Menger, 
who had decided to emigrate and had ended up in Indiana. 
While Godel was in South Bend, Czechoslovakia was 
handed over to Hitler. This was the fateful year of 1939, the 
entire world holding its breath. To the dismay of Menger, 
Godel, instead of sending for Adele and making plans to 
empty sets one of its members. Infinitely many choices (hence the name of 
the axiom) may be required, which is why the axiom has received so much 
attention. The axiom is saying that a certain set exists, even though the set 
is not really specified or constructed. The axiom of choice is probably the 
second most discussed axiom of mathematics, right after Euclid's parallels 
postulate. Like the parallels postulate, the axiom of choice was proved to be 
independent of the other axioms, in this case of set theory. Godel proved 
the first part of the independence by showing that the axiom is consistent 
with the other axioms of set theory; and then (as with the continuum 
hypothesis) Paul Cohen completed the proof (in 1963) by showing that the 
negation of the axiom of choice is consistent with the other axioms. Just as 
the proof of the logical independence of the parallels postulate gave rise to 
non-Euclidean geometry, so, too, there's a non-Cantorian form of set 
theory that uses the negation of the axiom of choice. But though the very 
idea of the infinite number of choices involved in the axiom of choice 
might make mathematicians a bit queasy, most mathematicians don't 
hesitate to avail themselves of the axiom in constructing their 
(nonconstructive) proofs, because it has so many important applications 
in practically all branches of mathematics that its rejection would seriously 
manacle mathematicians. It's not clear when Godel began to think about 
set theory, and it's not clear when he proved that the axiom of choice is 
consistent with the other axioms of set theory. He didn't tell anyone about 
his proof until the following year when he was back again in Princeton. 
Not surprisingly, it was von Neumann who received the confidence of 
the important new result, which Godel published in 1938. 

226 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
resettle in America, insisted on returning to Vienna. He was 
extremely incensed that his Dozentur was in danger of being 
revoked by the New Order, and felt that he must hurry back 
and see that his rights weren't violated. Menger, devoted to 
Godel, found his fondness severely tried. 
He had complained about the revocation of his dozentship 
and had spoken about violated rights. "How can one speak 
of rights in the present situation?" I asked. "And what 
practical value can even rights at the University of Vienna 
have for you under such circumstances?" But despite pleas 
and warnings by all his acquaintances at Notre Dame and 
Princeton, he was determined to go to Vienna; and he went. 
A man who could be terrorized by a refrigerator, convinced 
that it was emitting poisonous gases, returned to a Vienna 
overrun with Nazis to secure "his rights." 
Godel's world back in Vienna was now thoroughly 
Nazified. Menger had written to Veblen, while still in Vienna, 
that "whereas I . . .  don't believe that Austria has more than 
45% Nazis, the percentage at the universities is certainly 75% 
and among the mathematicians I have to do with . . . [apart 
from] some pupils of mine, not far from 100%." 
Godel was decidedly not anti-Semitic. He never took the 
slightest offense when others assumed he was Jewish; he 
simply corrected the error "for the sake of the truth," as he 
had written in the unmailed correction to Bertrand Russell's 
autobiography. The group of thinkers with whom he 
associated in Vienna were for the most part Jewish. Godel 
neatly instantiates the tongue-in-cheek advice that the 
satirist Leon Hirshfeld gave to travelers: "Be careful 
during your stay in 

Incompleteness 
227 
Vienna not to be too interesting or original, otherwise you 
might behind your back suddenly be called Jewish." 
Though he didn't in the least partake of the crudely 
simplifying racial theories that were having such a popular 
run in Vienna and elsewhere, Godel was dismayingly 
indifferent to the plight of the victims of those racial theories. 
The 
German 
(Jewish) 
positivist 
philosopher, 
Gustav 
Bergmann, recalled to John Dawson that shortly after 
arriving in America in October 1938, he was invited to 
lunch with Godel, who asked, with clueless charm, "And what 
brings you to America, Herr Bergmann?" 
For Menger, there was a limit to how much one could 
forgive clueless genius: 
During the summer I heard nothing from Godel. But on 
August 30, 1939, one of the few days between the Hitler-
Stalin pact and the entry of German troops into Poland 
which unleashed the second world war, he wrote me a 
letter that may well represent a record for unconcern on 
the threshold of world-shaking events: "Since the end of 
June I have been here in Vienna again and had a great many 
tasks to perform so it was unfortunately not possible to 
write up anything for the Colloquium. How did the 
examinations turn out for my logic lectures? ... In the fall 
I hope to be back in Princeton." 
Menger's affection for Godel considerably cooled, not to 
return until decades later, at the end of Godel's life, when he 
came to understand more completely the deep and abiding 
strangeness of the logician. 
So there was Godel in Vienna in 1939. But it was a Vienna 

228 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
sadly changed, as even Godel must have apprehended, however 
dimly. The old Circle was no more, of course. Schlick had been 
murdered by a psychotic student who was then transformed 
into a hero in the Nazi press; Feigl, Carnap, and Menger had 
fled from the increasingly poisonous atmosphere. Hans Hahn 
had died of cancer on 24 February 1934 at the age of 55—one 
day before a group of Nazis stormed the chancellery in Vienna 
and assassinated Dollfuss in a failed putsch. 
Nonetheless Godel apparently intended to remain in Vienna. 
His wife and he had signed a new lease on their apartment and 
had even arranged for some renovations. He had, in addition to 
renewing his apartment contract, made an attempt to become a 
Dozent neuer Ordnung. The authorities "of the New Order" who 
vetted his application noted that he was "well recommended 
scientifically" but that his Habilitation had been supervised by 
"the Jewish professor Hahn," and that it "redound[ed] to his 
discredit" that he had "always traveled in liberal-Jewish circles." 
To be fair to him, it was observed that "mathematics was at that 
time strongly verjudet," or Jewified. The authority in charge of 
Godel's case, Dr. A. Marchet, the Dozentbundsfiihrer, could find 
no statements by Godel on record opposing National Socialism, 
but none supporting it either. Dr. Marchet's decision, 
concerning the status of Kurt Godel in the New Order, was not 
forthcoming; he could not bring himself either to approve 
Godel or, for the time being, reject him. 
The event that seemed to have precipitated his decision to 
leave Vienna was that Godel was once again mistaken for a 
Jew, this time far more threateningly, since it was by a group 
of young thugs in the vicinity of the university. He was 
roughed up, his glasses smashed on the sidewalk. Godel didn't 
look wnjewish, especially in his habitual long overcoat, his 

Incompleteness 
229 
fedora, his heavy-framed thick eyeglasses. He looked like an 
intellectual, and that was incriminating enough. The doughty 
Adele, displaying the protective skills for which he no doubt 
married her, fought the fascists off with her umbrella. 
Godel had also received the shock of being declared fit for 
military service, which no one had been expecting. (The draft 
board in America almost automatically classified him 4-F— 
disqualified for physical reasons.) The authorities had refused 
to excuse him from military service on the basis of the heart 
that Godel continued to maintain had been damaged by his 
bout of rheumatic fever at age eight. They also overlooked the 
more convincing evidence of his mental instability, including, 
by this time, a few more stays in sanatoria. This is a fortunate 
oversight, since "mental defectives" were dispatched not to the 
front but to places that more efficiently eliminated them. 
It was difficult to obtain a leave of absence from the 
University of Vienna, as well as permission to leave Austria for 
America from both the Austrians and the Americans, but 
Godel's Princeton supporters—Abraham Flexner; Flexner's 
successor as director of the Institute,7 Frank Aydelotte; 
Veblen; and von Neumann—all joined forces to make it 
possible for Godel to cross the Atlantic. Godel credited, in 
particular, Aydelotte's letter to the charge d'affaires at the 
German Embassy in Washington. In that letter, dated 1 
December 1939, the new director of the Institute testified that 
Godel was an Aryan who was one of the greatest 
mathematicians in the 
7 Flexner's resignation was the result of his having made two 
appointments, both of economists, without first consulting the touchy 
faculty. The mathematicians were particularly sensitive on this matter, 
foreshadowing events that were to cast a pall over Godel's last years at the 
Institute. 

230 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
world. "His case could hardly create a precedent," Aydelotte 
reasoned, "because there are so few men in the world of his 
scientific eminence." 
The Godels began their journey to the New World, going 
first through Russia and onward to Japan on the trans-
Siberian railway. The German certificate of exit had required 
this route, and in addition, as Godel wrote in a letter to 
Aydelotte, "I am told in all steamship bureaux that the danger 
for German citizens to be arrested by the English is very great 
on the Atlantic." They arrived in Yokohama on 2 February 
1940, a day after the ship that had been booked for them by 
the Institute had sailed. They had to wait for the next ship, the 
President Cleveland, which docked in San Francisco on 4 
March. From there it was a matter of taking the 
transcontinental railroad to New York, and then finally 
traveling to their new home in Princeton. 
This sounds like rather a drama, in the normal sense of the 
word. But Godel was coolly detached from the sort of drama 
that escaping Nazi Europe afforded. "Godel has come from 
Vienna," wrote Oskar Morgenstern in his journal. Morgenstern, 
too, was originally from Vienna and was naturally eager to get 
news of his beleaguered city from the newly arrived logician. 
"In his mix of profundity and otherworldliness he is very 
droll... .When questioned about Vienna, he replied 'The 
coffee is wretched."' 
Adele would make the return trip several times after the 
war to visit her mother back home, but Godel never set foot 
on European soil again. His mother would have to come to 
Princeton, as she did several times, if they were to see each 
other again. In fact, so unlike the typical peripatetic academic, 

Incompleteness 
231 
he barely ever strayed, for the next 38 years of his life, out of 
the township of Princeton. 
Godel could not even be induced to make the easily walka-
ble trip to Princeton University when, in 1975, it finally got 
around to offering him an honorary doctorate. He already had 
such degrees from Harvard, Yale, Amherst, and Rockefeller. It 
had been primarily through the efforts of Paul Benacerraf 
that the university decided to acknowledge the genius who 
had become, for those of us who cared, something like the 
Greta Garbo of the intellectual world, wanting to be alone. 
However, as commencement day approached, Godel's initial 
pleasure gave way to his far more characteristic tergiversation, 
continuing until the very morning of the event. Both 
Benacerraf and Simon Kochen offered to chauffer him to the 
ceremony and attend to all other concerns, but Godel ended 
up sitting the honor out. Perhaps he was miffed that the 
honor had come so late. "Ten years ago," he told Morgenstern, 
"such a thing ... would have been proper." The one condition 
of receiving the honorary doctorate is that one show up. 
Therefore, although Godel was listed in the program as 
having received a Doctor of Science, the program lied. Here, 
nevertheless, is the lovely citation: "His revolutionary 
analysis of received methods of proof in that most familiar 
and elementary branch of mathematics, the arithmetic of 
whole numbers, has shaken the foundations of our 
understanding both of the human mind and the scope of one 
of its favorite instruments—the axiomatic method. Like all 
important revolutions, his has not only shown the limits of 
old methods, but also has proved a fertile source of fresh ones, 
leaving new and flourishing disciplines in its wake. Logic, 
mathemat- 

232 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
ics, and philosophy all continue to gain immeasurably from 
his genius." 
One anecdote of Godel in America bears repeating, and 
this concerns his becoming an American citizen. This is 
perhaps the most famous story told about Godel. (It comes to 
us by way of Morgenstern.) Not only does it involve Einstein 
playing straight man to that wild guy, Godel, but it also sets 
off the cuddly eccentricity of the genius, and everybody seems 
to enjoy these kinds of tales. (At a reading I gave at my college 
of a chapter of this book, the "question period" quickly 
degenerated into a session of trading such stories about 
Godel. Unfortunately, I'd already heard them all.) 
Godel had taken the whole matter of American citizenship 
very seriously, studying thoroughly in preparation for his 
exam; so thoroughly, in fact, that he made, he believed, a 
disturbing discovery: there is an internal contradiction in the 
American Constitution that would allow its democracy to 
deteriorate into tyranny.8 
In a state of high consternation Godel revealed his 
finding to Morgenstern. There was always a strongly 
legalistic bent to Godel, a fascination with examining the 
meaning and implications of man-made laws that faintly 
mirrored his interest in the eternal laws of logic. The 
economist was 
8 Unfortunately, Morgenstern's account, and so all the others that derive 
from it, omits mention of the precise constitutional flaw. I asked John 
Dawson whether he knew what it was supposed to be, and he e-mailed 
back: "No, I don't, though many have asked that question. There is a set of 
shorthand notes in GodePs Nachlass concerned with American government 
(presumably made while he was studying for the citizenship examination) 
that might contain the answer, but transcribing that particular item has 
never had as much priority as the mathematical material" (3 January 2004). 

Incompleteness 
233 
both amused by Godel's argument and concerned, because 
he knew that, Godel being Godel, he might very well behave 
in such a way as to jeopardize his eagerly anticipated 
citizenship. Morgenstern consulted Einstein on how best to 
handle the logician. 
On the day of Godel's citizenship test, 5 December 1947, 
Morgenstern and Einstein arrived to take Godel to Trenton. 
Morgenstern was the designated driver and Einstein the 
designated distracter. As soon as Godel stepped into the car, 
Einstein, not giving him a chance to speak, greeted him with a 
diverting joke. 
"Well, are you ready for your next-to-last test?'" 
"What do you mean, 'next to last'?" 
"Very simple. The last will be when you step into your 
grave." Old-world hilarity. 
Einstein continued on, telling story after story, including 
one about a recent autograph hound. He observed that such 
people are the last of the cannibals, in that they seek to take 
possession of the souls of those they ingest. And so the three 
members of the Institute for Advanced Study managed to 
arrive at the Trenton federal courthouse. There were several 
applicants ahead of them and so Einstein was resigned to 
keeping up his diversionary shtick; but fortunately it turned 
out that the judge, whose name was Philip Forman, was the 
very one who had administered the oath of citizenship to 
Einstein some years before and he ushered the three men into 
his chambers immediately. 
Einstein and Forman chatted for a while and Godel, sitting 
quietly and biding his time, seemed all but forgotten. 
Eventually, though, Forman got on with the business of the day. 
"Up to now you have held German citizenship." 

234 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
Immediately, Godel corrected the judicial error: Austrian 
citizenship. 
Duly corrected, the judge continued. 
"In any case, it was under an evil dictatorship. Fortunately, 
that is not possible in America." 
This was just the opening the logician had been waiting for. 
"On the contrary," he objected, "I know precisely how it can 
happen here," and he began to launch into his account of the 
flawed Constitution. Forman, Morgenstern, and Einstein 
exchanged meaningful glances and the judge called a halt to 
Godel's exposition, with a hasty, "You needn't go into all that," 
and steered the conversation round to less dangerous subjects. 
A few weeks after he'd taken the oath, Godel aptly described 
Forman in a letter to his mother as "a very sympathetic person." 
"The Logic, It Was Impossible" 
Every day, the two of them, Einstein and Godel, would walk 
home together from the Institute, deep in conversation, and 
others watched them and wondered. Godel took great 
pleasure—perhaps even pride—in the friendship; the 
references to Einstein in his letters to his mother bear witness to 
this. "I keep on wondering over Einstein's walking to the 
Institute in such weather. But he appears to be in this respect a 
match of you in unreasonableness," Godel wrote his mother 
teasingly on an inclement 17 February 1948. And on July 12 of 
that same year: "I see Einstein almost daily. He is very robust 
for his age. One does not see that he is already nearly 
seventy and he now appears also to feel completely well in 
terms of his health." 
But it was only a few months after this, in the autumn of 
1948, that Einstein, suffering attacks of pain in his upper 

Incompleteness 
235 
abdomen, entered Jewish Hospital in Brooklyn for an 
exploratory laparotomy. An abdominal aneurysm was 
discovered. A few years later Einstein learned that the 
aneurysm was growing and, reported Helen Dukas, "We 
around him knew of the sword of Damocles hanging over us. 
He knew it, too, and waited for it, calmly and smilingly." 
Einstein was careful that Godel, so obsessed with his own 
health, never knew. Einstein was always extremely protective 
of his delicate younger friend. So Godel wrote repeatedly to 
his mother of Einstein's robust health (compared to his own 
health problems, both real and imagined) until the letter of 25 
April 1955. Einstein had died on 18 April 1955: 
The death of Einstein was of course a great shock to me, 
since I had not expected it at all. Exactly in the last weeks 
Einstein gave the impression of being completely robust. 
When he walked with me for half an hour to the Institute 
while conversing at the same time, he showed no signs of 
fatigue, as had been the case on many earlier occasions. 
Certainly I have purely personally lost very much through 
his death, especially since in his last days he became even 
nicer to me than he had been all along, and I had the 
feeling that he wished to be more outgoing than before. 
He had admittedly kept pretty much to himself with respect 
to personal questions. Naturally my state of health turned 
worse again during last week, especially in regard to sleep 
and appetite. But I took a strong sleeping remedy a couple 
of times and am now somewhat more under control again. 
After Einstein's death, Godel's sense of exile must have 
deepened enormously. When Einstein had been ordered by 
his doctor to take a rest cure, there had been nobody, as Godel 

236 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
complained to his mother, for him to speak to. Now there 
would permanently be nobody. 
His profound isolation wasn't only a matter of his 
intellectual estrangement from the philosophical positivism 
that he felt had trailed him to the New World from Vienna 
(which in some sense it had). On a personal level, as well, 
Godel was quite completely alienated from his mathematical 
colleagues at the Institute. Unlike Einstein, they weren't 
amused by his "strange axiom," his version of Leibniz's 
principle of sufficient reason, which disposed him to believe 
that everything that happens has a thoroughly logical 
explanation—especially since Godel's application of his 
axiom led him to believe that those in authority are indeed in 
authority for a sufficiently good reason. Godel's axiom 
inclined him to give the Powers That Be the benefit of the 
doubt—they must have their good reasons for their decisions 
and actions, even if all empirical evidence seems to indicate 
that they don't—and such reasoning served to deeply divide 
the logician from his colleagues at the Institute. 
So far as mathematics went, the mathematicians found that 
Godel, logician though he was, was a ready participant in 
their theoretical discussions. "In fact, he knew more 
mathematics than I had suspected," Borel explained to me 
when I visited him at the Institute. "He could participate in 
discussion not just about logic. In mathematics, he was really 
a participant to our discussions." 
It was in the more practical sphere that Godel alienated his 
fellow mathematicians, at least as the practical presents itself 
at the Institute: the all-important issue of appointments. It's 
particularly the matter of the permanent membership that 
snaps the most otherworldly of Institute thinkers to full 

Incompleteness 
237 
attention: Who is worthy to enter the empyrean reaches of 
pure reason? 
Flexner had chosen mathematics, "the severest of 
disciplines," as his model; not only are mathematical results 
certain, but the relative depth and importance of the 
results are also certain. So, too, is the relative depth and 
importance 
of 
the 
mathematicians 
themselves 
commensurately certain. Mathematicians know exactly 
who among them is the best, and the best is what the 
Institute is all about. The Institute's mathematicians have a 
tradition of judging other disciplines, well, severely. 
The mathematicians balked at Flexner's attempt to diversify 
the population at the Institute, to include scholars of 
economics, politics, and the humanities. Flexner managed to set 
up two new schools, one of economics and politics, another of 
humanistic studies, but the battle had been quite acrimonious 
and when Flexner retired four years later he was a very tired 
man. Getting the start-up money out of the Bamberger/Fulds—
who, after all, had respect for him and his opinions—had 
been a piece of cake compared to getting his proposals past 
the mathematicians. His successor, Frank Aydelotte met, for 
the most part, with the mathematicians' approval. He was, in 
Einstein's words, "a quiet man who will not disturb people 
who are trying to think." 
When Aydelotte retired in 1947 the directorship passed to 
}. Robert Oppenheimer, who had returned to teaching at 
Berkeley and Caltech after the successful completion of the 
"Manhattan project"—the war-time mission that had brought 
together many of America's leading physicists to develop the 
first atomic bomb. Oppenheimer had hesitated, as Einstein 
had, in making the move to Princeton. After visiting the 

238 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
Institute, he spoke mockingly of its "solipsistic luminaries." 
Still he came, and it wasn't long before he and the 
mathematicians were sniping at one another. 
Oppenheimer, quite understandably, was interested in 
strengthening the Institute's school of physics. Individual 
appointments brought mathematicians like von Neumann 
and Deane Montgomery into sharp opposition with the 
director. In Oppenheimer's day the entire faculty voted on 
every 
appointment. 
Nobody 
could 
really 
judge 
the 
mathematicians' 
work 
except 
the 
mathematicians 
themselves, though they seemed to have no trouble passing 
judgment on the work of the physicists, economists, 
historians, and humanists (yet another perk of residence in 
the highest turret of Reine Vernunft). Ironically, the 
otherworldly mathematicians were the force with which to be 
reckoned when it came to the most central practical concern 
at the Institute. Some have theorized, somewhat facetiously, 
that the trouble with the mathematicians is not just the lofty 
standards that they're used to employing, but that they also 
tend to work fewer hours of the day than other people. This 
leaves them ample time for mischief. 
But it wasn't simply Oppenheimer's advocacy of nonmath-
ematicians that poured fuel on the mathematicians' ire. It 
was, in fact, the candidacy of the mathematician John Milnor 
that lit the match. John Milnor was then a mathematician at 
Princeton University. When he had been an 18-year-old 
freshman at Princeton he'd heard about a conjecture of the 
Polish topologist, Karol Borsuk, concerning the total 
curvature of a knotted curve in space. Milnor figured out a 
proof of the conjecture and took it to his professor, saying, "I 
can't seem to find anything wrong with this, can you?" The 
professor couldn't 

Incompleteness 
239 
and neither could his colleagues. A year later, Milnor had 
worked out a general theory of the curvature of knotted curves 
that had the proof of Borsuk's conjecture as a mere by-
product. He'd gone on to a brilliant career, and the Institute 
mathematicians wanted him as one of their own. 
Oppenheimer opposed them, saying that there had been a 
pledge given to the university that the Institute would not 
come courting in its own backyard. The mathematicians 
countered that there had never been such a pledge, that 
Oppenheimer was constructing it ad hoc for his own ulterior 
motives. (The mathematicians' doubts about Oppenheimer's 
good faith were so deep and abiding that I could catch the 
echoes of them even today. One mathematician, describing 
the path that used to lead directly from Fuld Hall to Olden 
Farm, the director's residence—the very path that Einstein 
and Godel would daily walk—told me that after Einstein's 
death Oppenheimer "for some reason suppressed the path," 
that is, let the grass grow over it. "I have no idea why," the 
mathematician concluded, giving me a dark look strongly 
suggestive of the sinister intent behind this path suppression.) 
Godel, as Borel explained to me, had wanted Milnor to 
come to the Institute as much as any of the mathematicians 
had. But he couldn't bring himself to oppose the director's 
authority. It was Godel's unchallengeable adherence to 
authority's 
rights 
that 
provoked 
the 
rest 
of 
the 
mathematicians to decide "that there was just no possible 
argument" [with Godel], as Borel put it to me, continuing: 
The logic was just so strange. There just could be no 
discussion, not even a common way to discuss the matter. 
He was always with the authority. Deane Montgomery 
and I, 

240 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
we were talking to Godel, and the logic, it was just totally 
impossible. Here was a man who had had to flee the fascists 
in power in Austria. And yet, by his logic, one does not defy 
authority. The logic, it was just impossible. And it was so 
bad in the department that it was decided, by general 
consent, that from then on logic would be handled 
separately. 
What this meant was that Godel would no longer be included 
in the discussions of the mathematicians on appointment; he 
wasn't sent the files of prospective candidates, he wasn't 
solicited for his opinion, he wasn't present at the meetings. He 
was exiled to his own sphere: logic. He would decide on the 
appointments 
of 
logicians, 
conferring 
with 
the 
mathematician Hassler Whitney. 
This was in 1961, and after that almost all conversation 
between Godel and the other mathematicians ceased. Only 
Whitney kept up any contact with Godel. And the contact was 
only of the most professional sort, for this is how Godel 
himself wanted it. At Godel's memorial service, Whitney 
recalled how he'd once gone to pay a visit to Godel and 
Godel had been taken aback, since there'd been no "precise 
issue" that had brought Whitney to Godel's door. 
Godel also developed a strong preference for conducting all 
conversations over the telephone. Even if a colleague was a 
few feet's stroll away from his office at the Institute, Godel 
would instruct him to use the phone. 
There was a brief period, in the early seventies, when Godel 
manifested what was, for him, a preternatural gregariousness. 
Simon Kochen told me that during this period Godel would 
often call him, to catch himself up on the latest work in his 
field. In March of 1973, Abraham Robinson (1918-1974), a 

Incompleteness 
241 
mathematician whose work Godel admired, gave a talk at the 
Institute. Robinson's work had used the techniques of formal 
logic, many developed by Godel in the course of his proof of 
the first incompleteness theorem, to solve standard problems 
in algebra, engendering what is called "nonstandard analysis," 
and such extensions of logic's reach were always encouraging 
to Godel. (Simon Kochen's work as a very young logician had 
similarly brought formal logic to bear on a more traditional 
mathematical problem.) Robinson's talk prompted the 
usually taciturn Godel to rise to his feet to congratulate 
Robinson on his work.9 Nonstandard analysis, he said, was not 
"a fad of mathematical logicians" but was destined to become 
"the analysis of the future. . . .  In coming centuries it will be 
considered a great oddity ... that the first exact theory of 
infinitesimals was developed 300 years after the invention 
of differential calculus." 
In the autumn of 1973, Godel surprised everyone by 
holding court at that lawn party at which I got my one and 
only opportunity to meet him. Joseph Stalin's daughter, 
Svetlana Alleluyeva, a minor celebrity memoirist of the 
1970s, was, I remember, at that party as well, but who had 
eyes for a Stalin when a Godel was there? I never caught 
another glimpse of him. 
Then Godel managed to infuriate his colleagues once 
again, during the Institute cause celebre that produced waves 
so huge as to overspill onto the pages of the NY Times and 
such magazines as Harper's and the Atlantic Monthly (whose 
cover for the February issue of 1974 read: "Bad Days on 
9 A few months after this talk, Robinson succumbed to pancreatic 
cancer, a death which reportedly struck Godel hard. 

242 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
Mount Olympus: The Big Shoot-Out in Princeton"). Though 
the director was now a different one—Karl Kaysen, who had 
taken over the reins from Oppenheimer in 196610—the bone 
of contention was the same—namely, appointments. 
Kaysen had come to the Institute from Harvard's 
economics department, but he'd taken a leave from Harvard 
in 1961 to work for McGeorge Bundy at the National 
Security Council in the Kennedy White House. This was 
already far too much of the real world for the 
mathematicians, 
and 
they—excluding 
Godel—were 
already strongly inclined toward bristling skepticism about 
the new man on campus.11 But when Kaysen proposed 
establishing a new school of social science, promising that he 
would raise all the funding for this school on his own, the 
mathematicians, as well as many from the School of History, 
girded themselves for full-scale warfare. 
The first appointment was of Clifford Geertz, a cultural 
anthropologist from the University of Chicago, whose work 
addresses all aspects of culture and whose professional 
credentials were as unchallengable as a social scientist can 
hope 
10 Oppenheimer had managed to merge the floundering School of 
Economics and Politics with the flourishing School of Humanities to create 
the new School of History. But by the time he stepped down—with less 
than six months to live—he found that half his faculty weren't speaking 
with him. All the mathematicians—with the exception of Godel—were in 
the enemy camp. In speaking to mathematical survivors of that period even 
today,  Oppenheimer's  character  is  described  in  uncharitable  terms. 
Memories seem never to fade at the Institute. 
11 His scholarly work primarily concerned American anti-trust policy; 
he'd done a study of United States v. United Shoe Machinery Corporation. 
Said the mathematician Andre Weil, "I think he wrote his thesis about a 
shoe factory." 

Incompleteness 
243 
to attain. He got by. It was the candidacy of Robert Bellah, a 
sociologist of religion at Berkeley, that converted the hostile 
rumblings into pitched battle. Though of course the weapons 
were words, they could be quite targeted, even deadly. The 
mathematician Andre Weil,12 for example, was quoted in the 
NY Times as saying, "Many of us started reading the worthless 
works of Mr. Bellah. I've seen poor candidates before, but I've 
never had the feeling of so utterly wasting my time." Some 
supporters of Bellah objected that Weil, as a mathematician 
employing the high standards of his discipline, would find 
any attempt to study religion sadly lacking in rigor. Weil 
countered that on the contrary, he had a personal connection 
with such topics; after all, his sister had been the famous 
mystic, Simone Weil. 
Godel 
once 
again 
agreed 
in 
principle 
with 
the 
mathematicians. Borel told me that Godel had said that 
Bellah's appointment would be the weakest in the history of 
the Institute. At the general faculty meeting during which 
Bellah's candidacy was discussed—a meeting in which many 
unfortunate things were said in the heat of emotion that were 
then released to the press by the "dissident majority," after 
Kaysen had made clear his intention to ignore the faculty's 
vote—Godel overcame his reserve and spoke up, delivering 
himself in cool and rational terms. (His allies were relieved at 
his consistent reasonableness throughout his public remarks; 
in a pow-wow before the 
12 Weil had come to the Institute from France and had been one of the 
original participants in the pseudonymous existence of "Nicolas Bourbaki." 
It was under this name (Bourbaki was identified as "formerly of the Royal 
Poldavian Academy") that a group of young mathematicians published at 
least two dozen mathematical treatises of the highest order, bringing the 
level of proof up to a new standard of rigor. 

244 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
faculty meeting, he had privately speculated that perhaps 
Bellah, who had originally come from Canada, was so favored 
by the board of trustees because its director had once been the 
Canadian ambassador and perhaps Bellah had been a spy for 
Canada! This, says my source for this story, who, after all these 
years, still wishes to remain anonymous, was typical of 
Godel's reasoning. Since Godel had read Bellah's works and 
found them unimpressive, he was seeking the sufficient 
reason 
that 
would 
render 
the 
authorities' 
decision 
intelligible.) 
In the public meeting, Godel distinguished, in true 
Godelian fashion, the influence ideas may have from their 
objective truth. (Intimations of Plato, castigating the Sophists 
of his day.) Bellah's defenders spoke only of the former, not of 
the latter. Bellah's work, Godel was reasonably pointing out, 
may have influenced many in his own field, but that, in itself, is 
no grounds for thinking them true. Fashionable ideas aren't 
necessarily true ideas. The counterclaim that in such fields as 
sociology there is nothing but influence to consider, the notion 
of objective truth being inapplicable (Kaysen, responding to 
Godel, pushed this line a bit) amounted, for Godel, to the 
most severe delegitimatizing possible of a field like sociology. 
"He [Godel] also pointed out that many scientists of great 
intelligence, originality, learning, and influence have produced 
completely wrong theories, for example, Stahl, the inventor of 
the phlogiston theory." 
Yet when it came to the vote, Godel was one of the few 
mathematicians who didn't vote against the nomination, once 
again finding it impossible to defy authority. The final vote of 
the faculty was 13 against Bellah, 8 for, and 3 abstentions. One 
of the abstainers was Kurt Godel. This was final confirmation 

Incompleteness 
245 
for Godel's mathematical colleagues that "the logic, it was just 
impossible." 
The whole sad business of the Bellah nomination was 
brought to a fittingly sad conclusion: Bellah's daughter died, 
and Bellah, in grief, simply withdrew from consideration. Not 
too long after the Bellah affair, Kaysen left the Institute, 
exhausted by his mathematical adversaries (as Oppenheimer 
and Flexner had themselves resigned, utterly wasted). The 
current director of the Institute is said by the mathematicians 
to be a reasonable man. 
So much passion had been generated by the Bellah affair 
that in speaking with some of the participants now, more 
than a quarter of a century later, I could still feel blasts of heat 
rising up out of the past. Kochen told me that during the 
troubles over Bellah, Godel would sometimes call to speak to 
him about it. "He was very distressed at the incivility of the 
atmosphere." 
So despite the fact that he had briefly been the ally of his 
mathematical colleagues at the Institute, judging the work of 
the proposed new member as they judged it, his isolated exile 
continued. In fact, if anything it deepened. 
"I Can Only Make Negative Decisions" 
Karl Menger, Godel's old acquaintance from the Vienna 
Circle, who was happily ensconced at Notre Dame, wrote: 
On every one of my admittedly infrequent trips to 
Princeton, I had long talks with Godel. Apart for his 
friendship with Einstein and (especially after the latter's 
death) 

246 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
with Morgenstern, Godel seemed to me rather lonely. Once 
he asked to my surprise, "Where is Artin now?" [This is the 
algebraist Emil Artin.] And when I answered, "In Princeton; 
I spoke to him yesterday," Godel said, "I thought he left long 
ago. I haven't seen him in years." 
Even more sadly, Menger theorized that the isolation that 
Godel experienced at the Institute contributed to his lack of 
publications: 
At no time in his life did Godel need intellectual 
stimulation to conceive and develop original and 
unexpected ideas. But he needed a congenial group 
suggesting that he report his discoveries, reminding and, if 
necessary, gently pressing him to write them down. All 
this he had at the beginning of his stay in Princeton with 
regard to the publication of his two booklets and his 
article on Russell. And he presumably could have found 
such support later. But apparently he never looked for it, 
and no one seemed to volunteer. The fact is that I could 
not observe anything of the sort in the 1950's. Rather, it 
soon became clear to me that he wrote up many brilliant 
ideas only for his desk drawer if at all. From the point of 
view of the outside world, his incomparable talent was 
lying lamentably fallow. 
It was in this deep isolation that the paranoid tendencies 
from which Godel had suffered even in his youth took on 
substance. Perhaps this darkening of his mental outlook 
would have been inevitable with age. Still, the imposed 
isolation, laced with the genuine hostility of his immediate 
peers, certainly couldn't have been good for him. As we used 
to say in the sixties: just because you're paranoid doesn't 
mean they're not really after you. 

Incompleteness 
247 
After Einstein's death, Godel's deepest identification 
appeared to have been with Leibniz. So true was this that Godel 
extended his own paranoiac fantasy of imperiled rationality so 
that it extended to the seventeenth-century rationalist. 
In Godel's estimation Leibniz was an even greater thinker 
than posterity has realized and had carried his ideas for a 
characteristica universalis—or an alphabet of thought which 
would be used to represent thoughts in a logical way, 
rendering their internal logical relations transparent—to a 
more advanced stage than the written testimony suggests. 
Godel had confided in Karl Menger his suspicions that some 
of Leibniz's "important writings . . . had not only failed to be 
published, but [had been] destroyed in manuscript." 
"Who could have an interest in destroying Leibniz's 
writings?" Menger had queried. 
"Naturally, those people who do not want men to become 
more intelligent," was the logician's reply. 
Menger then suggested that the iconoclastic free-thinker 
Voltaire would be a more likely target of censorship, but 
Godel disagreed: 
"Who ever became more intelligent by reading Voltaire's 
writings?" 
Menger mentioned the interchange to Oskar Morgenstern, 
who had something of his own to relate on the subject of 
Leibniz and Godel. He, too, had been alerted by Godel as to 
the deliberate suppression of Leibniz's contributions and had 
tried to argue the logician out of his conviction. Finally, to 
convince Morgenstern, Godel had taken the economist to the 
university's Firestone Library and gathered together "an 
abundance of really astonishing material," in Morgenstern's 
words. The material consisted of books and articles with exact 

248 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
references to published writings of Leibniz, on the one hand, 
and the very works cited, on the other. The primary sources 
were all missing the material that had been cited in the 
secondary sources. 
"This material was really highly astonishing," a 
flabbergasted (if unconvinced) Morgenstern admitted. 
Godel had always worried that he wasn't living up to what 
the Institute had expected of him; this made him feel not only 
guilty but also insecure. Hard as it is to believe, the man who 
had been cited by Harvard as having produced the most 
important mathematical discovery of the century—the 
thinker who is generally pointed to as second only to Einstein 
in establishing the Institute as the haunt of intellectual 
divinities touching down briefly upon Earth—would 
sometimes call Morgenstern in a panic, saying that he 
expected to be thrown out. He also reported his suspicions 
that there were those who were trying to kill him, that his 
wife Adele had given away all his money, and that his 
doctors understood nothing of his case and were conspiring 
against him. 
Oskar Morgenstern did remain a wonderful friend to 
Godel, loyally devoted, Godel's one abiding link, beside his 
wife Adele, to the old days in Vienna. Even when Morgenstern 
was dying of metastasized cancer, a fact tragically apparent to 
all his acquaintances but Godel, his journal entries are filled 
with his concern for the logician. 
Today .., Kurt Godel called me again ... and spoke to me 
for about 15 minutes __ After briefly asking how I was and 
asserting that... my cancer would not only be stopped, but 
recede ... he went over to his own problem[s]. He asserted 
that the doctors are not telling him the truth, that they do 

Incompleteness 
249 
not want to deal with him, that he is in an emergency 
(exactly what he told me with the same words a few weeks 
ago, a few month ago, two years ago), and that I should 
help get him into the Princeton Hospital. . . . [He] also 
assured me that . . . perhaps two years ago, two . . . men 
appeared who pretended to be doctors . . . .  They were 
swindlers [who] were trying to get him in the hospital. .. 
and he . . .  had great difficulty unmasking them. . . .  It is 
hard to describe what such a conversation . . . means for 
me: here is one of the most, brilliant men of our century, 
greatly attached to me, . . . [who] is clearly mentally 
disturbed, suffering from some kind of paranoia, 
expecting help from me, . . . and I [am] unable to extend 
it to him. Even while I was mobile and tried to help him 
. . .  I was unable to accomplish anything . . . .  [Now,] by 
clinging to me—and he has nobody else, that is quite 
clear—he adds to the burden I am carrying. 
This was the journal entry for 10 July 1977. Sixteen days 
later, Oskar Morgenstern was dead. Hours after the 
economist's death, Godel called his house, expecting to 
speak with him, to pour out the content of his dark delusions. 
The news that his one trusted ally had just died so shocked 
him that Godel simply hung up the phone without saying a 
word. 
Adele, too, was experiencing health problems and had to be 
hospitalized during this period, and so Godel was left to fend 
for himself for the autumn months, and then into the winter. 
With Morgenstern dead, and Adele away, the logician's 
decline was precipitous. 
Perhaps the only one who tried to make contact with Godel 
during these last few months of his life was the faithful 
acolyte/logician, Hao Wang. Wang was out of the country from 

250 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
mid-September to mid-November of 1977, but right before his 
departure he called Godel, to tell him that he was coming by to 
see him. Wang came bearing a chicken that his wife had 
prepared for Godel. Always a valetudinarian, excessively 
watchful of what went into his body, with recurring fears that 
he was being poisoned, GodeFs abstemiousness was now 
advancing to self-starvation. When Wang arrived at the house 
on Linden Lane, Godel "eyed him suspiciously" and refused to 
open the door. Wang left the chicken on the doorstep and 
departed. 
Wang did manage to gain entry into the Godel house on 17 
December and seems to have been reassured by GodePs 
manner and presence (though he must have been emaciated). 
"His mind remained nimble and he did not appear sick. He 
said, 'I've lost the faculty for making positive decisions. I can 
only make negative decisions.'" 
Adele returned home from her own hospital stay at the end 
of December and on 29 December (with the help of Hassler 
Whitney) persuaded Godel to enter Princeton Hospital. "It 
was said that G[6del]'s weight was down to sixty-five pounds 
before his death and that, toward the end, his paranoia 
conformed to a classic syndrome: fear of food poisoning 
leading to self-starvation." 
Kurt Godel died in the fetal position on Saturday, 14 
January 1978, at one in the afternoon. According to the death 
certificate, on file in the Mercer County Courthouse in 
Trenton, he died of "malnutrition and inanition" caused by 
"personality disturbance." 
Karl Menger contributed one last anecdote: 
In one of his last telephone calls before his own death (in 
July, 1977) Morgenstern described an event that evoked in 

Incompleteness 
251 
me memories that long ago had somewhat estranged me 
from Godel13—but it evoked them by its contrast to those 
memories, so that Morgenstern's story moved me very 
much. Once again it was a question of Godel's rights, 
where his punctiliousness knew no bounds. What had 
happened was that Godel, apparently suffering severely, 
sought and was granted admission to a Princeton 
hospital, but soon thereafter insisted that he had no right 
to one of the benefits proffered, since his insurance policy 
did not provide for it. He therefore refused to accept the 
benefit. The details of the case escape me now, though of 
course I am convinced that Godel's logic in interpreting 
the insurance contract was superior to the hospital's. But 
be that as it may, in his juridical precision, Godel 
unshakably maintained his ground. 
Godel was buried on 19 January in the Princeton Cemetery 
on Witherspoon Street; the funeral was small and private. But 
on 3 March there was a memorial service held at the Institute 
and presided over by Andre Weil. The speakers were Hao 
Wang, Hassler Whitney, and, as a last-minute fill-in for the 
prominent logician Robert Solovay, who had flown in from 
California but whose rented car had swerved into a snow 
ditch, Simon Kochen. 
Kochen recalled in his tribute to Godel that at his Ph.D. 
oral exam, his examiner, Stephen Kleene, had asked him to 
name five of Godel's theorems. The point of the question was 
that "Each of the theorems .. [was] the beginning of a whole 
branch of modern mathematical logic." Proof theory, model 
13 Menger is referring here to Godel's outrage that his rights as a 
university Dozent had been tampered with by the Third Reich. 

252 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
theory, recursion theory, set theory, intuitionist logic; all had 
been transformed by, or, in certain cases, had gotten their 
inception from, Godel's work. 
Kochen then compared Godel's work to Einstein's, in terms 
of the way in which both grew out of their deep foundational 
thinking. "That was an obvious comparison to make," Kochen 
told me. 
He also, far more surprisingly, compared Godel's work to that 
of Kafka, not knowing that Godel himself had been an admirer 
of the writer.14 Both men combined their strongly "legalistic" 
bent, in Kochen's words, with an otherworldly, almost surreal, 
ability to create self-contained worlds, worlds that might seem 
at first blush to run counter to logic but which are compounded 
of the very stuff of logic. "There is an Alice-in-Wonderland 
quality to both men's work," Kochen said to me. 
Kochen told me that had he had time to prepare his remarks, 
the analogy to Kafka would probably never have been made by 
him. It was because he had to come up with something quickly 
that he reached for the vague suggestion that Godel's work had 
always impressed on him, but that he had never bothered to 
think out. But everyone I spoke with who had been present at 
the memorial service remembers Kochen's remark. The 
comparison with Kafka, another sui generis mind out of 
Central Europe, managed to capture something startling and 
true. 
14 Godel wrote his mother on 4 and 19 July 1962, of his "recent 
discovery" of the "modern poet," Franz Kafka. Godel also enjoyed 
abstract and surrealist painting. In other respects, his cultural tastes are 
notable for their childlike quality. Not only did he prefer fairy tales to 
Goethe and Shakespeare, writing to his mother that only in such tales is 
the world represented as it ought to be, but he was also a great fan of 
Disney movies and saw Snow White at least three times. 

Incompleteness 
253 
Incompleteness (AH Over Again) 
Einstein and Godel shared, along with so much else, a 
preoccupation with the nature of time. Despite the popular 
distortions, to a certain extent encouraged by the vague 
suggestions of the word "relativity," Einstein was, as we have 
already seen, as far from interpreting his famous theory in 
subjective terms as it is possible to be. On the contrary, on 
his interpretation, 
 
Einstein and Godel walking on the 
suppressed path that went from Fuld Hall 
to Olden Farm. 

254 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
relativity theory offers a realist description of time that is star-
tlingly distinct from our subjective experience of time. The 
great yawning chasm between the "out yonder" and the "in 
here" is stretched even wider, on the Einsteinian hypothesis, 
since objective time—the time that is described in the 
equations of relativity theory—is lacking the very feature 
that seems to provide the essential stab to our subjective 
experience of time: its inexorable flow, ultimately lighting all 
our yesterdays the way to dusty death.15 Is there anything 
we know more intimately than the fleetingness of time, the 
transience of each and every moment? 
Yet, strangely enough, it isn't so ... not if we take Einstein's 
physics seriously. The nature of reality that spills forth from 
Einstein's physics is so much more startling than the 
simplistic, undergraduate-beloved shibboleth: everything is 
relative to subjective points of view. In Einstein's physics, 
there is no passage of time, no unidirectional flow away from 
the fixed past and toward the uncertain future. The 
temporal compo- 
15 An Op-ed piece in The New York Times, which ran, appropriately 
enough, on New Year's Day, beautifully delineated the chasm between 
subjective and objective time: "A hundred years ago today, the discovery of 
special relativity was still 18 months away, and science still embraced the 
Newtonian description of time. Now, however, modern physics' notion of 
time is clearly at odds with the one most of us have internalized. Einstein 
greeted the failure of science to confirm the familiar experience of time 
with 'painful but inevitable resignation.' The developments since his era 
have only widened the disparity between common experience and 
scientific knowledge. Most physicists cope with this disparity by 
compartmentalizing: there's time as understood scientifically, and then 
there's time as experienced intuitively. For decades, I've struggled to bring 
my experience closer to my understanding." 

Incompleteness 
255 
nent of space-time is as static as the spatial components; 
physical time is as still as physical space. It is all laid out, the 
whole spread of events, in the tenseless four-dimensional 
space-time manifold. The distinctions we make between the 
past and the present and the future—distinctions that are so 
emotionally fraught and without which we can't even begin 
to describe our inner worlds—only have relevance within 
those inner worlds. Objective time, as it is characterized in 
relativity, can't support the distinction between the past and 
present and future. Or, as Einstein told Rudolf Camap, "the 
experience of the now means something special for man, 
something essentially different from the past and the future, 
but this important difference does not and cannot occur 
within physics." 
Understanding relativity theory to imply that there is no 
absolute now flowing along on a relentless tide of temporality, 
Einstein, living "under the sword of Damocles," seemed to 
take comfort in his vision of tenseless physical objectivity. In a 
condolence letter to the widow of Michele Besso, his longtime 
friend and fellow physicist, Einstein wrote: "In quitting this 
strange world he has once again preceded me by just a little. 
That doesn't mean anything. For us convinced physicists the 
distinction between past, present, and future is only an 
illusion, albeit a persistent one." 
It is a vision of impersonal objectivity sufficient to extract 
the bitterness, at least for Einstein, from the thought of one's 
own personal demise, than which there are few thoughts 
more unpalatable. Einstein's imperturbability recalls, in its 
transcendence, the death of Socrates that had so inspired 
Plato and, through Plato, all of Western civilization. This is 
scientific realism carried to heroic heights. The physicist who 

256 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
discussed the meaning of time on his daily walks with the 
logician was dying, and he knew it. 
Godel, no less than Einstein, believed that time is nothing 
like what it seems to us to be. His personality may not have 
been of the sort to allow him to use his vision of time to 
transcend the fears—both real and imagined—that tormented 
his mortal existence; but nonetheless it did, perhaps, offer 
him some degree of comfort. His own work on relativity 
theory had provided him a model of time that seemed to 
have appealed to him on a deep level, to mesh with the very 
substance of the man, as his embrace of Platonism had done. 
Godel, of course, had a long-standing interest in physics. 
He had first entered the University of Vienna intending to 
study physics and did so for the first two or three years while a 
student there, before switching to math. His relationship with 
Einstein rekindled his earlier interest in physics, and at some 
point in their relationship Godel began to ponder relativity 
theory for himself. He came up with an entirely unique model 
satisfying Einstein's field equations in general relativity, a 
model as Alice-in-Wonderland-like as anything else he had 
ever done. 
In Godel's model, time is cyclical. Not only are all events 
laid out in indifference to tensed distinctions between past, 
present, and future, but also endless repetitions of the 
patterns occur, and the parallelism between space and time, 
implicit in relativity theory, is extended further. "It turns out," 
wrote Godel, "that temporal conditions in these universes 
show... surprising features, strengthening the idealistic 
viewpoint (according to which all change is actually an 
illusion, nonobjective). Namely, by making a round trip on a 
rocket ship in a sufficiently wide curve, it is possible in these 
worlds 

Incompleteness 
257 
to travel into any region of the past, present, and future, and 
back again, exactly as it is possible in other worlds to travel to 
distant parts of space." 
Godel published his solution to Einstein's equations in the 
Festschrift volume in honor of Einstein's seventieth birthday.16 
Einstein's published remarks on the paper, also published in 
the Feshtscrift, acknowledge having been "disturbed" by the 
possibility of looping timelike lines, allowing one to return to 
the past, that Godel gleefully expounded. Einstein's response 
both pays tribute to the validity of Godel's deductions while 
also suggesting that Godel's solution might "be excluded on 
physical grounds." 
It is unclear how much of his cosmological work Godel 
had shared with his daily walking partner before handing him 
over the results on his seventieth birthday; but Einstein's 
reaction to the paper suggests that Godel had shared little. 
Godel's closed loops of time, allowing one, at least 
theoretically, to return to the past, were accepted by Einstein 
as formally possible, in the sense that Godel had shown that 
this model of time solves Einstein's field equations. But as a 
physicist and a man of common sense, Einstein would have 
preferred that his field equations excluded such an Alice-in-
Wonderland possibility as looping time. 
16 Schilpp had first approached Godel in 1946 to contribute an essay for 
this Festschrift in honor of Einstein. Godel immediately agreed, but there 
were to be many postponements of delivery of the final paper. Schilpp had 
hoped to have his volume ready for Einstein's seventieth birthday (14 
March 1949). Godel did not finish his article until a month before and even 
then held onto it. Schilpp got Godel to agree to present Einstein with the 
paper at the gala birthday celebration thrown for him at the Princeton Inn 
on 19 March. Soon after, Schilpp received a copy of the paper. 

258 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
But the model of cyclical time seemed to have appealed to 
Godel very much. Did Godel actually like the idea of being 
able to go back and live his life all over again? Did he, too, like 
his friend Einstein, draw some sort of solace from his 
contemplation of the real nature of time, distinct from the 
unidirectional finality of our experience of it? 
Who knows? The opacity of the logician prevails. However, 
there is one interesting fact that perhaps allows us a peek 
behind the opacity. Godel took his quite extraordinary 
solution to Einstein's equations so seriously that he 
descended, probably for the only time in his life, from the 
highest reaches of Reine Vernunft to try to acquire actual 
empirical (!) data to support his closed-looped model for 
time. John Archibald Wheeler and Kip Thorne, two of the 
most prominent physicists of their days, who had collaborated 
(with Charles Misner) on a marvelous book on gravitation, 
were closely questioned by Godel in the early 1970s as to 
whether they had found any evidence for, or against, a 
preferred sense of rotation of the galaxies. Godel was clearly 
disappointed in them, Wheeler reported, when they 
confessed that they just hadn't looked into the question: 
It turned out that he himself, as a preliminary step to get 
some evidence, had taken down the great Hubble atlas of 
the galaxies. Godel, whom you think of as the 
mathematician among mathematicians, had taken a ruler 
and got the angle and made a statistics of these numbers 
and concluded that within the statistical error there was 
no preferred sense of rotation.... 
About a year after our visit to Godel I was down the hall 
here in the office of Jim Peebles [a prominent Princeton 

Incompleteness 
259 
astrophysicist] talking to him about cosmology, and a 
student came in and threw down on the table a big thing. 
"Here it is, Professor Peebles!" So I said to him, "What is 
it?" He said, "It's my thesis." "What's it about?" "It's about 
whether there is any preferred sense of rotation in the 
galaxies." "How marvelous," I said, "Godel will be so 
pleased." "Who is Godel?" "Well," I said, "if you called him 
the greatest logician since Aristotle you'd be downgrading 
him." "Are you kidding?" "No, no." "What country does he 
live in?" "Right here in Princeton," I answered. So I picked 
up the phone and dialed Godel, reached him at home, and 
told him about this. Pretty soon his questions got to the 
point I couldn't answer them. I turned it over to the 
student, and pretty soon it got to the point that the 
student couldn't answer them. He gave the phone to 
Peebles, and when Peebles finally hung up he said, "My, I 
wish we talked to Godel before we did the work." 
When Godel presented his ideas on relativity at the 
Institute, which took place several years before the 
conversations with Wheeler, Thorne, and Peebles, the physicists 
present all expressed astonishment at how well the 
mathematical logician had grasped all the subtleties of the 
physical theory. But of course he had had the privilege of 
discussing the intricacies of the theory with the theoretician 
himself—even as the theoretician confessed that, at the end, 
he only went to his office to have the privilege of walking 
home each day with the logician, the two great minds of the 
twentieth century able to share, at least for a while, their 
intellectual exile with one another. 
It is tempting to connect Godel's attraction to these closed 
time loops with a passing remark that Hao Wang made, 
indicating how Godel had thought of his life as incomplete: 

260 
REBECCA GOLDSTEIN 
In philosophy Godel has never arrived at what he looked for: 
to arrive at a new view of the world, its basic constituents, 
and the rules of their composition. Several philosophers, in 
particular Plato and Descartes, claim to have had at certain 
moments in their lives an intuitive view of this kind totally 
different from the everyday view of the world. 
And, again, Wang made reference to a transcendental 
experience that Godel had awaited all his life: 
He also looked for (but failed to obtain) an epiphany (a 
revelation or sudden illumination) that would enable him 
to see the world in a different light. (In his conversations 
with me, he repeatedly said that Plato, Descartes, and 
Husserl all had such an experience.) 
Philosophy had inspired Kurt Godel's formidable 
mathematical career from the beginning. It had been his 
focus ever since his first course at the University of Vienna in 
the history of philosophy, when Godel, like so many lovers of 
abstraction, had found in Plato a vision of reality that 
answered to his intellectual love. As philosophy had been his 
end, so, too, it was by philosophy's light that he judged his 
life, finally, incomplete. No longer believing that it was 
possible to change other people's minds, not even by way of 
a priori proof, he awaited the epiphany that would change 
his own. With the sense of his own incompleteness—and 
perhaps, too, with the preserved death-terror of a child 
believing that his eight-year-old heart had been fatally 
damaged—he was drawn to his model of an eternal life of 
cyclical time, a model which undermines the reality of 
personal death. 
If time loops back on itself, as Godel in the tormented last 

Incompleteness 
261 
years of his life sought empirically to corroborate, then a 
young Godel will once again sit in a college classroom in 
Vienna, transfigured by the notion of the infinite eternal 
verities lying suspended beyond all the human imperfections, 
the confoundments and obfuscations and distortions that 
make him wonder how people can ever understand one 
another at all. And he will think about using the language of 
mathematics in a way that no one has thought to use it before, 
so that it can talk about itself—only precisely, because 
mathematically, so that everyone will understand. He will 
dream, silently and audaciously, of proving a mathematical 
theorem the likes of which has never before been seen, a 
mathematical theorem that will illuminate the nature of 
mathematics itself. And then he will do it. 

 

Notes 
Introduction 
p. 13 "Hitler shakes the tree": Quote unattributed, in "Bad Days on 
Mount Olympus: The Big Shoot-Out in Princeton," Atlantic 
Monthly, February 1974. 
p. 19 "after its driver": Helen Dukas, Einstein's secretary, in a letter to C. 
Seelig as quoted in Abraham Pais, "Subtle is the Lord . . .": The 
Science and the Life of Albert Einstein (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1982), p. 473. 
p. 20 All of his thinking: Harry Woolf, ed., Some Strangeness of 
Proportion: A Centennial Symposium to Celebrate the Achievements 
of Albert Einstein (Reading, MA.: Addison-Wesley, 1980), p. 485. 
p. 23 The Encyclopedia of Philosophy's, article "GSdePs Theorem": J. van 
Heijenoort, The Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Vol 3, ed., Paul 
Edwards (New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc., and the Free 
Press, 1967), pp. 348-9. 
p. 24 "He is the devil": David Foster Wallace, "Approaching Infinity," 
Boston Globe, 12 December 2003. 
p. 29 "Science without epistemology": Paul A. Schilpp, Albert Einstein, 
Philosopher-Scientist (New York: Tudor, 1949), p. 684. 
p. 29     "No story of Einstein": Woolf, op. cit. 
263 

264 
NOTES 
p. 31 "the logic of Aristotle's successor": Armand Borel, "The School of 
Mathematics at the Institute for Advanced Study," in A Century of 
Mathematics in America, ed. Peter Duren (Providence, RI: 
American Mathematical Society, 1989), p. 130. 
p. 31 "I don't believe in natural science": Quoted in Ed Regis, Who Got 
Einstein's Office? Eccentricity and Genius at the Institute for 
Advanced Study (Cambridge, MA: Perseus, 1987), p. 58.1 also 
corroborated the story with John Bahcall. 
p. 32     "After that... I just gave up": Private conversation, May 2002. 
p. 32 "the laws of nature are a priori": Reported to me by Paul 
Benacerraf, who was told of the conversation by Chomsky. 
p. 33 "um das Privileg zu haben": In a letter to Bruno Kreisky 
(Bundesmeister fur Auswartige Angelegenheiten of Austria) dated 
25 October 1965. 
p. 34 "two-membered 'natural kind' ": Hao Wang, Reflections on Kurt 
Godel (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987), p. 2. 
p. 37 "It works, yes": Michael Frayn, Copenhagen (New York: Anchor 
Books, 1998), pp. 71-2. 
p. 39 "Godel's findings seem to have even more far-reaching 
consequences": William Barrett, Irrational Man: A Study in 
Existentialist Philosphy (New York: Anchor Books, 1962,1990), p. 
39. 
p. 42     "the religious paradise of youth": Schilpp, op. cit, p. 5. 
Chapter 1: A Platonist among the Platonists 
p. 54     a brief "History of the  Godel Family":  Reprinted  in  Godel 
Remembered: Salzburg 10-12 July 1983, ed. P. Weingartner and L. 
Schmetterer (Napoli: Bibiopolis, 1987). p. 58     John Dawson, 
Logical Dilemmas: The Life and Work of Kurt Godel 
(Wellesley, MA: A K Peters LTD, 1997), p. 14. p. 58     "an exile in 
Czechoslovakia": Dawson 1997, op. cit., p. 15. p. 58     "his interest in 
precision": Wang 1987, op. cit., p. 41. p. 60     until John Dawson 
undertook the formidable task: See also 
Dawson's (1997) excellent biography of Godel that has already 
been cited. 

NOTES 
265 
p. 60 manuscripts for articles that he had promised to deliver: For 
example, the article for Rudolf Carnap's Festschrift, which he had 
promised to P. A. Schilpp in 1953. Godel produced no less than six 
drafts of the "brief note" which grew into a lengthy manuscript. He 
kept revising until 1959, when he finaly wrote to Schilpp, calling it 
quits. Two of the six versons were posthumously published under 
the title "Is Mathematics the Syntax of Language?" in volume III of 
Godel's Collected Works. 
p. 60 a hysteria of discretion: Solomon Feferman expressed this double 
aspect of Godel's personality this way: "What I find striking here is 
the contrast on the one hand between the depth of Godel's 
convictions which underlay his work, combined with his 
sureness of insight leading him to the core of each problem, and 
on the other hand the tight rein he placed on the expression of 
his true thoughts." See Solomon Feferman, "Kurt Godel: 
Conviction and Caution," in Godel's Theorem in Focus, ed. S. G. 
Shanker (London: CroomHelm, 1988), p. 111. 
p. 63 I remember my own: See Rebecca Goldstein, "Writers on Writing: 
On the Wings of Enchantment," The New York Times, 19 December 
2002. 
p. 63 "Here is the life, Socrates": Symposium, 21 ld-21 le. Translated by 
William S. Cobb (State University of New York, 1993). 
p. 64 Godel had been drawn toward number theory: Wang, 1987, op. 
cit, p. 22. 
p. 66 "It is a measure of Godel's status": Jaakko Hintikka, On Godel 
(Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Thomson Learning, 2000), p. 1. 
p. 72 "Theory of Cafe Central": Quoted in Alan S. Janik and Hans Veigl, 
Wittgenstein in Vienna: A Biographical Excursion Through the City 
and its History (New York: Springer, 1998), p. 88. 
p. 74 The philosopher Karl Popper ... waited with impatience: See David 
Edmonds and John Edinow, "Wittgenstein's Poker: The Story of a 
Ten-Minute Argument Between Two Great Philosophers (New York: 
HarperCollins, 2001), for a lively discussion of Popper's exclusion 
from the Vienna Circle and the antagonism to Wittgenstein that lay 
behind it. 

266 
NOTES 
p. 74     "The Circle's voice," Edmonds and Edinow, op. cit., p. 163. 
p. 75 He was dismayed: He himself acknowledged in a letter to the 
mathematician Menger that he had contributed (presumably 
because of his disinclination to address it) to the misapprehension: 
"In consequence] of frequent tiredness I hardly ever answer letters 
before a week's time. But in this case there was moreover a sp[ecial] 
reason, namely that I always have inhibitions in writing about my 
relationship to the Vienna Circle because I never was a logical 
pos[itivist] in which the term is commonly understood and explained 
in the [manifesto of J 1929. On the other hand by some publications] 
(probably in part through my own fault) the impr[ession) is 
created that I was." Quoted in Wang 1987, op. cit., p. 49. 
p. 80 "The pleasant atmosphere": Rudolf Carnap, "Intellectual 
Autobiography," in The Philosophy of Rudolf Carnap, ed. Paul A. 
Schilpp (La Salle, IL: Open Court, 1963). 
p. 80 footnote 7: Boltzmann had succeeded: For a fascinating discussion 
of Boltzmann's life and works see David Lindley, Boltzmann's Atom: 
The Great Debate That Launched A Revolution in Physics (New York: 
Free Press, 2001). 
p. 81 "especially interested in the formal-logical": Herbert Feigl, "The 
Wiener Kreis in America," in The Intellectual Migration: Europe and 
America, 1930-1960, ed. Donald Fleming and Bernard Bailyn 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univeristy Press, 1969), p. 635. 
p. 81 "that almost seemed to exude sincerity": Karl Menger, 
Reminiscences of the Vienna Circle and the Mathematical 
Colloquia, ed. Louise Golland, Brian McGuinness, and Abe Sklar 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1994), p. 63. 
p. 81     When anything came up in conversation: Menger, op. cit., p. 64. 
p. 82     "Schlick especially seemed to resent this": Menger, op. cit., p. 65. 
p. 84     "Uncritical, run-down aristocrats": Menger, op. cit., pp. 61-2. 
p. 85 "our philosophical movement with its international trade name": 
Feigl, op. cit, p. 630. 
p. 85     "The truths of pure mathematics": Feigl, op. cit., p. 652, 
p. 88     "a rather dingy room," Menger, op. cit., p. 55. 
p. 90 "the Austrian equivalent": Ray Monk, Ludwig Wittgenstein: The 
Duty of Genius (New York: Penguin, 1990), p. 72. 

NOTES 
267 
p. 94 "We were both cross from the heat": Bertrand Russell to Ottoline 
Morrel,27Mayl913. 
p. 95 footnote 13: "were taken from authors": Allan Janik and Stephan 
Toulmin, Wittgenstein's Vienna (New York: Simon and Schuster, 
1973), p. 27. 
p. 95 Partly it was the Viennese aspect in his thinking: This is a dominant 
theme in Janik and Toulmin, op. cit. "Those of us who attended his 
lectures [at Cambridge University] ... still found ourselves looking 
upon his ideas, his methods of argument and his very topics of dis 
cussion as something totally original and his own ___If there was an 
intellectual gulf between him and us, it was not because his 
philosophical methods, style of exposition and subject matter were 
(as we supposed) unique and unparalleled. It was a sign, rather, of a 
culture clash: the clash between a Viennese thinker whose intellectual 
problems and personal attitudes alike had been formed in the 
neo-Kantian environment of pre-1914, in which logic and ethics 
were essentially bound up with each other and with the critique of 
language {Sprachkritik), and an audience of students whose 
philosophical questions had been shaped by the neo-Humean... 
empiricism of Moore, Russell and their colleagues" (pp. 21-2). 
p. 95     "a quintessential^ Viennese figure": Monk, op. cit., p. 20. 
p. 96 pronounced a genius by Russell: "Wittgenstein's recurring thoughts 
of suicide between 1903 and 1912, and the fact that these thoughts 
abated only after Russell's recognition of his genius, suggest that he 
accepted this imperative (Weininger's) in all its terrifying severity." 
Monk, op. cit., p. 25. 
p, 99 "stranger than others by orders of magnitude": Jaakko Hintikka, 
op. cit, p. 3. Hintikka is here speaking even more widely than of 
logic; he is speaking of all of mathematics. 
p. 101 "We shall see contradiction": Remarks on the Foundations of 
Mathematics (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1967), p. 110. 
p. 101 the later Wittgenstein came to regard the entire field as a "curse": 
For example, he writes: "The curse of the invasion of mathematics 
by mathematical logic is that now any proposition can be 
represented in a mathematical symbolism, and this makes us 
feel obliged to understand it. Although of course this method of 
writ- 

268 
NOTES 
ing is nothing but the translation of vague ordinary prose." 
Wittgenstein, op. cit., 155. 
p. 103   footnote 16: "an Indian poet much in vogue": Monk, op. cit., p. 243. 
p. 104 footnote 17: "Although Godel had not persuaded Carnap on this 
fundamental issue": Eckehart Kdhler, "Godel and the Vienna 
Circle: Platonism versus Formalism," in History of Logic, 
Methodology, and Philosophy of Science, section 13 (Vienna 
Institute for Advanced Studies). Later cited in S. G. Shanker, ed., 
Gb'del's Theorem in Focus (London: Croom Helm, 1988). 
p. 105   "I shall relate to you": Quoted in Janik and Veigl, op. cit. p. 63. 
p. 105   "a mythological character": Monk, op. cit., p. 284. 
p. 105   "Schlick adored him": Feigl, op. cit., p. 638. 
p. 105 "Feigl had always had an unusual ability to get along with 
everyone": Menger, op. cit., p. 66. 
p. 105   "limitless admiration for Carnap": Ibid. 
p. 106 "I once wanted to give a few words in the foreword": Letter to 
Ludwig von Ficker, quoted in Monk, op. cit., p. 178. The letter is 
undated, but Monk says it was almost certainly written 19 
November 1919. 
p. 110   "a slim, unusually quiet young man": Menger, op. cit., p. 201. 
p. 110   "a very unassuming, diligent worker": Feigl, op. cit., p. 640. 
p. I l l  "Some reductionism is correct": Hao Wang, A Logical Journey: 
Prom Godel to Philosophy (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996). 
p. 113 "[A] friend described going to Beethoven's door": Bertrand Russell 
to Ottoline Morrell, 23 April 1912. 
p. 114 "I had my tonsils out": Fania Pascal, "Wittgenstein: A Personal 
Memoir," in Recollections of Wittgenstein, ed. R. Rhees (Oxford: 
Oxford Press, 1984), pp. 28-9. 
p. 117   "In the early 1970's": Menger, op. cit., p. 230. 
p. 117 " 'logishe Kunststucken'": The relevant passage is in Remarks on the 
Foundations of Mathematics, Appendix I, p. 19. "You say:..., so P is 
true and unprovable. That presumably means: Therefore P. That is 
all right with me—but for what purpose do you write down this 
'assertion'? (It is as if someone had extracted from certain 
principles about natural forms and architectural style the idea 
that on 

NOTES 
269 
Mount Everest, where no one can live, there belonged a chalet in 
the Baroque style. And how could you make the truth of the 
assertion plausible to me, since you can make no use of it except 
to do these little conjuring tricks?" 
p. 118 "As far as my theorems about undecidable propositions are 
concerned": Menger, op. cit, p. 231. 
p. 118 "Wittgenstein's views on mathematical logic": Georg Kreisl, 
"Wittgenstein's 'Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics,'" 
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, IV (1958), pp. 143-4. 
Chapter 2: Hilbert and the Formalists 
p. 124 "So the geometrical figures are signs or mnemonic symbols": 
David Hilbert, "Mathematische Probleme. Vortrag, gehalten auf 
dem internationale Mathematischer-Kongress zu Paris 1900." 
Nachrichten von der Kb'nglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu 
Gb'ttingen, 253-97. English translation in Felix Browder, ed., 
"Mathematical Developments Arising from the Hilbert Problems," 
Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics XXVIII, parts 1 and 2. 
(Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society, 1976). 
p. 128 "In mathematics we must always strive after a system": Gottlob 
Frege, Begriffsschrifte, eine der arithmetischen nachbedildete ormal-
sprache des reinen Denkens (Halle: Nebert, 1879). English 
translation in Jean van Heijenoort, ed., Prom Prege to Gb'del: A Source 
Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879-1931 (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard Univeristy Press, 1967), p. 279. 
p. 128 "no science can be so enveloped in obscurity as mathematics": Jean 
Heijenoort, ed., op. cit., p. 242. 
p. 136 "meaningless marks on paper": Quoted in John de Pillis and Nick 
Rose, Mathematical Maxims and Minins (Raleigh, NC, 1988). 
p. 142 "Admittedly, the present state of affairs": David Hilbert, "On the 
Infinite," in Philosophy of Mathematics, ed. Paul Benacerraf and 
Hilary Putnam (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1964), p. 141. 
A translation of a talk delivered 4 June 1925 before a congress of 
the Westphalian Mathematical Society in Munster, in honor of Karl 

270 
NOTES 
Weierstrass. Translated by Erna Putnam and Gerald J. Massey from 
Mathematische Annalen (Berlin) no. 95 (1925), pp. 161-90. 
Chapter 3: The Proof of Incompleteness 
p. 149   "the application of the Verification Principle to mathematics": 
Monk, op. cit., p. 295. p. 154   footnote 2: "The completeness 
theorem, mathematically, is indeed 
an almost trivial consequence": Hao Wang, From Mathematics to 
Philosophy (New York: Humanities Press, 1974), pp. 8-9. p. 158   
No mention of Godel . . .  by Hans Reichenbach: Reichenbach's 
account was published in Die Naturwissenschaften, Vol. 18 (1930), 
1093-4. p. 160   Godel didn't fully prove his second 
incompleteness theorem until 
after the conference: John Dawson, "The Reception of Godel's 
Incompleteness Theorems" in Godel's Theorem in Focus, ed. S. G. 
Shanker (London: Croom Helm, 1988), p. 91, footnote 2. p. 160   
How, given Godel's Entdeckungen, could he not have questioned 
his former thinking?: See Dawson (1988) for a thorough discussion 
of the reaction, or initial lack thereof, to Godel's first 
incompleteness theorem. 
p. 161    "In science ... novelty emerges": Kuhn, op cit., p. 64. p. 179   What 
we use next is something called the diagonal lemma: See 
Hintikka, op. cit., p. 33. p. 185   "Operating with the infinite can 
be made certain only by the 
finite": Hilbert 1964, op. cit., p. 151. p. 188   The last article that 
Godel was to publish in his life: "Ober eine 
Bisher    Noch    Nicht    Benutzte    Erweiternung    des    Finiten 
Standpunktes," Dialectica 12 (1958), pp. 280-7. p. 188   "doubtful. 
.. about the completeness of the formal systems": In a 
letter to Constance Reid Bernays, 3 August 1966; quoted in Dawson 
1997, p. 72. p. 189   "Mathematics cannot be incomplete": 
Wittgenstein 1967, op. cit., 
p. 158. p. 190   "No calculus can decide a philosophical problem": 
Philosophical 
Remarks, p. 296. 

NOTES 
271 
p. 190   "My task is not to talk about GodeFs proof": Remarks on the 
Foundations of Mathematics V, p. 16. p. 191    "They are what is 
mystical": Tractatus, 6.522. p. 195   footnote 9: how Godel "entered my 
intellectual life": Stephen C. 
Kleene, "Godel's Impression on Students of Logic in the 1930's," in 
Godel Remembered, ed. Paul Weingartner and Leopold Schmetterer 
(Naples: Bibliopolis, 1987) p. 52. p. 196   footnote 10: "It is very 
queer": "Wittgenstein's Lectures on the 
Foundations of Mathematics: Cambridge 1939," from the Notes 
of R. G. Bosanquet, Norma Malcolm, Rush Rhees, Yorick Smythies, 
ed. Cora Diamond (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1976), 
Lecture XXI, pp. 206-7. p. 200   "Godel's theorem seems to me to 
prove that Mechanism is false": J. 
R. Lucas, "Minds, Machines, and Godel," Philosophy, XXXVI 
(1961),p. 112. p. 201    "What did Godel's theorem achieve?": 
Roger Penrose, Shadows of 
the Mind: A Search for the Missing Science of Consciousness (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1994), pp. 64-5. p. 203   "Either the 
human mind surpasses all machines": Wang 1974, op. 
cit, p. 324. p. 205    "Delusions may be systematized": Shervert H. 
Frazier and Arthur C. 
Carr, Introduction to Psychopathology (Jason Aronson, 1983), p. 106. 
p. 205    "A paranoid person is irrationally rational": James W. Anderson, 
Associate Professor of Clinical Psychology, Northwestern University, 
personal communication, 7 October 2003. 
Chapter 4: Godel's Incompleteness 
p. 210   He mentioned to . . .  Morton White: Private conversation with 
Morton White, May 2002. p. 213   footnote 3: according to Hao 
Wang ... in 1970: Wang 1987, op. cit., 
p. 9. p. 213   "Godel would probably have published more": Wang 
1987, op. cit., 
p. 29. p. 216   revised and expanded for this volume: The original 
appeared in the 
American Mathematical Monthly 54 (1947), pp. 515-25. The origi- 

272 
NOTES 
nal had been published before Paul Cohen had proved that the 
continuum hypothesis could not be deduced from the axioms of 
set theory. 
p. 220 "Godel was more withdrawn after his return from America": 
Menger, op. cit, p. 205. 
p. 223 "How can any of us be called professor when Godel is not?": 
Stanislaw M. Ulam, Adventures of a Mathematician (New York: 
Charles Scribner's Sons, 1976), p. 80. As Dawson remarks (Dawson 
1997, p. 302, note 462), it "is worth noting that Godel himself 
seems never to have complained about his status, either publicly or 
in private remarks or correspondence." 
p, 223 "G married Adele Porkert on 20 September 1938": Wang 1988, op. 
cit., p. 47, footnote 7. 
p. 226 "He had complained about the revocation of his dozentship": 
Menger, op.cit, p. 123. 
p. 227 "And what brings you to America, Herr Bergmann?": Dawson 
1997, op. cit, p. 90. 
p. 227 "During the summer I heard nothing from Godel": Menger, op. 
cit., p. 124. 
p. 230 "His case could hardly create a precedent": Dawson 1997, op. cit., 
p. 148. 
p. 241 Nonstandard analysis, he said, was not "a fad": Dawson 1997, op. cit., 
p. 244. 
p. 244 "He [Godel] also pointed out that many scientists of great 
intelligence": Morton Gabriel White, A Philosopher's Story 
(University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1999), p. 
303. 
p. 245 "On every one of my admittedly infrequent trips to Princeton": 
Menger, op. cit., p. 226. 
p. 247 "Who could have an interest in destroying Leibniz's writings?": 
Menger, op. cit., p. 19. 
p. 248 He also reported his suspicions that there were those who were 
trying to kill him: Dawson 1997, op. cit., pp. 249-50. 
p, 248 "Today . . . Kurt Godel called me": Morgenstern papers, Perkins 
Memorial Library, Duke University, folder "Godel, Kurt, 
1974-1977." 
p. 250   "eyed him suspiciously": Wang 1987, op. cit., p. 133. 

NOTES 
273 
p. 250   "I've lost the faculty for making positive decisions": ibid. 
p. 250 "It was said that G[6del]'s weight was down to sixty-five pounds": 
ibid. 
p. 254 footnote 15: "The Time We Thought We Knew," Brian Greene, 
Op/Ed, The New York Times, 1 January 2004. 
p. 256 "temporal conditions in these universes show . . . surprising 
features": Kurt Godel, "A Remark About the Relationship 
Between Relativity Theory and Idealistic Philosophy," in Albert 
Einstein: Philosopher Scientist, ed. Paul Arthur Schilpp (New 
York: MJF Books, 1949), p. 560. 
p. 257   "be excluded on physical grounds": Einstein, op. cit, p. 687-8. 
p. 258 "It turned out that he himself, as a preliminary step to get some 
evidence, had taken down the great Hubble atlas of the galaxies": 
Jeremy Bernstein, Quantum Profiles (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1991), pp. 140-1. 
p. 260 "In philosophy Godel has never arrived at what he looked for": 
Wang 1987, op. cit., p. 46. 
p. 260 "He also looked for (but failed to obtain) an epiphany": Wang 
1987, op. cit., p. 196. 

 

Suggested Reading 
Like many before and after me, my first substantive exposure to 
Godel's incompleteness theorems came not by way of studying the 
famous 1931 paper itself but rather by reading, as an 
undergraduate, the celebrated Godel's Proof by Ernest Nagel and 
James R. Newman (New York: New York University Press, 1968). 
This is a popular exposition that yet manages to go into some 
detail concerning the substance of the proof. My world was 
rocked. On rereading it after all these years, I was impressed all over 
again. It's a wonderful little book, in its own way a classic. 
Jaakko Hintikka's very slim (70 pages) book, On Godel (Belmont, 
CA: Wadsworth Thomson Learning, 2000), is also a clear and 
concise presentation of Godel's proof for the non-expert. Like the 
more expansive Godel's Proof, Hintikka's proof is self-contained, 
requiring no previous knowledge of logic. He also has a good sense 
of humor. 
So far as the life of the logician is concerned, Logical Dilemmas: 
The Life and Work of Kurt Godel (Wellesley, MA: A K Peters, 1997) 
by John Dawson is definitive. As not only a logician but also GodePs 
archivist, whose wife learned to translate Godel's shorthand, 
Dawson was in an unrivaled position for presenting the life of 
275 

276 
SUGGESTED READING 
Godel. I was told by Institute mathematician Armand Borel that 
Godel's literary remains, which had been donated to the Institute 
for Advanced Study by Godel's widow, were in utter chaos, piled 
helter-skelter into decaying boxes; and then "a young man" 
(Dawson) had offered to put it all into order. "He did a good job, 
I'm told." Indeed he did. 
John Dawson also has two papers on Godel that are accessible 
and interesting: "Kurt Godel in Sharper Focus" and "The Reception 
of Godel's Incompleteness Theorems." Both are reprinted in Godel's 
Theorem in Focus, edited by Stuart Shanker, as are other interesting 
essays, including Solomon Feferman's "Kurt Godel: Conviction and 
Caution." 
Hao Wang produced three rather eccentric but intriguing books 
out of the pickings of Godel's mind: From Mathematics to 
Philosophy (New York: Humanities Press, 1974), Reflections on Kurt 
Godel (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987), and A Logical Journey 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996). The books recount 
conversations Wang had with Godel, interlaced with history of the 
logician's life and Wang's own views on the topics he and Godel 
discussed. What they lack in structure they compensate for in 
content. 
There are several, memoirs of Godel, written by those who had first 
known him in Vienna, and they are fascinating and in their own way 
touching. There is first of all Georg Kreisl's "Kurt Godel: 1906-1978," 
Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society, Vol. 26 (1980), 
pp. 148-224. Kreisl, an eminent mathematical logician, is in a unique 
position, having known Wittgenstein quite well when Kreisl was a 
student, and then, later, having gotten to know Godel in Princeton. 
Karl Menger had been invited, together with Godel, to join the 
Vienna Circle as favored students of Hans Hahn and his invaluable 
first-hand reminiscences of Godel are recounted in "Memories of 
Kurt Godel," in Reminiscences of the Vienna Circle and the 
Mathematical Colloquium, ed. Louise Golland, Brian McGuinness, 
and Abe Sklar (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1994). And then there is Olga 

SUGGESTED READING 
277 
Taussky-Todd, herself a number-theorist, who also had first come to 
know Godel in their student days. Her "Remembrances of Kurt 
Godel" is in Godel Remembered (Naples: Bibliopolis, 1987). 
If the reader is interested in seeing how a contemporary polymath 
applies Godel's theorems in his own creative scientific thinking) then 
he is advised to read Roger Penrose's The Emperor's New Mind: 
Concerning Computers, Minds, and the Laws of Physics (New York: 
Penguin, 1989) and his Shadows of the Mind: A Search for the Missing 
Science of Consciousness (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994). Like 
Go'del, Penrose is a confirmed mathematical Platonist; he interprets 
the incompleteness theorems exactly as Godel did. There's lots of 
further fascinating mathematics that he discusses—-including 
Turing's contributions to the work Godel began, the Mandelbrot 
set, and Penrose's own work on the tiling of the plane—all argued, by 
him, as pointing in the direction of Platonism. Penrose's overall 
argument is that mathematical knowledge, the amazing fact that we 
have it, is evidence that the laws of physics are of a fundamentally 
different character than we have heretofore dreamt. 
Douglas Hofstadter's Pulitzer-prize-winning Godel, Escher, Bach: 
The Eternal Golden Braid (New York: Basic Books, 1974) is a spirited 
romp through self-referentiality. Hofstadter does a wonderful job of 
braiding together ideas in logic, art, and music, just as the title 
promises. When, upon being asked what I'd been working on these 
past few years, I'd say "Godel," more often than not I got a blank 
stare in return. Then I'd mention the title of Hofstadter's bestseller, 
and the blank stare would give way to a smile and an "oh yes." 
Finally, there is the writing of Godel himself, his few published 
papers and his many unpublished works, in Collected Works, ed. 
Solomon Feferman et al. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986-). 
There are three volumes to date. 

 

Acknowledgements 
If there is any aspect of being the perfect literary agent that Tina 
Bennett lacks, I have yet to discover it. The current project only 
served to reveal new aspects of Tina's ways of unstintingly 
supporting her writers. 
I am extremely grateful to the following people who shared their 
recollections of Kurt Godel with me: John Bahcall, Paul Benacerraf, 
Armand Borel, Thomas Nagel, Morton White. Each one was stintless 
with his time. Simon Kochen not only spoke long hours with me but 
also generously read over my completed manuscript, catching some 
technical errors, for which I am profoundly grateful, and answering 
further queries by e-mail. Berel Lang also read the manuscript and 
his comments, too, were insightful, substantive, and helpful. 
I thank John Dawson, not only for the Herculean work he did as 
Godel's archivist, which made the job of all scholars who follow 
possible, but also his prompt response to any question that arose. 
As always, Sheldon Goldstein, physicist-philosopher, had insights 
that were invaluable. He, more than anyone, helped me to ease my 
way back into mathematical logic. There is not a man on Earth, I'd 
wager, quite equal to him for reminding one of the beauty and ele- 
279 

280 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
gance of abstract thought. Steven Pinker generously read some early 
inchoate chapters, when I was feeling my way toward "popular 
technical writing," and his comments and encouragement were 
sustaining. And when I threw up my hands, Yael Goldstein calmly 
placed them back on the keyboard, offering the sort of sage advice 
and substantive criticism and guidance without which this book, 
quite literally, would not have been written. 
Accordingly, I dedicate the book to her, with gratitude, love, and 
stupefied admiration. 

I n d ex  
Adler, Max, 73 
algebra, I32n, 241 
algorithms, 132,171,197 n, 
199-200 
Alleluyeva, Svetlana, 241 
Alt, Rudolf von, 70n 
Altenberg, Peter, 72 
analytic propositions, 44n 
Anselm, Saint, 209 
Aristotle, 31,48, 55,150,205, 
210,259 
arithmetic: 
completeness vs. 
consistency of, 66-67,134-
45, 153-56,158,160, 162-
63,167-68,169, 175-
76,181-88,212, 221 Godel's 
consistency proof 
for (1958), 212 
see also numbers 
artificial intelligence, 201-2 
Artin, Emil, 246 Atlantic 
Monthly, 241-42 atomic bomb, 
22, 237 "Autobiographical 
Notes" 
(Einstein), 42-43 
Autobiography (Russell), 116 
"axiom of choice," 224 
Aydelotte, Frank, 229-30,237 
Ayer, Alfred Jules, 89,108,214 
Bahcalljohn,31 Bamberger, 
Louis, 14-15,16, 
237 
Barbara or Piety (Werfel), 72 
Barrett, William, 38-39 
Beethoven, Ludwig van, 96,113 
Bellah, Robert, 243-45 
Benacerraf, Paul, 20n, 111-12, 
216-18,231 
Berg, Alban, 70, 72 
281 

282 
INDEX 
 
Bergmann, Gustav, 227 
Bernays, Paul, 188,212 Besso, 
Michele, 255 Bick, Auguste, 
204n Blackwell, Kenneth, 116 
Bohr, Niels, 37-38, 39,42,43, 
51,214 
Boltzmann, Ludwig, 80 Bolyai, 
Farkas, 130M Bolyai, Janos, 130M 
Borel, Armand, 31, 33-34, 236, 
239-40 Born, Max, 
43 Borsuk, Karol, 238-39 
"Bourbaki, Nicolas," 243M 
Brouwer, Luitzen, 143 
Bundy, McGeorge, 242 
calculus, predicate, 35«, 150, 
154n, 221,222 Cantor, Georg, 
93M, 139 Cantor's continuum 
hypothesis, 111-12,139, 216-
18, 224-25 
Cantor's paradox, 93M, 142 
Carnap, Rudolf, 80, 81, 82,104, 
105-6,148,158,160-61, 213M, 
228,255,265n Chaitin, G. J., 
166n Chomsky, Noam, 32 
Cocteau, Jean, 76M cognition, 
25-27, 31,32, 
36-40,199-205,211 
Cohen, Paul, 139,217,225M 
combinatorics, 118,163-64,202 
computability, 196n-97M 
computers, 19-20,25,133, 
199-203 
Comte, Auguste, 85 
Concerto for the Left Hand 
(Ravel), 90M 
Constitution, U.S., 232-34 
constructive proofs, 143n, 148 
Contributions to the Analysis of 
Sensation (Mach), 85 
Copenhagen (Frayn), 37-38 
Darwin, Charles, 199 Dawson, 
John, 54, 58, 59-60, 
222,227, 232n 
decidability, 196M-97M 
Descartes, Rene, 27M, 137,260 
descriptive propositions, 44 
"diagonal argument," 139 
Dukas, Helen, 20M, 235 
Edmonds, David, 74-75 
Eidinow, John, 74-75 Einstein, 
Albert: autobiographical notes 
by, 
42-43 death of, 61,234-
36, 245-46, 
255-56 Godel 
compared with, 
34-37,40,44,47-48,49, 
113,194,248,252 Godel's 
relationship with, 13-14,20-
23,29-44, 48-
49,51,213,219, 232-36, 
239,245-46, 253-58 at 
Institute for Advanced 

Index 
283 
 
Study, 13-14,19-20,48, 
234-36,237 intellectual 
isolation of, 35-38,40-
44,48,49 Jewish 
background of, 19 legends 
about, 30,40-41 
mathematics as interest of, 
29-30, 35,64 
photographs of, 22, 253 as 
physicist, 29-30, 34; see 
also relativity theory as 
political exile, 13—14, 
34-35,124-26 
reputation of, 13-14,19-20, 
35,38,221M as scientific 
realist, 41-43, 
45,254-56 as U.S. citizen, 
233 Eisenhower, Dwight D., 30 
"either-or" propositions, 202—5 
Elements (Euclid), 130M 
Emperor's New Mind, The 
(Penrose), 25, 201 empiricism, 
32, 74-80, 84-90, 
107,111,137,215, 258-
59,267n Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy, 
23-24,26 Epimenides, 
166 epistemology, 17M, 24-
25,27, 
29,121-22,137, 154H 
Equivalents of the Axiom of 
Choice (Rubin and Rubin), 
224M 
Euclid, 128-29,137,185-86, 
225M 
evolution, 31-32,199 excluded 
middle, law of the, 
143n existentialism, 
135-36,189 
Fackel, Die, 71 Feferman, 
Solomon, 265« Feigl, Herbert, 
84-86,105-6, 
109,110,136-37,160, 
213-14,228 Fermat, 
Pierre de, 155 Fermat's last 
theorem, 155M Fields Medal, 
47M finitary proofs, 
118,144,148, 
154M, 163,184«, 185-88, 
212 Flexner, Abraham, 
14-20, 33, 
219,229,237,245 
formalism, 26, 46M, 86-88, 
98-102,128-29, 132, 
134-45,148,149,161 
Forman, Philip, 233—34 Franz 
Joseph, Emperor of 
Austria, 69 
Frayn, Michael, 37-38 Frege, 
Gottlob, 56M, 81, 83, 
91-92, 96M, 111,119, 
128-29,144,218 
Freud, 
Sigmund, 
70,71 
From A Logical Point of View 
(Quine),214 
From Mathematics to 
Philosophy (Wang), 111 
Fuld, Mrs. Felix, 14-15,16,237 
Furtwangler, Phillip, 58,61, 
115M, 204M; 222M 

284 
INDEX 
 
galaxies, rotation of, 258-59 
games, 122,134,136,141 game 
theory, 33n, 40,100-101 Gauss, 
Carl Friedrich, 130n 
Getfawfcen-experiments 
(thought-experiments), 
65,66 
Geertz, 
Clifford, 
242-43 
Gentzen, 
Gerhard, 
184n 
geometry, 62,85,123-29,130n, 
131,137-38, 141-42, 
225n God, 
existence of, 77-79, 
209-10 Godel, 
Adele Nimbursky 
(Porkert), 33, 208,209, 
223-26,228-29, 230, 
248,249,250 Godel, 
Escher, Bach: An Eternal 
Golden Braid 
(Hofstadter), 26 
Godel, Kurt: 
ambition of, 29,47, 51, 60, 
64,118-19,187n, 194, 
222,259-61 
authority respected by, 
236-40, 244-45 author's 
encounter with, 
211-12,241 
birth of, 53 
childhood of, 53-58,260-61 
correspondence of, 33,60, 
61,111-12,116-17,192, 
227, 234,235-36,252n, 
266n death of, 250-
52,260-61 
Dozent and Privatdozent 
appointments of, 156, 
220-22,226-28,251n 
education of, 29, 33,35, 51, 
53, 57-59 German 
background of, 
53-54, 57-58, 124-26 
Gibbs lecture of (1951), 
202-3 Harvard lectures 
prepared 
by, 215 heart ailment of, 
56,229, 
260 honorary degrees of, 
222-23, 
231-32 ill health of, 
56,220, 229, 
248-50,260 
influences on, 58—59, 
111-12,115-16,193 at 
Institute for Advanced 
Study, 13-14,20-23, 
30-34,48,207,211-12, 
215,219,222-25, 
229-31,234-50 
intellectual isolation of, 
30-32,35-38,44-48, 
60-61,213-19,236-50, 
259-60 "interesting 
axiom" of, 
20-21,30-31,48,55,236 
Jewish identity misattributed 
to, 116,219-20,226-30 
at Konigsberg conference 
(1930), 65-67,147-49, 
150,155-62,195n, 201, 
219 

Index 
285 
 
language as viewed by, 110, 
158,261 legalistic 
tendencies of, 
232-34,250-51,252 
legends about, 30-32, 
208-13, 232-33,258-59 
literary remains (Nachlass) 
of, 59-62, 89,115-17, 
213,232M logical 
positivism opposed 
by, 87-88,109,213-19, 
236,266M as logician, 
20-21,24,29-30, 
31,48-51,55,57,58-59, 
64-65, 74, 76M, 83,116, 
138,205,210,219, 
232-34, 236,239-40, 
251-52,259 marriage of, 
33, 208, 209, 
223-26,228-29,230, 
248,249,250 
mathematics revolutionized 
by, 21-23, 38-40, 59, 64, 
161,207,218-23, 
229-32 memorial service 
for, 240, 
251-52 paranoia of, 
30,48-49, 
56-57,204-5,211,224, 
229,240-41,246-50 
personality of, 30-32,48-49, 
56-57, 59,61,75-76, 
114-15,223-31,265n 
Ph.D. dissertations of, 147, 
150,153-54,156,159, 
186,221-22 
photographs of, 22, 55, 253 
physical appearance of, 14, 
211,228-29 
physics as interest of, 34, 35, 
58, 213M, 253-61 
as Platonist, 44-48, 59, 61-
64,73,75,87-88, 104M, 
110-13,116-17, 
154,185,192,194, 213-
19,244,256,260 
as political exile, 13—14, 34-
35,53,58,124-26, 219-
22,225-34 
proof of, see incompleteness 
theorems 
publications of, 34M, 60, 
111-12,212-13,216-18, 
246, 257, 265M 
questionnaire answered by, 
60-61,115-16,193 
reputation of, 22-23, 35, 67-
68,147,207-15, 220-
23,229-31,248, 251-
52,259, 272M 
reticence of, 57-58, 59, 61, 
75-76,109,110,114-15, 
116,135-36,149, 156-
58,194-95,207-15 
rheumatic fever, 56, 229 
self-starvation of, 211, 
248-50 
at University of Vienna, 29, 
33,35,51,53,58-59, 
67-102, 115M, 147,150, 
153-54,156,219-22, 
225-30, 251M, 255,260 

286 
INDEX 
 
Godel, Kurt (continued) as U.S. 
citizen, 54,232-34 in Vienna 
Circle, 108-13, 
115,116,117,135-36, 
160-61,193,213-14, 
216,228,236,266M 
Yale lectures of (1941), 
212 Godel, Marianne, 33, 
53, 54, 
55,192,223-24, 230, 
234,235-36,252n 
Godel, Rudolf (brother), 54, 
55,56 Godel, Rudolf 
(father), 53-54, 
55,223 Godel 
numbering, 67,156,162, 
165n, 167,169-77,179 
Godel's Proof (Nagel and 
Newman), 156 
"Godel's Theorem" 
(Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy), 23-24 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 
58 Goldbach, 
Christian, 87n, 
155n, 217 
Goldbach's conjecture, 155n 
Gomperz, Heinrich, 59,61,73, 
115n 
Gomperz, Theodore, 59 
Grandjean, Burke D., 60-61, 
111-12,115-16,193 
Grundgesetze der Arithmetic 
(Frege), 91-92 
Grundlagenen der Geometrie 
(Hilbert), 137-38 
Hahn, Hans, 82-84,97,116, 
157,159,221,228 
Hahn-Banach extension 
theorem, 82 
Hapsburg Empire, 53-54,68, 
69-70, 71 
Hardy, G. H., 46-47 
Heidegger, Martin, 39 
Heisenberg, Werner, 21-22, 
36-38,39,41-42,43,51, 
214 
Hempel, Carl, 88-89,214 
Herzl, Theodore, 70 
Heyting, Arend, 148 
Hilbert, David, 46«, 49, 
119-20,123-24,136-45, 
148,153,161,162-63, 
164,184n, 185,187,188, 
197«, 198,212,218 
Hintikka, Jaakko, 65-66,99, 
147,267n 
Hirshfeld, Leon, 226-27 
"History of the Godel Family" 
(R. Godel), 54 
History of Western Philosophy 
(Russell), 102n 
Hitler, Adolf, 13,225,227 
Hofstadter, Douglas, 26 
Hormann, Theodor, 70n 
Hume, David, 77, 267n 
incompleteness theorems, 
155-88 
author's 
explication of, 
164-88 completeness vs. 
consistency 

Index 
287 
 
in, 23-24,66-67, 140-
44,153-56,158, 
160,162,167-68,169, 
175-76,181-88,192, 
196n-97n, 198,221 
as conceptual models, 25-26 
development of, 23, 35,47, 
59,64-67,74, 155-61, 
260-61 
diagonal lemma in, 179-82 
digit juxtaposition in, 172-74 
first theorem of, 23, 24, 35, 
39,50,65, 74-75, 134-
35,158,162, 164-
83,197n, 202,211, 
241,270n 
formalism and, 134-35,145, 
149,161-64,167, 168-
69,175-77,178, 182-
88,198,201-2,204, 218 
Godel numbering in, 67, 
156,162,165n, 167, 
169-77,179 
logical positivism 
contradicted by, 74-
75,99, 104«, 112-
13,160,161, 188-89,191, 
266M 
as "logische Kunststucken" 
117,118-19,189, 268n-
69n 
mathematical implications 
of, 24-25, 28, 51, 74-75, 
158-64,187-88,190, 
221-23,231-32,251-52, 
260-61 
mechanical procedures in, 
169-77,183 
metamathematical 
implications of, 24-29, 
35-39, 50-51,99,104n, 
118-20, 163, 169-
77,187-94, 198-205, 222 
musical analogy for, 156, 
165,176-77 
number properties in, 172-
74,178-83,184, 187 
objectivity and, 38-40, 
50-51 
paradoxes and, 49-51,65, 
66-67,99,164, 165«-
66n, 179w, 184-85 
philosophical implications 
of, 27-29, 67,191-92, 
198-205,211 
popular misinterpretation 
of, 23,24-26,37-40,61, 
74-76,158, 218,266« 
preliminary definitions for, 
164-65 
proof of, 66-67,74-75,115, 
117-18,153-54,158, 
162-64,167-68,170-71, 
175-83,184,187-88, 
191,196n-97« 
publication of (1931), 24, 
165«, 195n, 197« 
public disclosure of, 66, 74-
75,110,147-49,150, 
155-62,195«, 201,219 

288 
INDEX 
incompleteness theorems 
(continued) relativity theory 
compared 
with, 36-40 scientific 
impact of, 21-23, 
161-62,187-88, 
194-205,231-32 second 
theorem of, 23-24, 
35n, 74-75,158,162-63, 
183-88,212 
statement of, 23—24,26, 
74-75,155-56 syntactic 
relationships in, 
171-72,175-77,181-83, 
188 Turing's 
interpretation of, 
190,195-97 Viennese 
cultural context of, 
67-102 von Neumann's 
reaction to, 
161-63,187 well-
formed formulas in 
(wffs), 168-75,178,181 
Wittgenstein's reaction to, 
89-90,99,100,102, 
111-20,158,188-95, 
218,268«-69n infinity, 
143,144,148,154n, 
185-86,198,224n-25n 
Institute for Advanced Study: 
appointments to, 229n, 
236-45 directors of, 14-
20, 33,211, 
219,229,237-39, 
241-45 Einstein as 
member of, 
13-14,19-20,48, 
234-36,237 founding of, 
14-16 Godel as member of, 
13—14, 
20-23, 30-34, 48, 207, 
211-12,215,219, 
222-25,229-31,234-50 
mathematics faculty of, 
16-20,31,161-62,195, 
229n, 236-45 
political exiles at, 13-14, 
34-35 Introduction to 
Mathematical 
Philosophy (Russell), 117 
intuition, 17n, 40,67,100, 
121-34,143-44,148, 
188,198,202,203-4, 
216-17, 252,254n 
intuitionism, 143-44,148,252 
"Intuitionist Foundations of 
Mathematics, The" 
(Heyting), 148 
Irrational Man: A Study in 
Existentialist Philosophy 
(Barrett), 38-39 "Is 
Mathematics Syntax of 
Language?" (Godel), 
265n isosceles 
triangles, 124 
lews, 19,70,79«-80n, 97,116, 
126,219-20,226-30 
Kafka, Franz, 170,252 Kant, 
Immanuel, 73,185, 213n, 267n 

Index 
289 
 
Kaysen, Karl, 211,242-45 
Kesten, Herman, 68 
Khowasizm, Abu Ja'far 
Mohammad ibn Musa 
al-, 132n K.-K. 
Staatsrealgymnasium mit 
deutscher 
Unterrichtssprache, 
57-58 
Kleene, Stephen, 251 Klepetaf, 
Harry, 58 Kline, Stephen, 195n 
knotted curves, 238-39 
Kochen, Simon, 24n, 170,187n, 
231,240,241,251-52 
Kraus, Karl, 68,71-72 Kreisl, 
Georg, 119 Kuhn, Thomas, 
161,194 
language: 
abstraction and, 71-72, 
78-79,158 
"games" of, 40,100-101 
meaning and, 78-80,86-87, 
110,150-54,158,261 
paradoxes in, 50-51,102-3, 
189 syntax of, 86, 87, 
100,103, 
107-8,112,189-90 
truth and, 98-99,104, 
189-90 Language, 
Truth, and Logic 
(Ayer),89,214 Leibniz, 
Gottfried Wilhelm, 
27n, 32,48,61,137,209, 
236,247 
Leoncavallo, Ruggero, 176-77 
Lewis, Clarence I., 82 
"liar's paradox," 49-50, 165M, 
166, 179M, 196M light, 
properties of, 35,45, 85 
Lobachevsky, Nicolai 
Ivanovich, 130M 
logic: 
abstract nature of, 38, 71-72, 
78-79,117, 154M, 158, 
192,198-205,260-61 
contradiction in, 92, 93n, 
101-2,118,133-34,135, 
140-42,192, 196M 
deduction in, 40, 55n-56n, 
86,136,142,168-69 
formal, 24,90-93,112-13, 
114,189-90,195-96, 
241,267M-68M 
"limpid," 150-54,158,221, 
222 
paradoxes in, 49-51,65, 66-
67,90-93,99,100, 102-
3,117-18,142-43, 
145,164,165n-66«, 
179n, 184-85,189,192, 
196M, 198 
predicates in, 150-54,158 
proofs in, 144M, 196M 
propositions in, 44, 78-79, 
85-86, 90-93,97-103, 
150-54,268n-69n 
rules of, 100-102,153-54 
syllogistic, 56n 
symbolic, 82,172-74, 
267«-69M 

290 
INDEX 
 
logic (contit 
syntactic nature of, 86, 87, 
100-101,103, 107-8, 
112,150-54, 160,161, 
163,171-72, 175-77, 181-
83,188, 189-90 tautologies 
in, 86, 98-99, 
106,123,148,150,151 
truth in, 44-45,49-51, 
98-102,116-17,152-54, 
196n, 268«-69« variables 
in, 151-52,173 
logical positivism, 43-44, 
74-80, 84-90, 97-109, 
112-13,119, 160,161, 
188-89,191,213-19, 
236,266« 
"Logical Positivism: A New 
Movement in European 
Philosophy" (Blumberg 
and Feigl), 84-85 
Loos, Adolph, 70, 72 
Lucas, John, 200-201, 211 
Mach, Ernst, 80, 85, 112 "Main 
Ideas of Logicism, The" 
(Carnap), 148 Man 
Without Qualities, The, 
(Musil), 57n 
Marchet, A., 228 Marx, 
Groucho, 27 
"Mathematical Problems" 
(Hilbert), 138-39 
Mathematician's Apology, A 
(Hardy), 46-47 
mathematics: 
a priori nature of, 17-18, 27, 
28,48, 50M, 76, 85-86, 
108,121-22, 133,134, 
136,260 axioms of, 75, 
112n, 122-34, 
140-41,144, 163,185, 
186-88,200,216-17, 
224,231 descriptive 
content in, 86, 
87-88,111,136,140-41, 
187-88 diagrams and 
sketches for, 
122-24,125 
formalism in, 26, 46M, 
86-88, 98-102, 128-29, 
132,134-45, 148,149, 
161 Godel's influence on, 
21-23, 
38-40,59,64,161,207, 
218-23,229-32 meta-, 
24-29, 33, 35-40, 
44-48,50-51,62,64-65, 
67,99,104M, 118-20, 
134,154», 156,163, 
169-77,187-94, 
198-205,222 objective 
reality in, 27-28, 
35-48,111-12 
philosophy and, 27-28, 59, 
61-64,100-102,194 
physics compared with, 
29-30, 35, 36-37 proof 
in, 86-88,121-22, 
136-37,138,140-42, 
143M, 144-45, 148-49, 
155-59, 243M, 251,260 

Index 
291 
 
as pure science, 16-17, 
26-27, 85-86, 99-100 
reality of, 44-48, 64,121-22, 
134-35,140-41 rules of, 
101-2,121-23, 126-
33,136,137, 154M, 170,198, 
200, 203 symbols of, 86-87, 
99-100, 123-24,131-
32,133, 136-37,154n, 
167,198, 267« 
syntactic nature of, 100-
101, 112,131-32,188, 198-
99, 267n-68n theorems in, 
118, 126, 127-28,131, 
134,135, 140-41,200 
truth of, 86-87, 98-102, 
107-11,137-38,140-41, 
148-49,158-59,188, 
202-5 
see also arithmetic; 
geometry; logic 
Mauthner, Fritz, 103 Mendel, 
Gregor, 53n Menger, Karl, 
84,110,117-18, 
149,158,220,225-26, 
227,228,245-46, 247, 250-
51,266« metaphysics, 76, 
85,104n, 
110-11,112,216 Milnor, 
John, 238-39 mind, see 
cognition Misner, Charles, 
258 model theory, 187M, 
194, 251-52 
modus ponens, 92M 
molecular theory, 80M-81M 
Monk, Ray, 149 
Montgomery, Deane, 238, 
239-40 
Moore, G. E., 97,267M 
Morgenstern, Oskar, 32-33,48, 
211,224,230,232-34, 
246,247-51 
Morrell, Ottoline, 94, 113 
Musil, Robert, 57M mutation, 
genetic, 32« mysticism, 83-84, 
104M, 106, 
107,191-92 
Nagel, Ernest, 156 Nagel, 
Thomas, 31—32 Natkin, Marcel, 
109 "Nature of Mathematics, 
The: 
Wittgenstein's 
Standpoint" 
(Waismann), 148-49 
Nazism, 13, 19, 70, 79,124-26, 
212,225-30,251n 
Nelbock, Johann (Hans), 79n 
Neurath, Olga, 82 Neurath, 
Otto, 81-84, 110 Newman, 
James R., 156 Newton, Isaac, 
58, 254M New York Times, 241, 
243, 254M "Nicolas Bourbaki," 
243M Nietzsche, Friedrich, 39 
non-Euclidean geometry, 129, 
130M, 225M 
non-fmitary proofs, 154M, 212 
nonstandard analysis, 241 

292 
INDEX 
 
numbers: 
even, 155n, 165n 
natural, 45,11 In, 127,139, 
163,165n-66n, 172-74, 
178-83,187 prime, 46-
47, 87, 155M, 172, 
176,217 properties 
of, 172-74, 
178-83,184,187 real, 
11 In, 139 sets of, 62,83,90-
93, 112K, 
129-30,131,135,139, 
142,144-45,212, 
216-17,224-25,252 
theory of, 23, 58-59,61,64, 
83,85-86,90-93,118, 
131,135,155n 
"On computable numbers, 
with an application to 
the Entscheidungs-
problem" (Turing), 
197n 
ontology, 76, 209-10 
Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 
237-39,242,245 
Organon (Aristotle), 55n-56« 
Ovid, 209 
Pagliacci, I (Leoncavallo), 
176-77 parallels 
postulate, 129n-30«, 
136,185-86,225n 
Pascal, Fania, 114 Peano, 
Giuseppe, 96, 127,128 
Peebles, Jim, 258-59 
Penrose, Roger, 25,201-2 
philosophy, 27-29, 34, 59, 
61-64,67,100-102,103, 
191-92,194, 198-205, 
211 
Philosophy of Mathematics 
(Benacerraf and 
Putnam, eds.), 111-12, 
216-18 
physics, 28-30,33,34, 35-48, 
51, 58,65,2 13M, 253-61, 
see also relativity theory 
Pinker, Steven, 32« 
Planck, Max, 80 
Plato, 39,44,61-64,113,121, 
137,199,255,260 
Platonism, 44-51, 59,61-64, 
73, 75, 87-88,104«, 
110-13,116-17,135, 
143-44,148,154,163, 
185,192,194,213-19, 
244, 255,256,260 
Polgar, Alfred, 72-73 
Popper, Karl, 74,265« 
postmodernism, 24-26, 37,49, 
69,101,135-36,189 
Princeton University, 13, 20«, 
30-32,36,51,59,68, 
124-26, 224, 226, 227, 
229-30,231-32,238-39, 
246,258-59 
Principia Mathematica (Russell 
andWhitehead),83, 92-
93,96,101,144,160 
Prior Analytics (Aristotle), 
55n-56n 

Index 
293 
 
proof theory, 144,251 
Protagoras, 38,44,62, 86-87 
"pseudo-propositions," 78 
psychology, 70, 71, 80, 204-5 
Putnam, Hilary, 111-12,216-18 
Pythagoreans, 39 
quantum mechanics, 37-38, 
40-41,43 Quine, Willard 
van Orman, 88, 
214 
Ravel, Maurice, 90n 
reality: abstract, 43-
45,50-51, 
62-64,214 contingency 
and, 20-21,30, 
32M, 40-41 delusion vs., 
202—5 empirical, 32, 50n, 
74-80, 
84-90,107,111,137, 
215,258-59, 267M 
mathematical, 44-48,64, 
121-22,134-35,140-41 
meaning and, 44, 78-80, 81, 
85-86,97-98,100,101, 
111,131,140-41, 
191-92 objective, 
23,24-29,33, 
35-48,50-51,61-64,85, 
111-12,131,140-41, 
188,202-5,214,253-54 
perception of,46, 85, 111, 
122,134,216 subjective, 
24-25, 28, 36-40, 
62, 84-90,202-5 
transcendental, 89,191-92, 
255-57, 259-61 as 
unknowable, 106-7 recursion 
theory, 132-33,194, 
252 
Redlich, Friedrich, 54 
Reichenbach, Hans, 82,147, 
158,214,218 Reidemeister, 
Kurt, 97 Reine Vernunft (pure 
reason), 15-16,18,67,123, 
218-19,238,258 relativity 
theory: 
as conceptual revolution, 
21-22,36-43, 85 
coordinate system in, 41« 
development of, 35,65 field 
equations for, 34M, 256, 
257-58 
general theory of, 19,41 
Godel's work on, 34n, 213M, 
253-61 objective reality 
and, 36-38, 
41-43,85, 253-54 
popular misinterpretation 
of, 37-40,253-54 
space-time continuum in, 
4In, 42,45,253-61 
special theory of, 19, 35,41, 
65 religion, 27M, 42-43, 
77-79, 97, 
192,209-10,243 Remarks on 
the Foundations of 
Mathematics (Wittgenstein), 
117,190, 268n-69M 

294 
INDEX 
 
Richard, Jules, 165n Richard's 
paradox, 165n~66n, 
179« Robinson, 
Abraham, 1 18M, 
240-41 
Rorty, Richard, 208-9 Rubin, 
H., 224M Rubin, J., 224n 
Russell, Bertrand, 78, 83, 111, 
160,198 Godel and, 
116-17,216-18, 
226,248 paradox 
formulated by, 
90-93,100,102,142,144 
Wittgenstein and, 93-96, 97, 
101-2,108,113,119, 
267« "Russell's 
Mathematical Logic" 
(Godel), 216-18 
Schilpp, P. A., 42, 257M, 265n 
Schimanovich, Werner, 222 
Schlick, Moritz, 73-74, 78-81, 
82,83, 84, 88, 96, 97, 
104,105,110,117, 148-
49,213,220,228 Schonberg, 
Arnold, 70 science: 
methodology of, 29,31, 76 
pure, 16-17,26-27, 85-86, 
99-100 revolutions in, 
21—22,161, 
231-32 
subjectivity in, 36-40, 84 
Secession, 70-71 self-referential 
statements, 
66-67,90-93,165n-66n, 
195 Shadows of the Mind 
(Penrose), 
25,201 
Snow, C. P., 47M Snow 
White, 252M sociology, 
242-45 Socrates, 
63,255 Solovay, 
Robert, 251 "Some 
Remarks on 
Axiomatized Set 
Theory" (Skolem), 154n 
Sophists, 40, 62, 84,112-13, 
191,193,244 Spencer, 
Herbert, 85 Spinoza, Benedictus, 
27M, 97, 
126,199 
Sprache, Die (Kraus), 71 
Sprachkritik (Mauthner), 103 
Stalin, Joseph, 32,227, 241 
Straus, Ernst Gabor, 20-21, 
29-30,34 
Structure of Scientific 
Revolutions, The (Kuhn), 
161 Survey of 
Symbolic Logic 
(Lewis), 82 
Tagore, Rabindranath, 103M-4M 
Tarski, Alfred, 89 Taussky-
Todd, Olga, 108,204n, 
218 "Tertium non datur" 
(Hilbert), 
218 thaulatnazein 
(ontological 
wonder), 54-55 

Index 
295 
 
Theory of Types, 92-93,100, 
144-45 
thermodynamics, 80n Thorne, 
Kip, 258,259 Time, 22In time, 
nature of, 34«, 41«, 42, 
45,253-61 
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus 
(Wittgenstein), 95n, 96-
109,119,190-94 Tractatus 
Theologico-Politicus 
(Spinoza), 97 
transfinite set theory, 216-17 
truth: 
absolute, 114,124-26 beauty 
and, 28,63-64,107 
inheritance laws of, 
126«-27n linguistic, 
98-99,104, 
189-90 in logic, 44-
45,49-51, 
98-102,116-17,152-54, 
196«, 268«-69« 
mathematical, 86—87, 
98-102,107-11,137-38, 
140-41,148-49,155-59, 
188,202-5 morality and, 62, 
71-72, 
86-87,107,124-26,267n 
objective, 23-25, 77-78, 85-
86,116-17,216-17, 244 
Turing, Alan, 166«, 190, 195-
97,219,221n "Two Dogmas of 
Empiricism" (Quine),214 
"Uber formal unentscheidbare 
Satze der Principia 
Mathematica und ver-
wanter Systeme I" 
(Godel), 24 
see also incompleteness 
theorems 
uncertainty principle, 21-22, 
36-37, 39 
undecidable propositions, 
117-18 
universal instantiation, 
126«-27n 
universal set, 93n 
Veblen, Oswald, 19,219,226, 
229 
Vienna Circle, 43-44, 73-84, 
89-113,115,116,117, 
119,135-36,147,158, 
160-61,193,213-14, 
216,228,236,266n, 
267n 
Voltaire, 247 
von Neumann, John, 19-20, 
33,88,148,161-63,187, 
195,212,219,223,225n, 
229,238 
Wagner-Jaur egg, Julius, 220 
Waismann, Frederich, 84, 
104-5,110,148-49,160 
Wang, Hao, 34,54, 58,64,83, 
111, 154n, 159,202-3, 
213,223,249-50,251, 
259-60 

296 
INDEX 
 
Weil, Andre, 242n, 243, 251 
Weil, Simone, 243 Weininger, 
Otto, 95-96 well-formed 
formulas (wffs), 
86,131-32,141,144n, 
168-75,178,181 Werfel, 
Franz, 72 "What is Cantor's 
Continuum 
Problem?" (Godel), 
111-12,216-18 
Wheeler, John Archibald, 
258-59 
White, Morton, 210, 215 
Whitehead, Alfred North, 83, 
92-93,96,101,111,144, 
160,198 Whitney, 
Hassler, 240, 250, 
251 "Wiener Kreis in 
America, 
The" (Feigl), 213-14 
Wiles, Andrew, 155M Wirtinger, 
Professor, 222 
Wissenschaftliche 
Weltauffassung: Der 
Wiener Kreis, 84 
Wittgenstein, Karl, 70M 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig: 
background of, 90, 
102 at Cambridge 
University, 
94-95,104,105,113-14, 
195-97, 267M 
early vs. late philosophy of, 
100-102,188-89 Godel 
compared with, 109, 
114-15,118-19,188-94, 
218 Godel's theorems as 
viewed 
by, 89-90,99,100,102, 
111-20,158,188-95, 
218,268n-69« influence 
of, 44,104-9, 111, 
113-14,119 linguistic 
analysis by, 71, 
96-102,106-9,118, 
267M logical 
positivism and, 
43-44,103-9,119, 
188-89,191 personality 
of, 94-95,104-7, 
113-15,118-19, 267M 
reputation of, 148-49,214, 
218,221M Russell 
and, 93-96,97, 
101-2,108,113,119, 
267M Vienna Circle and, 
43-44, 
89-109,117,119,267n 
Wittgenstein, Paul, 90M 
Wittgenstein's Poker (Edmonds 
and Eidinow), 74-75 
World War I, 68, 69-70,96 
Zen Buddhism, 103 

