
Inconsistent Mathematics 

Mathematics and Its Applications 
Managing Editor: 
M. HAZEWINKEL 
Centre for Mathematics and Computer Science, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
Volume 312 

Inconsistent 
Mathematics 
by 
Chris Mortensen 
Centre for Logic. 
Department of Philosophy. 
University of Adelaide. 
North Terrace. Australia 
SPRINGER-SCIENCE+BUSINESS MEDIA, B.V. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Mortensen, Chris. 
Inconsistent mathematics I Chris Mortensen. 
p. 
cm. -- (Mathematlcs and ltS appllcations 
v. 3121 
Includes bibl iographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-90-481-4480-8 
ISBN 978-94-015-8453-1 (eBook) 
DOI 10.1007/978-94-015-8453-1 
1. LogiC, Symbolic and mathematical. 
2. Inconsistency (LogicI 
1. Title. 
II. Serles: Mathematlcs and its appl ications (Kluwer 
Academic Publishersl ; v. 312. 
QA9.M752 
1995 
510'.1--dc20 
94-37996 
ISBN 978-90-481-4480-8 
Printed an acid-free paper 
AH Rights Reserved 
© 1995 Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 
Originally published by Kluwer Academic Publishers in 1995 
Softcover reprint ofthe hardcover Ist edition 1995 
No part of the material protected by this copyright notice may be reproduced or 
utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording or by any information storage and 
retrieval system, without written permis sion from the copyright owner. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ONE 
MOTIVATIONS 
TWO 
1. 
Paraconsistency 
2. 
Summary 
3. 
Philosophical Implications 
ARITHMETIC 
1. 
Relevant Arithmetic 
2. 
Nonclassical Logics and their Theories 
3. 
Models for Number Systems with 
Arithmetical Operations 
1 
5 
7 
15 
20 
27 
4. 
Summary of Further Results in Arithmetic 
31 
THREE MODULO INFINITY 
1. 
The Classical Denumerable Nonstandard Model 
of Natural Number Arithmetic 
2. 
Inconsistency 
FOUR 
ORDER 
33 
35 
1. 
Order and Equality without Function Symbols 
39 
2. 
Order and Equality with Function Symbols 
40 
FIVE 
CALCULUS 
1. 
Introduction 
43 
2. 
A Nilpotent Ring of Hyperreal Numbers 
44 
3. 
An Incomplete Theory 
47 
4. 
Incomplete Differential Calculus 
49 
5. 
Inconsistent Differential Calculus 
55 
6. 
Integration 
56 
7. 
Conclusion 
58 
v 

vi 
SIX 
INCONSISTENT CONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS 
l. Introduction 
59 
2. 
Functionality 
60 
3. 
Logic 
63 
SEVEN 
THE DELTA FUNCTION 
l. Introduction 
67 
2. 
Functionality 
68 
EIGHT 
INCONSISTENT SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS 
l. Introduction 
73 
2. 
The Inconsistent Case 
73 
3. 
Control Theory 
77 
4. 
Applications, Problems and Special Cases 
80 
NINE 
PROJECTIVE SPACES 
l. Introduction 
83 
2. 
Vector Spaces 
84 
3. 
Projective Geometry 
86 
4. 
Projective Geometry Modulo Infinity 
88 
TEN 
TOPOLOGY 
93 
ELEVEN 
CATEGORY THEORY 
(with Peter Lavers) 
l. Introduction 
101 
2. 
Closed Set Logic 
103 
3. 
Propositional Logic in a Category 
104 
4. 
Implication 
109 
5. 
Quantification Theory 
112 
6. 
Conclusion 
114 

TWELVE 
THIRTEEN 
FOURTEEN 
CLOSED SET SHEAVES AND THEIR CATEGORIES 
(William James) 
1. 
Introduction 
2. 
Pretopologies and Topologies for Categories 
3. 
Subobject Classifiers 
4. 
Closed Set Sheaves 
DUALITY 
FOUNDATIONS: PROVABILITY, TRUTH AND SETS 
(with Joshua Cole) 
1. 
Introduction 
2. 
Provability 
2.1 Consistent Preliminaries 
2.2 The Inconsistent Case 
3. 
Truth 
3.1 The Fixed Point Method 
vii 
115 
116 
120 
123 
125 
129 
130 
132 
135 
3.2 The Fixed Point Method Applied to Truth Theory 
137 
3.3 The Proof that Fixed Points Model the T-scheme 
139 
3.4 The Proof that there are Fixed Points 
141 
4. 
The Fixed Point Method Applied to Set Theory 
141 
5. 
Further Applications 
146 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
147 
INDEX OF DEFINITIONS AND NAMES 
152 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Chapter Five substantially in the present form appears in The Notre Dame 
Journal of Formal Logic, (Vo1.31 No.2), Spring 1990. Chapter Eleven sections 1-3 
are with Peter Lavers. Chapter Twelve is by William James. Chapter Fourteen 
sections 3-5 are with Joshua Cole, and written by him. The research and publi-
cation were aided by a series of research grants from The University of Adelaide. 
The research was also aided by a Visiting Fellowship at the Automated Reason-
ing Project, Australian National University in August - September 1989; thanks to 
Michael McRobbie for making available the resources of the Automated Reasoning 
Project. I wish to thank Steve Leishman for his invaluable research assistance, 
William James for the LaTeX diagrams and Mary Mattaliano for the LaTeX typ-
ing. Thanks to Allen Hazen, as well as to Richard Benham, Edwin Coleman, Steve 
Leishman and other members of the University of Adelaide Logic Group, for useful 
comments and corrections on an earlier version. Finally I wish to thank Catherine 
Speck for her support and encouragement while this was being written. 
The University of Adelaide 
25.4.94 
ix 

CHAPTER 1: MOTIVATIONS 
1. Paraconsistency 
The following idea has recently been gaining support: that the world is or 
might be inconsistent. In its modern manifestation it has been the province of rig-
orous symbolic logic, with motivations from logic, semantics and the foundations 
of mathematics. However, the idea finds roots in an older view, that change espe-
cially motion is contradictory, which can be traced back through Engels and Hegel 
to Zeno and Heraclitus, and has recently been revived, e.g. by Priest [46]. 
Two recent convergent motivations have been the paradoxes of logic, semantics 
and set theory, and the semantics of relevant logic. A theory is a set of sentences 
closed under a deductive relation (but d. Definition 2.8). A logic (Def 2.7) is 
then a theory with the extra property of being closed under the rule of uniform 
substitution (relative to a specified set of connectives, such as 'and', 'or', 'not', 
'if .. then', 'for all', 'there exists', 'equals'). This expresses the idea that the logic 
of a collection of connectives ought to be neutral as to subject matter. The point 
stressed here is that deductive theories come with a logic in the background, albeit 
one which is perhaps tacitly presupposed as natural. 
Let us consider set theory first. The most natural set theory to adopt is un-
doubtedly one which has unrestricted set abstraction (also known as naive compre-
hension). This is the natural principle which declares that to every property there 
is a unique set of things having the property. But, as Russell showed, this leads 
rapidly to the contradiction that the Russell set (the set of all non-self-membered 
sets) both is and is not a member of itself. The overwhelming majority of logicians 
took the view that this contradiction required a weakening of unrestricted abstrac-
tion in order to ensure a consistent set theory, which was in turn seen as necessary 
to provide a consistent foundation for mathematics. But all ensuing attempts at 
weakening set abstraction proved to be in various ways ad-hoc. Da Costa [10] 
and Routley [51] both suggested instead that the Russell set might be dealt with 

2 
Motivations 
more naturally in an inconsistent but nontrivial set theory (where triviality means 
that every sentence is provable, see Definition 2.4). Since the triviality of a theory 
undoubtedly makes it uninteresting, this means that the background logic of any 
inconsistent theory should not validate the rule ex contradictione quodlibet (ECQ: 
from A and not-A to deduce any B), which two valued Boolean logic validates. Da 
Costa proposed C1 as one such logic, and demonstrated some Crindependence re-
sults for set theories containing the Russell set. Graham Priest argued persuasively 
that semantic paradoxes such as The Liar, and set-theoretic paradoxes such as Rus-
sell's, are best solved by accepting that there are some true contradictions; rather 
than sacrificing the generality and naturalness of principles like an unrestricted 
truth predicate or unrestricted set abstraction (e.g. [45J,[46]). The need follows 
for a logic in which ECQ fails. Such logics are known as inconsistency-tolerant, or 
paraconsistent. 
A second motivation came from Anderson and Belnap's investigations of rele-
vance or conceptual connection. The idea was that correct natural entailment rests 
on conceptual connection; so that ECQ could not be a universally valid princi-
ple, because its premises can evidently be irrelevant to its conclusion (B may have 
no connection to A and not-A). However, subsequent discoveries in the seman-
tics of sentential relevant logics by Belnap-Dunn-Fine-Meyer-Plumwood-Routley-
Urquhart made it clear that the existence of inconsistent theories was necessary 
for relevance (though not sufficient). On this point the 1972 paper by Routley and 
Routley [52J was one of the earliest and most telling. 
One can distinguish two strands of doctrine here: strong paraconsistentism is 
the acceptance of true contradictions, while weak paraconsistentism is the thesis 
that contradictory possibilities or structures have to be considered in the semantics 
of natural logic. Within strong paraconsistentism one can locate the two views we 
began with. First there is the modern motivation that true contradictions arise 
by a priori argument from various paradoxes; (for example, the argument that the 
Liar sentence 'This sentence is false' is demonstrably both true and false; or the 

Paraconsistency 
3 
argument that the Russell set is demonstrably both a member of itself and not 
a member of itself.) Second there is the older motivation that a philosophically 
correct account of change forces true contradictions on us. Within weak para-
consistentism, on the other hand, one can distinguish the thesis that inconsistent 
semantic structures represent genuine possibilities; so that while no contradictions 
are true, some contradictions are possible. 
Two further distinctions are worth making here. First, we began by noting the 
thesis that the world is or might be inconsistent. But inconsistency is, strictly, 
a property of linguistic things like propositions or theories: the 'not-A' and the 
'A' of a contradiction are the kinds of things capable of being true or false, that is 
propositions or sentences. So one can instead have a linguistic version of the central 
thesis: that the one true and exhaustive theory of the universe is inconsistent. 
The universe would be inconsistent, then, just to the extent that its true and 
exhaustive theory was inconsistent. We will not really need to make anything of 
this distinction in this book, though it can be said that the approach is certainly 
to study theories and other language-like items. A second distinction which has 
been made, is between viewing contradictions as propositions which are both true 
and false, and viewing them as true propositions of the form A and not-A (see 
e.g. Meyer and Martin [26]). Again, we will not be making much of this possible 
difference in this book. But it should be noted that to facilitate formal study, the 
mark of inconsistency in a theory is taken to be the presence among its consequences 
of the propositions A and not-A. 
The attraction of the Russell set is that of providing a foundation of mathe-
matics on a simple principle such as the naive principle of comprehension. An al-
ternative contradictory foundation might be found in category theory, which looks 
interestingly close to inconsistency in places (see Chapter 11), as any broad abstrac-
tion principle will. Mathematicians undoubtedly flirt with such principles. There 
are, it should be noted, technical problems with inconsistent naive comprehension: 
while the Russell set can be tolerated, a stronger paradox, Curry's paradox, threat-

4 
Motivations 
ens triviality for deeper reasons (Meyer-Dunn-Routley [29], Slaney [53]). Brady has 
done important work demonstrating that the ordinal structure in such a set theory 
does not collapse in [5]. 
These ideas are foundationalist in spirit, while this book is not foundationalist. 
Many working mathematicians (though by no means all) are suspicious of logicians' 
apparent attempt to take over their subject by stressing its foundations. Surely 
one can reasonably feel that contradiction in set theory or category theory could 
not remotely threaten the immense corpus of mathematical results and applications 
discovered over more than two millenia. That alone is an argument for the natural-
ness of limiting the spread of contradictions. I do not mean that no foundationalist 
program for mathematics could succeed, however. A foundationalist program might 
succeed, and the inconsistent versions look the most promising. Indeed if the spe-
cial case thesis defended later is true (that consistent complete mathematics is a 
special case of general mathematics), then any successful foundationalist program 
should be inconsistent or paraconsistent in some sense. But I have been persuaded 
by Edwin Coleman [8] that foundationalism in mathematics should be regarded 
with considerable suspicion; or at least that proper 'foundations', arguably both 
formalist and conventionalist in broad senses, would be much more complex and 
semiotical than twentieth century mathematical logic has attempted. In which case 
it would be arguable whether 'foundations' is an appropriate term. 
The first consciously inconsistent number-theoretic structure seems to have been 
Meyer's inconsistent arithmetic modulo two (see below Chapter 2); though it is fair 
to say that his main concern was with demonstrating the consistency of the rele-
vant arithmetic R#, rather than with inconsistency for its own sake [23],[24],[25]. 
Routley replicated the result using a different nonclassical background logic [51]. 
Dunn's admirable paper [11] considered three-valued paraconsistent model theory 
with applications to arithmetic and type theory. Priest and Routley called for in-
consistent infinitesimals [47] on the grounds that inconsistent claims abound in the 
pre-Weierstrassian history of the calculus. See also Asenjo [6]. It is argued here that 

Summary 
5 
without a properly developed inconsistent calculus based on infinitesimals, then in-
consistent claims from the history of the calculus might well simply be symptoms 
of confusion. This is addressed in Chapter 5. It is further argued that mathematics 
has a certain primacy over logic, in that paraconsistent or relevant logics have to 
be based on inconsistent mathematics. If the latter turns out to be reasonably rich 
then paraconsistentism is vindicated; while if inconsistent mathematics has seri-
ous restriytions then the case for being interested in inconsistency-tolerant logics is 
weakened. (On such restrictions, see this chapter, section 3.) It must be conceded 
that fault-tolerant computer programming (e.g. Chapter 8) finds a substantial and 
important use for paraconsistent logics, albeit with an epistemological motivation 
(see this chapter, section 3). But even here it should be noted that if inconsistent 
mathematics turned out to be functionally impoverished then so would inconsistent 
databases. 
2. Summary 
In Chapter 2, Meyer's results on relevant arithmetic are set out, and his view 
that they have a bearing on G8del's incompleteness theorems is discussed. Model 
theory for nonclassical logics is also set out so as to be able to show that the 
inconsistency of inconsistent theories can be controlled or limited, but in this book 
model theory is kept in the background as much as possible. This is then used to 
study the functional properties of various equational number theories. 
Chapter 3 considers equational theories constructed from inconsistent models 
modulo an infinite prime. Chapter 4 introduces order. In the first section it is 
shown that the result of classical model theory that the theory of dense order 
without endpoints is t{o-categorical, breaks down in the inconsistent case. In the 
second section arithmetical functions are added and results about ordered rings 
and fields are summarised. 
In Chapter 5, a congruence relation on the ring of noninfinite hyperreal numbers 

6 
Motivations 
is defined; leading to an inconsistent theory in which reasonable notions of limits, 
continuity, differentiation and integration can be defined, and Taylor's formula and 
polynomial differentiation proved. A simple change to this theory produces an 
incomplete differential calculus. In both theories every function is continuous. The 
latter theory is shown to have some similarity with synthetic differential geometry, 
a well-known incomplete theory in the language of categories due to Lawvere, Kock 
and others. 
In Chapter 6 we begin by considering Priest's use of the Leibniz Continuity 
Condition (LCC) to produce an inconsistent theory of motion. The LCC is seen to 
have further implications. It is then shown that inconsistent functions are definable 
which can be regarded as everywhere continuous derivatives of certain classical 
functions which are not everywhere differentiable from the classical point of view. 
Chapter 7 puts together the previous two chapters to produce a structure in which 
functionality fails though in a controlled way; and uses this for an account of 
delta functions, which can in turn be regarded as inconsistent derivatives of the 
inconsistent continuous functions of Chapter 6. 
Chapter 8 applies the additive group ideas of Chapter 6 to the solution of 
inconsistent systems of linear equations, and implications for control theory are 
outlined. Chapter 9 briefly considers the case of inconsistent vector spaces which 
suffer similar limitations to inconsistent fields. However .inconsistent projective 
spaces over these vector fields do not suffer the same limitations. In inconsistent 
projective geometry modulo an infinite prime, it is shown that the usual projective 
duality theorem can be extended to a stronger language. 
In Chapter 10, inconsistent quotient topologies are studied. It is shown that 
there is an interaction between classical topological concepts and the functionality 
of certain inconsistent topological spaces. 
In Chapter 11, consistency problems for category theory are briefly surveyed. 
Then an important type of category, namely toposes, are studied. It is shown that 

Philosophical Implications 
7 
a simple dualising operation gives rise to top os-like structures whose natural logic 
is not the usual intuitionist open-set logic, but rather its topological dual closed-set 
logic, which is paraconsistent. In Chapter 12, this open-closed duality is pursued 
further into the theories of presheaves and sheaves. In Chapter 13 extra dualising 
operations are considered, and it is shown that again inconsistent and incomplete 
theories can be regarded as duals. In the light of these dualities, it is argued that 
inconsistent and incomplete theories are deserving of equal respect. 
Finally, in Chapter 14 we look briefly at the foundations as they are traditionally 
conceived. First, looking at the concept of provability, the fate of the G8del sentence 
in the setting of inconsistent arithmetic is studied. Then, turning to the concept 
of the truth predicate, Kripke's nontriviality result using an incomplete theory is 
surveyed. It turns out that it is easily adapted to produce an inconsistent theory 
which represents the Liar sentence as a true inconsistency. Finally, turning to 
set theory containing unrestricted abstraction, we survey Brady's use of a fixed 
point method similar to Kripke's to produce an inconsistent set theory in which 
the Russell set is inconsistently self-membered. Here, the duality is seen to work 
in reverse, in that an incomplete set theory which does not decide on the self-
membered status of the Russell set and other non-well-founded sets, can readily be 
constructed. 
3. Philosophical Implications 
To paraphrase Marx: philosophers have hitherto attempted to understand the 
nature of contradiction, the point however is to change it. Recent debates on the 
rule Disjunctive Syllogism (DS: from (A or B) and not-A to deduce B) have centered 
on whether according to the natural logic of mathematicians that rule is valid. In 
most of the structures of this book, DS fails. In view of the well known Lewis 
arguments, paraconsistentists are committed to denying that DS is valid since it 
leads quickly to the validity of ECQ. (Proof: take as premisses A and not-A. From 
A deduce (A or B) by the Principle of Addition. Then using (A or B) and not-A 

8 
Motivations 
deduce B by Disjunctive Syllogism.) However, giving up DS does not seem to be 
such a heavy burden, as argued in [31] and [32] (see also [6],[7],[20],[49]). In any 
case, if reasonable mathematics can be developed without DS and ECQ, then the 
claim that they are universally logically valid is weakened. 
The question of the validity of DS and ECQ has not always been distinguished 
from the question of whether mathematicians are habitual consistentisers. Now it 
seems to me that mathematicians are indeed habitual consistentisers, at least in 
regarding inconsistency as implying something wrong with the premisses. However, 
this needs some qualification: mathematical practice is not absolutely univocal on 
the matter. For example, consider the history of infinitesimals in pre-Weierstrass 
calculus, or the old quantum theory (Bohr theory of the atom), or delta functions 
both before and after Schwartz, or the terminology of 'identification' in quotient 
constructions (see later chapters). As well, as noted earlier, there are persistent 
tendencies among mathematicians to use very general abstraction principles for 
both sets and categories, which can lead to inconsistency in short order. And of 
course there is the semantical thinking about self reference which has mostly been 
the province of logicians. But it is argued here that consistency can be relaxed 
without complete disorder resulting. In turn this casts doubt on any attempt to 
argue back from habitual consistency to the logical validity of DS and ECQ. 
These claims apply to inconsistent mathematics considered as pure mathemat-
ics. There are, I suggest, at least three justifications for studying inconsistent 
mathematical theories. The first justification might be called the argument from 
pure mathematics. The argument from pure mathematics for studying inconsis-
tency is the best of reasons: because it is there. In other words, nothing in this 
book relies on the thesis that contradictions are true. Nor is it claimed that the 
mathematics needed to describe existing physical systems is inconsistent. But then, 
how could you be perfectly sure? Just possibly a physical reason might be found, 
or perhaps some pleasing metaphysical reason (for example, the thesis that incon-
sistent calculus gives a better theory of motion). It is always dangerous to think 

Philosophical Implications 
9 
that a physical use will never be found for a giveI?- piece of mathematics. Nor is 
present-day mathematical physics anomaly-free: witness the singularities at the 
beginning of time or in black holes, delta functions in elementary quantum theory, 
or renormalisation in quantum field theory. 
These observations amount to a second reason for studying inconsistent theories, 
what can be called the ontological justification. This is, essentially, the paracon-
sistentist claim that a contradiction is true or might be true, backed up by one's 
favourite arguments from semantics or physics. Ontology here means having to do 
with how things are; and contrasts with epistemology, which has to do with how 
things are known. 
Thus there is also a third reason for studying inconsistent theories, what can be 
called the epistemological justification. This is the argument that any information 
system with more than one source of information must permit the possibility of 
conflict between its sources. Here it can be conceded that the world is consistent, 
so that an inconsistent database would inevitably be incorrect somehow. But it 
is not always easy to produce a consistent cut-down of one's information base, at 
least one which is not arbitrary in its selection of what to discard. Yet humans 
display the ability to operate in an anomalous data environment. This is plainly 
because evolving creatures face real-time difficulties; it might just take too long 
to solve the problem of what is the truth about one's environment. Evidently, 
informationally-sensitive machines face similar problems. For example, an aircraft 
aloft might be receiving contradictory data from its sensors but be unable to take 
the luxury of shutting down before solving the problem of what is the nature of 
the physical environment. Thus, rules for operating deductively in an inconsistent 
data environment are necessary, and the rule ECQ which permits the deduction 
of everything from an inconsistency is unhelpful. At the very least, a study of 
inconsistent theories in which such a rule is broken is indicated as part of the long-
term goal of artificial intelligence. Thus, even if the world is consistent, and having 
to deal with inconsistencies turns out to be because of the epistemic limitations of 

10. 
Motivations 
finite humans or computers, inconsistency-tolerance might well remain a permanent 
part of a good expert system. 
A special case thesis was mentioned earlier. No claim is being made that in-
consistent or incomplete mathematics is better than classical mathematics. Still, 
classical mathematics is a special case in two ways. To the extent that the logic of 
classical mathematics is classical two-valued logic, then classical logic is a special 
case of paraconsistent logic, holding over a restricted domain in which the assump-
tion of the truth-preservingness of DS holds. Further, general mathematics can be 
consistent or inconsistent, complete or incomplete, prime or nonprime. (A theory 
is nonprime when it contains some disjunction without containing the disjuncts: 
Meyer's R# interestingly turned out to be nonprime, and there is nonprime quan-
tum arithmetic, on both of which see Chapter 2; as well, classical Peano arithmetic 
is nonprime by G8del's theorem.) Nontrivial classical theories satisfy the special 
assumption of DS, so nothing is lost because it is all there in the classical special 
case. The aim of the present work is to expand conceptions of mathematics, not to 
deny the obviously excellent corpus of classical mathematics. 
Intuitionist mathematics is the home of incomplete theories (but note that any 
consistent axiomatisable classical theory containing arithmetic is also incomplete by 
G8del's theorem). The present point of view is firmly in favour of intuitionist and/or 
incomplete mathematics (see especially Chapters 5, 6 and 11). Let a thousand 
theories bloom. However the main concern in this book is with inconsistency, 
if for no other reason than that incompleteness has seemed easier to swallow than 
inconsistency, something not so easy to justify given the duality results of Chapters 
11-13. Those results turn on the topological duality between open sets and closed 
sets. It is well-known that intuitionist logic is also the logic of open sets; that is, that 
intuitionist logic stands to open sets as classical two valued Boolean logic stands to 
sets in general. It is less well-known that the logic of closed set's is paraconsistent, 
and this is considered especially in Chapter 11. Intuitionist theories have sometimes 
been very complicated. The three-valued approach to incomplete theories (below, 

Philosophical Implications 
11 
Chapter 5) can often illustrate many of their features in a simple and natural way. 
But conversely the complex brilliancy of incomplete theories in, say, the theory 
of sheaves, or synthetic differential geometry, is highly admirable. A three-valued 
incomplete approach to the truth predicate was taken by Kripke in his excellent 
paper 'Outline of a Theory of Truth' [19], which is discussed in Chapter 14. Kripke's 
approach has been nicely generalised to the inconsistent incomplete case by Fitting 
[12]. 
It can also be said that the use of closed-set logics for various theories below 
contributes to the re-vindication of the point of view of Brazilian logic. Brazilian 
logic studied paraconsistent logics partly with the aim of dualising intuitionism 
(see Da Costa [10]). For a time, however, it looked as if these logics suffered a 
serious limitation, because they do not admit a reasonable implication operator 
(see [30] and [36]). However, closed-set logic can fairly be described as Brazilian-
style. Also, a somewhat cavalier attitude is taken to implication in later chapters: 
to the extent that implication is the converse of deducibility, the latter is usually 
preferred below. Mathematics, unlike logic, seems not very interested in nested 
implications, and even less interested in nesting of depth three or more (perhaps 
it should be). This is in line with the position defended later in this section and 
elsewhere, that mathematics is functional rather than logical. And needless to say, 
existing theories based on Brazilian logics (see above first section) are as legitimate 
and interesting as any other. 
I would further argue that the only way to establish validity of the paraconsistent 
point of view is to demonstrate the existence of a rich and interesting inconsistent 
mathematics. Without that, the paraconsistent position would seem to rest on 
a motivation at best epistemic and computational, and functionally impoverished 
at that. That is why finding a distinctive inconsistent perspective on analysis, the 
crown jewel of classical mathematics, is desirable. The present book falls somewhat 
short of that; again for functional reasons the real numbers look to be essentially 
consistent (see especially Chapters 2-5 below). It is to be hoped that the situation 

12 
Motivations 
with inconsistent analysis will ultimately improve. Combining inconsistency with 
incompleteness would seem to be the right way to go here. For an example of this 
combination, see Chapter 6. 
Fortunately or unfortunately, the methods and results in this book indicate 
that the 'essence' of mathematics is deeper than paraconsistentists have thought, 
though it is also argued here that this is no vindication of any classical consistent 
limitation. Definitions are necessary to explain this point. A theory is functional 
iff, if an equation tl = t2 holds then Ftl holds iff Ft2 holds, where F is any 
atomic context (roughly, F is any 'logic-free' context lacking &, V, "', -+, 'V, 3); and 
a theory is transparent iff the same is true except that F is any context, including 
possibly the logical operations as well. (See Definition 2.11.) Now in the following 
chapters it is clear that being at least functional, if not transparent, is a good 
constraint to have on a theory. Without it, control over identity seems to be lost 
and one wonders what equality stands for, especially in the equational subtheory 
(though in a few theories later there is a controlled relaxation of functionality, see 
e.g. Chapter 7). But a method of proving inconsistent theories to be functional is 
commonly to find existing consistent theories which are invariably functional, add 
appropriate denials of atomic sentences using a paraconsistent background logic, 
and let the functionality of the latter ride in on the back of the consistent theory. 
Indeed it is not hard to show that any inconsistent complete functional theory 
has a consistent complete functional subtheory, which one might expect millenia 
of classical mathematics to have encountered. So one might say that classical 
mathematics, interested in functionality, concentrated on the consistent functional 
subtheory, naturally failing to notice related inconsistent supertheories. 
At its strongest this might be the criticism that inconsistent mathematics leads 
to no new functional insights, a typical mathematician's complaint. But I do not 
want to concede too much here: the situation is nowhere near as bad as that. For 
one thing, one can say that inconsistency is functionally no worse than consistency. 
The consistency constraint is unnecessary and binding, and full functionaljty is 

Philosophical Implications 
13 
available without it. One might further argue that this shows that functionality is 
deeper than consistency, completeness, or primeness. The question of the validity 
of DS and ECQ is irrelevant to the essence of mathematics, one might say. This 
also gives the prospect of searches for partly functional structures, where the failure 
of functionality is controlled by a combination of incompleteness and inconsistency. 
But also, it is not true that there are no interactions between functionality and 
inconsistency or incompleteness. The down side of this is the difficulty of incon-
sistentising real number theory, the essential consistency of the real and hyperreal 
number fields which was just mentioned. But the up side is that this can lead to 
interesting insights about functionality; for example Chapter 10 on topology, and 
any other time a quotient construction is done by thinking of 'identifying' distinct 
elements (Chapters 9,10 and elsewhere). 
The essentialist talk above about the essence of mathematics should not be 
taken too literally. It is only intended to claim that abandoning functionality is a 
bigger departure from mathematics as it is practised, than abandoning consistency 
or completeness is. If anything, inconsistent mathematics suggests antiessentialism 
and antinecessitarianism about mathematical truth. By necessitarianism is meant 
here the claim that there is a special unshakeable status for the truths of mathe-
matics and logic, that true mathematics and logic cannot have been false. I think 
the argument here against necessitarianism proceeds by attempting to whiteant 
the necessitarian's resolve, rather than knockdown refutation. But if consistency is 
not a necessary constraint on rigorous mathematical reasoning, then surely noth-
ing is sacred. For further argument in favour of antinecessitarianism, also called 
possibilism, see [35] or [38]. 
In place of necessitarianism, it seems right to put conventionalism about math-
ematical truth. By this is meant the idea that mathematics, particularly pure 
mathematics, is more like a decision than a discovery of a pre-existing truth. I do 
not mean the kind of conventionalism that confers a mystical power on conven-
tions or decisions to inaugurate or sustain necessary or logical truth. The old game 

14 
Motivations 
analogy does seem the right one: the 'truths' of pure mathematics are internal to 
mathematical theories in a way like rules are internal to games, and quite unlike 
the way empirical claims about the physical world are true or false. 
There are of course some interesting disanalogies: mathematics seeks unity 
between its branches, while games seem quite happy to be isolated from one another. 
Also, certain mathematical propositions have a preferred status (accepted) over 
others (denied), whereas preferred strategies can be reversed in different games. 
But whatever the explanation here, it presumably lies in the social. The question 
wherein lies rigor presumably has an explanation in terms of mathematical society 
and its relations to the rest of society and to the physical world and its properties 
(forms). Certainly an explanation in terms of the necessity of certain propositions, 
as opposed to their mere truth, would add nothing. 
Another conclusion to draw, perhaps more speculatively, is antiplatonism about 
the abstract objects of pure mathematics. Of course, the relationships between the 
propositions of mathematics and the forms (properties) of objects in the physical 
world, are very complex. Still there seems to be no difficulty in principle in denying 
timelessly existing abstract mathematical objects as truthmakers. One can be 
gripped by the picture of eternal objects, if one thinks of theories as necessarily 
consistent. Freeing up consistency suggests ultimate freedom from any constraint. 
But the absence of external constraints is the mark of fiction, not of fixed existing 
truthmakers. Convention cannot create what is not there to begin with. 

CHAPTER 2: ARITHMETIC 
1. Relevant Arithmetic 
The first consciously inconsistent arithmetical structure can fairly be dated at 
Robert K. Meyer's 1975 nontriviality proof for the consistent relevant arithmetic 
R#. In deference to history and to whet the reader's appetite, this chapter begins 
with a simplified version of his argument. We will see that it has considerable 
significance for the understanding of G8del's incompleteness theorems. Later in 
the chapter, the style of argument used by Meyer will be extended so as to study 
a broader range of number systems. First we need a formal language. This is 
the standard type of first order language used for studying formalised arithmetic 
theories, save that for technical reasons a distinction is made between two impli-
cation operators:::) and -to The language has names for all the natural numbers, 
0,0',0", ... , the arithmetical operations + and x, and the usual logical apparatus. 
Definition 2.1. The language £. contains a single binary relation symbol =, 
a single constant 0, term-forming operators +, x, " (the latter is read 'the suc-
cessor of'). o(n) is defined as 0'···' with n superscripted dashes. That is, o(n) is 
a name for the natural number n. In addition, there is logical apparatus con-
sisting of variables x, y, z, . .. , a unary propositional operator "', binary propo-
sitional operators &, V,:::), ==, -t, +-+, and quantifiers V and 3. 
The number of 
primitive operators can be reduced by defining A V B = df '" ('" A& '" B), 
A == B = df (A :::) B)&(B :::) A), A +-+ B = df (A -t B)&(B -t A), and 
(3) =df rv (V) "'. The connective -t is not material implication :::). The latter 
can be defined by A :::) B =df '" A V Bj the former is intentional and not definable 
from &, V, and "'. 0 is a term, and if tl and t2 are terms1 so are t~, (tl + t2), and 
(tl x t2)j and tl = t2 is an atomic sentence. All atomic sentences are sentences, 
and if A and B are sentences, so are'" A, A&B, A V B, A :::) B, A == B, A -t B, 
A +-+ B, (Vx)Ax, and (3x)Ax, where x is a variable not occurring in A and Ax is 
the result of replacing some term in A wherever it occurs by X. 

16 
Arithmetic 
We study theories of various logics. Theories are deductively closed sets of 
sentences (ofthe above language in the present case). Different deduction relations 
are thus possible, which are described by the axioms and rules of different logics. 
Meyer used RQ, a quantified version of the well-known relevant logic R. 
Definition 2.2. The relevant logic RQ is given by all universal closures of the 
following axiom schemata and rules. 
Axioms: 
(1) (A -. B) -. ((B -. C) -. (A -. C)) 
(2) A -. ((A -. B) -. B) 
(3) (A&B) -. A 
(4) (A&B) -. B 
(5) ((A -. B)&(A -. C)) -. (A -. (B&C)) 
(6) A -. (A V B) 
(7) B -. (A V B) 
(8) ((A -. C)&(B -. C)) -. ((A V B) -. C) 
(9) (A&(B V C)) -. ((A&B) V (A&C)) 
(10) ~~ A -. A 
(11) (A -.~ A) -.~ A 
(12) (Vx)Ax -. At (t any term) 
(13) (Vx)(A -. B) -. ((Vx)A -. (Vx)B) 
(14) A -. (Vx)A (x not free in A) 
(15) (Vx)(A V B) -. (A V (Vx)B) (x not free in A) 
(16) ((Vx )A&(Vx )B) -. (Vx )(A&B) 
Rules: 
(17) If A and B are theorems so is A&B 
(18) If A and A -. B are theorems so is B. 
To obtain the logic RMQ add the axiom scheme A -. (A -. A). 
The logic R (the sentential fragment of RQ) is an important relevant logic. A 
logic is said to be relevant iff, whenever A -. B is a theorem of the logic then A and 

Relevant Arithmetic 
17 
B share an atomic sentence in common. Relevant logics were studied extensively 
by Anderson and Belnap in [1) as well as by many others; and were proposed as 
serious rivals to classical (two-valued) logic as a logic of natural reasoning, which is 
arguably relevant at least in its sentential fragment. Every valid argument of R is 
a valid argument of classical logic, but not vice-versa. With a language and a logic, 
we can now specify arithmetical theories, in this case Meyer's relevant arithmetic 
R#. R# is similar to classical Peano arithmetic, called here Pi, save that in 
several places material implication ::) is replaced by the strong implication ~ used 
by all the usual relevant logics. 
Definition 2.3. The arithmetic R# is given by: 
logical axioms and rules are those of RQ, 
arithmetical axioms: 
(#1) (Vx,y)(x = y +-+ x' = y') 
(#2) (Vx,y,z)(x = y ~ (x = z ~ y = z)) 
(#3) (Vx)( '" x' = 0) 
(#4) (Vx)(x + 0 = x) 
(#5) (Vx,y)(x + y' = (x + y)') 
(#6) (Vx)(xxO=O) 
(#7) (Vx,y)(x x y' = (x X y) + x) 
Arithmetical rule of mathematical induction (RMI): If FO and (Vx)(Fx ~ Fx') 
are theorems, so is (Vx)Fx. 
For the arithmetic RM#, add the logical axiom scheme A ~ (A ~ A). For the 
arithmetics R## and RM##, add to R# and RM# respectively Hilbert's rule 
n: if FO, F1, F2 . .. are all theorems, so is (Vx )Fx. For classical Peano arithmetic 
Pi, take as logical axioms and rules those of classical quantification theory, and 
replace ~ and +-+ in (#1), (#2) and (RMI) by ::) and == respectively. For classical 
standard arithmetic P##, add rule n to Pi. 
To the extent that R captures a more plausible account of implication than 
classical logic does, as argued by Anderson, Belnap and many others, then it is 

18 
Arithmetic 
arguable that R# gives a closer account of 'natural' arithmetic than classical Peano 
arithmetic P# does. This does not 'deny' Pi: it is an interesting system like many 
another, not the least because the Godel incompleteness theorems can be proved 
of it (see below). 
Definition 2.4. An arithmetical theory is (negation) consistent if for no sen-
tence A is both A and ~ A provable, else (negation) inconsistent; and nontrivial if 
not every sentence is provable, else trivial. 
Proposition 2.5. (Meyer) R# is nontrivial. 
Proof. The argument uses the three-valued logic RM3 with values {F, B, T}, 
the tW0 element domain {O, I} of arithmetic modulo two, and an interpretation 
function I assigning terms to elements of {O, I} and sentences to elements of RM3. 
Set I(o(n)) = n mod 2, 1(+) = + mod 2, I( x) = x mod 2. For any terms 
tl,t2' set I(tl +t2) = I(+)(I(tI),J(t2)), I(tl x t2) = I(x)(I(tl),J(t2)), and I(t~) = 
(1 + I(td) mod 2. Set I(tl = t2) = B if I(tI) = I(t2), else I = F. For nonatomic 
sentences, set I( ~ A) = T, B or F as I(A) = F, B or T respectively. Order 
{F, B, T} by F < B < T; and then set I(A&B) = min{I(A), I(B)}; set I(AV B) = 
max{I(A),J(B)}; set I(A -+ B) = I(~ A V B) if I(A) ::::; I(B), else I(A -+ B) = 
I(~ A&B); and set I((Vx)Fx) = min{y : for some term t, I(Ft) = y}. It is now 
a straightforward, if lengthy, argument to verify that all theorems of R# take one 
of the values {B, T}. But since 0 mod 2 =I- 1 mod 2, 1(0 = 1) = F. Hence R# is 
nontrivial. 
o 
Meyer makes the point that this argument relies only on methods which are fini-
tistic in Hilbert's sense. In particular, the quantifiers can be treated by establishing 
that I((Vx)Fx) = I(FO&Fl), which is a standard argument in the metalanguage. 
Thus R# enjoys an advantage over classical Peano arithmetic P# : that its non-
triviality can be established by finitistic methods. Yet as Meyer pointed out, all 
primitive recursive functions are representable in R#, which is thus subject to the 
Godel incompleteness theorems also. But this is not really a puzzle. The explana-

Relevant Arithmetic 
19 
tion is that relevant and other paraconsistent logics turn on making a distinction 
between negation inconsistency and triviality, the former being weaker than the 
latter; whereas classical logic cannot make this distinction. For what the present 
author's intuitions are worth, these do seem to be different concepts. Thus for 
R#, negation consistency cannot be proved by finitistic means by G8del's second 
theorem, whereas nontriviality can be shown. Since P# collapses this distinction, 
both kinds of consistency are infected by the same unprovability. 
Indeed R# can do even better; for consider any 'false' equation tl = t 2, i.e. 
one which reduces by calculation to o(n) = o(m) where these are classically dis-
tinct natural numbers. 
Then a simple modification of the above proof using 
modulo(max{m,n} + 1) instead of modulo 2, shows that tl = t2 is not a theo-
rem of R#. R# has thus greater security of calculation than P#. If there is 
negation inconsistency in R#, it is along way away, contained. Meyer uses these 
conclusions to call for a revived Hilbert program based on relevant rather than clas-
sicallogic: since there exist finitistic proofs that various undesirable conclusions do 
not follow in relevant arithmetic, mathematics based on relevant logic can escape 
the limitations of G8del. The Hilbertian point of view is not, however, taken in the 
present work. 
One might also wonder whether there is the prospect of the nontriviality of P#, 
and hence its negation consistency, via a proof that P# c R#. Needless to say 
such an argument would be nonfinitistic by G8del 2, but it might be interesting 
nonetheless. This is the gamma problem for R#. It turns out that if R# were closed 
w.r.t. the rule: if A and A :::> B are theorems so is B, then P# c R#. Recently 
however Meyer has shown that this rule fails for R#. Meyer has expressed some 
dissatisfaction with R# because of this result, but it seems that it makes R# all 
the more interesting. 
This is not a book about relevance, however. The point of view might be 
described as paraconsistent, insofar as that implies an interest in nontrivial incon-
sistent theories. 

20 
Arithmetic 
2. Nonclassical Logics and Their Theories 
We proceed to a more systematic approach to inconsistent theories. In order 
to show that inconsistency can be contained in a deductively rigorous way, it is 
necessary to set out some of the theory of models. In this section we define theories 
and the semantical notion of an assignment. In the next section we bring in the 
notion of a domain and thus a model. Models are best thought of as devices for 
controlling the membership of theories; only secondly are they what theories are 
about. Theories define their own 'aboutness', regardless of domains of interpreta-
tion. An analogy is with the values of a many-valued logic, which are in the first 
place devices for controlling membership of theories. We begin by extending the 
language of the previous section, so as to deal with a broader range of applications. 
Definition 2.6. The language I: has the following components: 
(1) 
a collection of names or atomic terms, for example names for some or all 
the rational numbers, or integers, or rational numbers, or real numbers, or 
hyperreal numbers or other mathematical entities. Normally these names 
are taken from the entities themselves, i.e. self-naming. For each theory the 
collection of names must be specified. 
(2) 
a collection of n-ary term-forming operators, for example from among 
+, x, -, /,-1,', ( , , ), and possibly others. If tl, ... , tn are terms and a 
is an n-ary term forming operator, then otI, . .. , tn is a term. Term-forming 
operators are also called function symbols. 
(3) 
a collection of n-ary primitive predicates, for example from among =, <, E and 
possibly others. If tI, ... ,tn are terms and F is an n-ary primitive predicate 
then Ft1 ... in is an atomic sentence. 
(4) 
a collection of n-ary sentential operators. The general purpose negation sym-
bol is "', but.., (open set intuitionist negation) and r (closed paraconsistent 
negation) are sometimes used; also sentential operators &, V, ~, ==, ->, +-+. 

Nonclassical Logics and Their Theories 
21 
(5) 
variables x, y, z, and possibly others; and quantifiers (V ) also written ( ), 
and (3 ). These form nonatomic or complex sentences in the usual way. It is 
stipulated that no term is a variable and that only theories containing just 
closed sentences are considered. 
Definition 2.7. A logic L is a set of sentences closed under uniform substi-
tution and under a consequence relation r-L, sometimes written FL if the logic is 
semantically specified. The subscript is dropped if it is clear what logic is intended. 
Definition 2.8. An L-semitheory (of logic L) is a set T h of closed sentences 
satisfying: if A E Th and A r-L B then BETh. An L-theory is an L-semitheory 
also satisfying: 
if A E Th and BETh then A&B E Th. If Th is an L-theory 
and A E Th then we write r-Th A, dropping the Th when no confusion will result. 
An L-semitheory Th is ",,-inconsistent if for some A both A E Th and"" A E Th 
(similarly for'" and r, inconsistent for short); else This ",,-consistent (consistent 
for short). Th is prime if, whenever a disjunction A V B is in Th at least one of 
the disjuncts is too. Th is incomplete if for some sentence A neither A nor"" A 
is in T h, else This complete; and This trivial if T h = 1:, else nontrivial. This 
zero-degree or extensional if none of its members contains occurrences of -4 or ~. 
Most of the theories in this book are extensional. If T hI ~ T h2' we say that T h2 
extends or is an extension of T hI. 
Logics and theories in this book are determined by specifying (1) a lattice, 
complete in the lattice-theoretic sense, (2) a definition of the operator"" (or.., or 
r), and a definition of the relation r- or the operator -4 or both, on the lattice, 
(3) a subset V of designated values, closed upward under the order on the lattice, 
(4) an assignment function I : language I: -4 the lattice. 
In more detail: 

22 
Definition 2.9. An RM3-theory is determined by: 
(1) 
The lattice whose Hasse diagram is 
That is, AU B = lub{A, B} and An B = glb{A, B}. 
(2) 
For -+ and "', 
-+ 
T 
B 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
B 
T 
B 
F 
B 
F 
T 
T 
T 
T 
(3) 
Set of designated values V = {B, T}. 
(4) 
I : C -+ {F, B, T} is a partial function satisfying 
Arithmetic 
(4.1) If A is an atomic sentence and I(A) is defined, then I(A) E {F,B,T} 
(4.2) I(A&B) = I(A) n I(B) 
(4.3) I(A V B) = I(A) U I(B) 
(4.4) I(",A) ="'I(A) 
(4.5) I(A -+ B) = I(A) -+ I(B) 
(4.6) I((Vx)Fx) = glb{y: for some term t, I(Ft) = y} 
(4.7) I((3x)Fx) = lub{the same set} 
Such a function I is called an RM3-assignment. A semitheory This then 
determined by the condition Th =df {A: I(A) E V}; and if V is a filter on RM3 
then Th is a theory. One says that I determines Th. If Th is the RM3-theory 
determined by I, then A holds in Th and I if I(A) E V. The logic RM3 is the set 
of sentences which hold in all such I (e.g. all instances of A -+ A), together with 
the definition: A f- B =df for all I, if I(A) E V then I(B) E V. 
For P3-theories, make only two changes (a) B -+ B = T, (b) ",B = T. This 
is often signalled by changing '" to r. Such theories are complete and generally 

Nonclassical Logics and Their Theories 
23 
inconsistent and nontrivial. The logic P3 is defined in the same way as RM3 above. 
For J3-theories, 
(a) change the letter 'B' in P3 to 'N' (for 'neither'), (b) 
change'" to." (c) .,N = F, (d) yo = {T}. These theories are consistent and 
generally incomplete. The logic J3 is generated as above. 
For P J 4-theories, use the lattice 
Also, (a) ",T =",N = F, ",F =",B = T ('" is used for negation here since it is 
'neutral', but note that P3 and J3 are sublogics), (b) A -+ B =df T if A ::; B 
else A -+ B = F, (c) yo = {B, T}. This generates theories which are in general 
both inconsistent and incomplete. The logic P J 4 is defined as above. 
For the next few chapters RM3-theories are mostly used. While theories of 
other logics are interesting and have different properties from RM3-theories, many 
of the interesting functional questions are invariant w.r.t. changes between the 
logics. P3 and J3 theories are used in the chapter on differential calculus. PJ4-
theories are used in the chapters on inconsistent continuous functions and on linear 
equations. 
A simple result is the following: 
Proposition 2.10. (Extendability lemma) Let II and 12 be RM3-assignments 
in the same language, and T hI and T h2 be the extensional theories generated. If 
the atomic sentences holding in II are a subset of those holding in 12, and the 
negations of atomic sentences holding in II are a subset of those holding in 12 , then 
Th2 is an extension of ThI, i.e. Thl <; Th 2• 
Proof. By induction on the number of occurrences of {"", &, V}. Note first 
that the hypothesis of the proposition is equivalent to the following: If A is any 

24 
Arithmetic 
atomic sentence then (a) if II(A) = T then I2(A) E {B,T}, (b) if II(A) = B 
then I2(A) = B, (c) if II(A) = F then I2(A) E {F, B}. The inductive argument 
shows that (a)-(c) hold of all sentences. (Base clause:) 
Already defined to be 
true. (",clause:)(a) If 11(", A) = T then II(A) = F, so by inductive hypothesis 
(c), I2(A) E {F,B}j whence I2(",A)E{B,T}. The cases (b) and (c) are similar. 
(&clause:) (a) If II(A&B)=T then II(A)=II(B)=Tj whence I2(A&B)E{B,T}. 
The cases (b) and (c) are similar. (Vclause:) (a) If II ((Vx )Fx) = T then for all 
terms t, II(Ft)=Tj so by inductive hypothesis (a) for all terms t, I2(Ft)E{B,T}j 
whence I2((Vx)Fx)E{B,T}. The cases (b) and (c) are similar. 
0 
Note that the proposition fails for theories containing -+. The result is applied in 
many places in what follows. A frequent strategy is to take a consistent complete 
classical extensional (zero-degree) theory and extend it by adding extra atomic 
sentences which were assigned F in the old theory. This amounts to choosing a 
new RM3-assignment in which the extra atomic sentences and their negations are 
all assigned B. The Extendability lemma then ensures that the new theory loses 
none of the sentences of the old. 
Definition 2.11. A theory is functional iff, for all terms tl, t2, if tl = t2 holds 
then for any atomic sentence Ftl containing tI, Ftl holds iff Ft2 holds, where Ft2 is 
like Ftl except for replacing tl in one or more places by t2. A theory is transparent 
if the same condition holds except that Ftl can be any sentence (not restricted to 
atomic). 
Now notice that the Extendability lemma does not ensure that an lllconSlS-
tent extension of a functional theory must itself be functional, and similarly for 
transparency. One cannot add classically false sentences to a theory willy-nilly and 
expect to remain functional. For example, if 0 = 2 is added to classical natural 
number theory without also adding 0 + 1 = 2 + 1, i. e. 1 = 3, then functionality fails. 
And even if functionality were ensured, if '" 0 = 0 is not also added then trans-
parency fails (since I- 0 = 2 and I- ",0 = 2 but not I- ",0 = 0). Functionality and 
transparency coincide for classical consistent complete theories, but not for RM3, 

Nonclassical Logics and Their Theories 
25 
P3, etc. It is a desirable characteristic for mathematical theories to be at least func-
tional if not transparent, for then equality means something so to speak. In some 
later chapters it is seen that transparency is not as important as functionality, but 
also that even the latter can be relaxed in a controlled and reasonably-motivated 
way. From now on for several chapters, unless otherwise stipulated, we deal with 
RM3-assignments and their associated theories. 
Definition 2.12. An assignment is prereflexive iff for all terms t1 there is some 
term t2 such that t1 = t2 holds; and reflexive iff for all terms t, t = t holds. An 
assignment is normal iff (i) reflexive, and (ii) i1 = i2 holds iff i2 = i1 holds, and 
(iii) if i1 = i2 and i2 = i3 hold so does i1 = h. 
Proposition 2.13. (1) An assignment 1 is transparent iff for all terms i1,i2' if 
i1 = i2 holds then for all atomic F, 1(Fi1) = 1(Fi2)' 
(2) If 1 is functional and prereflexive then 1 is normal. 
(3) If 1 is prereflexive and Th is an equational theory, then 1 is transparent iff 1 is 
functional and for i1, i 2, if f- i1 = i2 then for all i, 1(t1 = i) = 1(i2 = i). 
Proof. (1) R to L is a straightforward induction on the number of occurrences 
of {"-', &, \I} in sentences. L to R : Suppose for some i1, i 2, and atomic F, 1(Fi1) -=I-
1(Ft2)' If one of Fi1 and Fi2 does not hold then the other does so that 1 is not 
functional and thus not transparent. Otherwise, if both Ft1 and Fi2 hold then one 
of ,,-,Fi1 and "-'Fi2 does not hold and the other does, and again 1 is not transparent. 
(2) Let t be any term. By prereflexivity, there is a term i1 such that f- t = t 1. 
By functionality, t = t holds iff t = t1 holds, so f- i = i. Also by functionality, 
i1 = i2 holds iff t2 = i2 holds and i2 = t1 holds iff t2 = t2 holds. Hence if t1 = t2 
holds then t2 = t1 holds. Finally, again by functionality, if t1 = t2 holds then i1 = t3 
holds iff t2 = i3 holds; so if i1 = t2 and t2 = t3 hold then t1 = t3 holds. Hence 1 is 
normal. 
(3) Let 1 be prereflexive and Th an equational theory. If 1 is transparent then 
certainly 1 is functional, and by (1) if f- i1 = t2 then for all t, 1(i1 = t) = 1(t2 = t). 
Conversely, from (1) it suffices to prove that if f- t1 = i2 then for all atomic F, 

26 
Arithmetic 
I(Ft1 ) = I(Ft2). Clearly it suffices to prove for just one replacement of tl by t2 
since an obvious induction then proves it for more replacements. Thus Ftl has 
one of two forms, t(t1) = t or t = t(tl)' and Ft2 has the corresponding forms 
t(h) = t or t = t(t2). That is it has to be proved that I(t(tl) = t) = I(t(t2) = t) 
and I(t = t(tl)) = I(t = t(t2)). Now by functionality, prerefiexivity and (2), 
r t(tl) = t(t1 ); hence if r t1 = t2 then by functionality r t(t1) =t(t2). Hence by the 
conditi.on of the theorem, I(t(t1) = t) = I(t(t2) = t). The other case is similar. 
0 
A simple result is the following 
Proposition 2.14. (Term elimination) Let Th be a transparent extensional 
theory determined by I. For any terms t1, t2 in £, let t1 ::::; t2 iff t1 = t2 holds in Th 
or t1 and t2 are the same term, and let C be any sublanguage of £ containing just 
one term from each ::::;-equivalence class and agreeing with £ on function symbols 
and primitive predicates. Let Th' be the theory determined by the assignment l' 
which is the restriction of I to £'. Then the restriction of Th to £' = Th'. 
Proof. By induction on the number of occurrences of {"', &, V}. 
(Base:) The atomic sentences of Th in the weaker language have the exact values 
they have in 1'. 
('" and & clauses:) Straightforward. 
(V clause:) (V1.1 :) If I((Vx)Fx) = T then I(Ft) = T for all t in £. Hence 
I(Ft) = T for all t in C, so J'(Ft) = T for every t in £, so I'((Vx)Fx) = T. 
(V1.2 :) Conversely, if I'((Vx)Fx) = T then J'(Ft) = T for every t in C. Since Th' 
is transparent, for every tin £, I(Ft) = T; so I((Vx)Fx) = T. 
(V2.1 :) If I((Vx)Fx) = B, then I(Ft) E {B,T} for every t in £, and for some t1, 
I(Ft1 ) = B. Hence I(Ft) = I'(Ft) E {B, T} for every t in £'. But also t1 ::::; t2 for 
some t2 in C, and J'(Ft2) = I(Ft2) = I(Ft1) = B; so J'((Vx)Fx) = B. 
(V2.2 :) If J'((Vx)Fx) = B, then for all tin £', J'(Ft) E {B,T}; and for some tl 
in £', I(Ft1) = B. But for all t2 in £ there is some t3 in £' such that t2 ::::; t3 and 
I(Ft2) = I(Ft3) = J'(Ft3) E {B, T} with also I(Ft1) = B; so that I((Vx)Fx) = B. 
The cases (V3.1) and (V3.2), when I((Vx)Fx) = F, are similar. 
o 

Models for Number Systems with Arithmetical Operations 
27 
Note that the last proposition fails if 'transparent' is weakened to 'functional': 
suppose that while tl = t2 holds, for some atomic F I(Ft1) = T but I(Ft2) = B. 
Then the choice of tl rather than t2 for £' affects whether (:lx) rv Fx holds in l' 
and Th', but the restriction of Th to £' is unaffected. 
3. Models for Number Systems with Arithmetical 
Operations 
We proceed to the notion of a model, and then study varIOUS arithmetical 
operations. 
Definition 2.15. A model is a pair (D, I) where D is a set and I is an as-
signment which also (1) assigns to every name a member of D, and is onto D so 
that every member of D is named; (2) I assigns to every n-ary function symbol 
an n-ary partial function on D; (3) the assignment to complex terms is given by 
are defined and equal. These have the effects that I is normal and functional. A 
model (D, I) is transparent iff I is transparent, inconsistent (incomplete) iff the 
associated theory is inconsistent (incomplete). A model is an extension of another 
if the associated theory of the first is an extension of that of the second; and infinite 
iff D has an infinite cardinal, else finite. 
For example, consider the class of finite transparent models described in the 
first section of this chapter, in which all (extensional) sentences of the classical 
standard model for the {+, x} arithmetic of the natural numbers hold (see [27]). 
Take names for all the natural numbers {a, 1,2, ... } (as usual we can let these be 
the natural numbers themselves); function symbols are {+, x}. The domain is the 
integers modulo m, i.e. {a, 1, ... , m - I}. For every name t, set I(t) = t mod m; 
and set 1(+)=+ mod m and I(x)= x mod m. This determines I(t) for every 
term t. Finally set I(tl = t2) = B if I(tl) = I(t2)' else I(tl = t2) = F. In [27] these 
are called RM3m and it is proved that they determine theories which are inconsis-
tent, complete, nontrivial, w-inconsistent, w-complete and decidable. It is also well 

28 
Arithmetic 
known that the classical integers mod m permit a definition of additive inverse, 
minus n, as (-n) mod m =df m - n mod m if n mod m =f 0 and 0 otherwise; and 
thus subtraction as nl(-mod m)n2 =df nl(+mod m)«-n2)mod m). So adding 
to the model names for all negative integers and setting 1(-) = -mod m deter-
mines I(t) mod m for all integer terms t in the {=, -, x} language. If as before 
I(tl = t2) = B if I(t1) = I(t2) else I(tl = t2) = F, then·the Extendability lemma 
can be applied to conclude that every sentence of the classical consistent complete 
(zero-degree) theory of the ring Z of integers holds. Also clearly the conditions of 
Proposition 2.13 are satisfied so the model is transparent. 
Summarising, 
Proposition 2.16. There are finite inconsistent complete transparent models 
in which every sentence of the classical consistent complete theory of the ring of 
integers Z holds. 
D 
It is worth noting that in these models it is not in general true that if A holds 
and A :J B holds then B holds. In particular, (A& rvA)&«A& rvA) :J B) might 
hold while B does not, e.g. if A is 0 = 0 and B is 0 = 1. Thus, as is characteristic 
of inconsistent nontrivial theories of paraconsistent logics, the rule DB in the form 
(if A holds and rvA V B holds then B holds) fails in these models. But this does not 
imply any loss of classical information; since clearly for any A and B, if A&( A :J B) 
holds, and also holds back in the classical standard model of the integers, then B 
holds (because by a well known argument DB holds for any consistent complete 
theory). 
An application of the term elimination lemma (Proposition 2.14) is that since 
these inconsistent models for Z are transparent, their simple terms can be cut down 
to {O, 1, ... , m - I}; and then the assignment I(tl = t2 ) = B iff I(t1 ) = I(t2) else 
I = F, has exactly the same sentences true as the assignment with names for all 
integers, in their common language. 
Moving to division and the theory of fields, it is well known that finite clas-

Models for Number Systems with Arithmetical Operations 
29 
sical arithmetic modulo a prime p allows a definition of the unique multiplicative 
inverse n-I of every number n#-O in {O, 1, ... ,p -
I}, and thus division via 
ndn2 =df nl(x mod m)(n21). These can be described by the classical transpar-
ent assignment with J(/) = /mod p, and J(tl = t2) = T if J(tl) = J(t2) else J = Fi 
and all the classical postulates and consequences of the theory of fields hold. For 
example, the following postulates, which axiomatise the classical theory of fields, 
all hold (see [50], p.130). 
(1) 
(x,y,z)(x+(y+z)=(x+y)+z) 
(2) 
(3) 
(x,y)(x+y=y+x) 
(x)(x+O=x) 
(4) 
(x)(x-x = 0) 
(5) 
(x,y,z)(x x (y x z) = (x x y) x z) 
(6) 
(x,y)(x x y = y x x) 
(7) 
(x)(x x 1 = x) 
(8) 
(x)(""x = 0 J x X X-I = 1) 
(9) 
(x,y,z)(x x (y + z) = (x x y) + (x x z)) 
(10) 
",,0=1 
Changing to J(tl = t2) = B if J(tt) = J(t2) and applying the Extendability lemma 
gives: 
Proposition 2.17. There are finite inconsistent transparent models in which 
every sentence of the classical theory of fields holds. 
o 
This cannot be strengthened to the conclusion that all the theory of the field 
Q of rationals with names for all of them holds: not every integer has an inverse 
defined, those with J(t) = 0 do not whereas all but 0 itself do in classical Q. This 
suggests a general difficulty in inconsistently extending fields, which proves to be 
the case. In the next chapter it is seen that this can be achieved in infinite fields 
modulo an infinite prime. 
These structures give a solution to the following problem, raised by Graham 

30 
Arithmetic 
Priest. One wants postulates such as the Cancellation Law ([4], p.2): 
(x)(""x = 0::) (y,z)(x x Y = x x z::) Y = z)) 
to hold when moving from the classical theory of rings to the classical theory of 
integral domains and fields. But inconsistent fields such as the above have both 
",,0 = 0 and (y, z)(O x y = 0 x z = 0) holding. Yet one does not want to detach 
every y = z or the theory is uninteresting. But one does want to detach y = z for 
those x classically not identical with 0 (in Q or R say). However, in the inconsistent 
fields mod p, while both ",,0 = 0 and (y, z)(O x y = 0 x z = 0) holds, still y = z 
cannot be detached (e.g. obviously not r 0 = 1). This is another symptom of 
the general undetachability of::). But also, if t = 0 does not hold classically, then 
(y, z)(t x Y = t x z ::) Y = z) holds; and then if t x t1 = t X t2 holds classically, 
t1 = t2 can be detached (all by the Extendability lemma). 
A useful general result proved by Dunn in [11 J is as follows. 
Proposition 2.18. (Dunn) Let A be an algebra (D, 01, .. . ,On) where the 0i 
are operations on D. Let A' be a subalgebra of A and h be a congruence from A 
to A' with h(x) = x for all x in A'. Then the classical equational theory Thl of A 
with names for all elements of D can be extended to an inconsistent transparent 
theory Th2 using the assignment l(t) = h(t) for all names t, and l(tl = t2) = B if 
l(tl) = l(t2) else l(tl = t2) = F. 
Proof. That Th2 is an extension of Thl follows by the Extendability lemma 
from the fact that if tl = t2 holds classically then clearly l(tl) = l(t2), so that 
l(tl=t2)=I( ""t1 =t2)=B. But also condition (3) for transparency in Proposition 
2.13 is evidently satisfied, so Th2 is transparent. 
D 
This can be applied to the {+, x, /} congruence from the non-negative ratio-
nals into itself given by h(x) = 1 if (classically) x -I- 0 and h(O) = 0, to give an 
inconsistent transparent nontrivial extension of the classical {+, x, /} theory of the 
non-negative rationals with names for all of them. But the attempt to bring in the 
negative rationals and subtraction while retaining all classical laws and functional-

Summary of Further Results in Arithmetic 
31 
ity, wrecks the theory: there needs to be an additive inverse -n for each nj but if 
classically distinct elements nl, n2 are identified inconsistently, then by functional-
ity they should have the same additive inverse, so that nl -
n2 = nl - nl holds. If 
the usual classical laws also are to hold then nl - nl = 0 also holds. But division by 
o is prohibited, so division by nI -
n2 must similarly be undefined by functionality 
again. But division by nI -
n2 is permitted in the classical theory. The interac-
tion between subtraction and division is the problem here, and it strengthens the 
suspicion that it is not so easy to inconsistentise fields. 
4. Summary of Further Results in Arithmetic 
These are proved in [27] or [41]. 
Proposition 2.19. RM3m can be axiomatised by: RM#, plus I- 0 = m 
plus I- 0 = t +-+ 0 = 1 for every t in {O, 1, ... , m - I}. 
Proposition 2.20. In R#, I- (0 = nI 00 = n2) +-+ 0 = gcd(nt, n2), where 
A 0 B =df ,...., (A -+,....,B) and gcd(nI' n2) is the greatest common divisor of nI and 
Definition 2.21. RM(2n + l)m is the result of replacing RM3 as background 
logic in RM3m by the logic RM2n + 1 (see [27]) RM3w = df nall m RM3m. 
RMw =df nallm.nRM(2n + l)m. 
Proposition 2.22. 
RMw IS inconsistent, incomplete, nontrivial and 
w-inconsistent. Its extensional part is complete, and identical with the zero de-
gree part of RM3w. Any inconsistent zero-degree extension of the zero-degree 
part of R# is complete. Not all inconsistent extensions of R# are extensions of 
RM#. The nontheorems of RMw are recursively enumerable. Problem: is RMw 
decidable? 

32 
Arithmetic 
Definition 2.23. LRQ is the logic axiomatised by dropping the distribution 
axiom (9) from RQ (Definition 2.2). LR# is then formed by adding the Peano 
postulates (#1) - (#7) and rule RM I (Definition 2.3) to LRQ. 
Proposition 2.24. Distribution is not provable in LR#, but is provable in 
any inconsistent extension of LR#. Problem: is every extensional instance of 
Distribution provable in LR#? 

CHAPTER 3: MODULO INFINITY 
1. The Classical Denumerable Nonstandard Model of 
Natural Number Arithmetic 
The classical consistent complete denumerable model of the natural numbers, 
{O, 1,2, ... }, of order type w, is also called the standard model of classical Peano 
arithmetic. This contrasts with the (classical consistent complete denumerable) 
nonstandard model. 
As is well known the latter has a domain of order type 
w + ",(w· + w), consisting of an initial block isomorphic to {O, 1,2, ... } (called the 
finite natural numbers), with succeeding blocks of numbers (called the infinite nat-
ural numbers) isomorphic to the integers (order type w· +w), the blocks themselves 
being densely ordered (order type "'). Both models verify exactly the sentences of 
classical standard arithmetic P## (see Definition 2.3) in their common language. 
In this chapter we consider consistent and inconsistent theories which arise from 
the nonstandard model. 
Given a finite (natural) number m, any infinite number can be uniquely rep-
resented as the sum of a multiple (possibly infinite) of m plus a unique natural 
number between 0 and m - 1. This gives a natural definition of modulo m for all 
infinite numbers. Hence the {+, -, x} modulo models of Chapter 2 can have added 
to them names for all nonstandard infinite numbers. 
Classical nonstandard numbers are constructed in such a way that first order 
properties of the standard natural numbers continue to hold. One such property is 
that the modulus of any number can be taken w.r.t. any nonzero number: 
(lfm, x)(rvm = 0 => (:Jy, z)(x = zm + y&O:::; y :::; m - 1)). 
That is, 
(lfm, x)(rvm = 0 => (:Jy, z)(x = zm + y&(:Jw)(w + y + 1 = m))). 
Hence in the nonstandard model, for any infinite numbers m and x, there is a mul-
tiple of m no more than m -1 below x. This evidently allows a consistent complete 

34 
Modulo Infinity 
model modulo infinite m with functions {+, x}, as well as additive inverses and 
subtraction. Also there are plainly inconsistent versions given by /(tl = t2) = B 
if tl mod m = t2 mod m else / = F, and by the Extendability lemma all of the 
classical consistent complete {+, -, x} theory of the integers Z continues to hold 
in the inconsistent models. 
An interesting subclass of these structures arises from the facts that infinite 
numbers can have infinite divisors and that infinite primes with no divisors save 
themselves and unity exist. (Proof: 
Add to classical Peano arithmetic P# the 
axioms (x)((3y)(x + y = p) ::::> (x = 1 V x = p V '" (3z)(x x z = p)), i.e. p is prime, 
and "'p = 1, "'P = 2, "'p = 3, .... Every finite subset of axioms has a classical model 
so by the compactness theorem the whole theory has a model. But p is not one of 
the finite numbers.) Now noting that 'x divides y' is definable as (3z)(x x z = y), 
we have that the well known theorem of standard number theory that 
(x, y,p)((prime p & p divides x x y) ::::> (p divides x V p divides y)) 
holds also in the (classical) nonstandard numbers, and thus for infinite primes p. 
(See [4], p.19, Theorem 9.) But this is equivalent to saying that if x x y = 0 mod p, 
then x = 0 mod p or y = 0 mod p. It follows easily that classical modulo infinite p 
is an integral domain and obeys the Cancellation Law (x, y, z)( "'x = 0 ::::> (x x y = 
x x z ::::> y = z)). (See [4], p.5, Theorem 1.) The usual argument ([4], p.41) can 
then be applied to show that every x =I- 0 in mod p has a unique multiplicative 
inverse x-I mod p. (Proof: The products x x 0, x xl, ... , x x (p - 1) are all in 
{O, ... , p - 1} since (x mod p) is an operation; but they are all distinct by the 
Cancellation Law. Exactly one of them must be 1 therefore, and X-I =df the 
unique y such that x x y = 1 mod p.) Further by the Cancellation Law, if two 
numbers have the same inverse then they are identical. Classical mod infinite p 
is thus a field, and xU modp)y =df x(x modp)(y-I modp). Its 'natural' order 
type is evidently w + "l(w* + w) + w*, with a last member p - 1 and a final block of 
order type w*. That is, the final block is { ... , p - 2, p - 1}. 
Some properties of consistent mod pare: 

Inconsistency 
35 
(1) 
A number is finite iff its additive inverse is in the final block. 
(2) 
(p-1)/2 and «p-1)/2)+ 1 are additive inverses in the same block (Benham), 
as are [(p - 3)/2 and «p - 3)/2) + 3)], ... , and [(p - (2n + 1))/2 and «p-
(2n+1))/2)+(2n+1)], and [(p+(2n+1))/2 and (p+(2n+1)/2)-(2n+l)] 
etc. 
(3) 
The multiplicative inverse of any finite number save zero IS defined and 
infinite. 
(4) 
2-1 is (p + 1)/2, and (p - 2)-1 = (_2)-1 = (p -1)/2, which are in the same 
block and additive inverses. 
2. Inconsistency 
Now we move to inconsistency. Take names for all members of the classical 
nonstandard model (naming themselves). If t is a name, then set I(t) = t mod p, 
set 1(+) = + mod p and similarly for {-, x, n. Note that I(tdt2) is not defined 
if I(t;;l) = 0; but this never happens if t2 is a nonzero finite number. The terms 
2-1,3-1 , ... can be used as names for the reciprocals of the natural numbers, and 
the terms t1 x t;;l for all finite names t1, t2 can be used as names for all the rational 
numbers. The assignment I(t1 = h) = B if I(t1) = I(t2) else I(tl = t2) = F, 
determines an inconsistent -theory. By the Extendability lemma this is an extension 
of the classical theory of the integers; and also of the integers modulo p so that all 
the sentences of the classical theory of fields hold. Also it is not difficult to show 
that it is transparent. Hence we have a strengthening of the results of the previous 
chapter (see also [28] and [34]): 
Proposition 3.1. There exist infinite inconsistent transparent models modulo 
an infinite prime in which hold all sentences of the classical consistent complete 
theory of the field of rationals Q, with names for all the rationals. 
0 
In these theories f-
rv 0 = 0, since 1(0 = 0) = B = I( rv 0 = 0). A different 
construction of {+, x} arithmetic enables that to be avoided, with inconsistency 

36 
Modulo Infinity 
being confined to the infinite part of the diagram, and has some consequences for 
Fermat's Last Theorem. Choose an arbitrary infinite number m and for domain D 
take D = {O, 1,2, ... }U{x : m ~ x ~ 2m-I}. 1ft is a name, set J(t) = tift is finite 
else set J(t) = t mod m+m. (In other words shift t mod m along by m to get J(t).) 
Set J(tl + t2) = tl + t2 if both are finite, else J(tl + t2) = ((tl + t2) mod m) + m. 
Set J(tl x t2) = tl x t2 if both are finite, else J(tl x t2) = ((tl x t2) mod m) + m. 
Set J(tl = t2) = T if J(tl) = J(t2) and both are finite, set J(tl = t2) = B if 
J(tl) = J(t2) and both are infinite, else set J(tl = t2) = F. Call this model and the 
associated theory N S N. 
Proposition 3.2. Every sentence holding in the classical standard and non-
standard models of the natural numbers holds in NSN. NSN is transparent. 
Proof. If A holds in standard arithmetic then it holds in the classical nonstan-
dard model. An inductive argument on the complexity of the term tl shows that 
if tl = t2 holds in the nonstandard model then J(tl) = J(t2). 
(Base:) Let tl be any name. If tl is finite then if tl = t2 holds then J(tl) = tl = 
t2 = J(t2). If tl is infinite then J(tl) = tl mod m + m = t2 mod m + m = J(t2). 
(+clause:) Iftl is t3+t4, then if both t3 and t4 are finite then J(t3+t4) = t3+t4 = 
tl = t2 = J(t2). Else, if one oft3, t4 is infinite then also t2 which = t3 + t4 is infinite. 
Hence J(t3 + t4) = m + (t3 + t4) mod m = m + t2 mod m = J(t2). 
(xclause:) Similar. But if J(tl) = J(t2) then tl = t2 holds in NSN, so NSN is an 
extension of the classical standard and nonstandard models. 
For transparency, by Proposition 2.13(1) it suffices to prove that if tl = t2 
holds in NSN then for all atomic F, J(Ftl) = J(Ft2). Now tl = t2 holds iff 
J(tl) = J(t2)' so it must be proved that if J(tl) = J(t2) then for all atomic F, 
J(Ftl) = J(Ft2). Again it suffices to prove this for just one replacement of tl by 
t2, so let Ftl be t(tl) = t3 and Ft2 be t(t2) = t3 (the case where Ftl is t3 = t(tl) 
is similar). Now note that if J(tl) = J(t2) then tl mod m = t2 mod m. (Rea-
son: 
if tl is finite then certainly tl = t2 ; while if tl is infinite then J(tl) = 
m + tl mod m = J(t2) = m + t2 mod m, so that since the addition is ordinary ad-

Inconsistency 
37 
dition of nonstandard numbers, tl mod m = t2 mod m.) But now the functionality 
of the classical modulus construction ensures that t(t1) mod m = t(t2) mod m and 
so that m + t(t1) mod m = m + t(t2) mod m. If t(t1) is finite then I(t(t1)) = 
t(tl) = t(tl) mod m = t(t2) mod m = t(t2) = I(t(t2))' and if t(tl) is infinite then 
I(t(tl)) = m + t(t1) mod m = m + t(t2) mod m = I(t(t2)) again. 
0 
N S N is interesting because it contains a 'pseudo-zero', the least infinite number 
m (and a pseudo-unity m + 1 as Richard Benham pointed out). That is, for any 
nonzero t, r t x m = m, and for any infinite t, r t + m = t. 
Now since m is a pseudo-zero, m3 + m3 = m3 holds, that is r (m X m X m) + 
(m X m X m) = (m X m X m), a counterexample to Fermat's Last Theorem (FLT) 
in this structure. At the time of writing, F LT seems to be a good bet following 
Andrew Wiles' argument, though Wiles has indicated that one case remains open. 
The situation can be analysed as follows. Neither F LT nor rvF LT can be expressed 
in the present {+, x} language, since the capacity to express exponentiation fully 
is absent. However, each instance of both F LT and rv F LT can be considered in 
the language, since one can write, for example, (xxxx) + (yyyy) = zzzz. Thus, 
if anyone of these held in a model for Standard Arithmetic, then F LT would 
be false; and if anyone held in a model of Peano Arithmetic, then F LT would 
be unprovable in Pi. This motivates the introduction of the symbols' F LT' and 
'rv F LT' into the language, where the former is evaluated as the minimum of the 
values of its instances (that is semantically the quantifier V is treated as generalised 
conjunction), and the latter evaluated as the maximum of its instances. More 
exactly, the value rv F LT is the maximum of the values of all equations of the 
form (x times itself n times) + (y times itself n times) = (z times itself n times), 
where x, y, z are nonzero numbers and n exceeds 2; while the value of F LT is 
the RM3-complement of the value of rv F LT. Now by the construction of N S N, 
(m X m x m) + (m X m X m) = m X m X m has the value B in NSN, so rvF LT is B 
or T in NSN, and thus holds in NSN. The following definition is now necessary. 

38 
Definition 3.3. For any subset S of £, the Routley * of S, 
S* =df {A :""A does not belong to S}. 
Modulo Infinity 
The Routley * operation is important in the semantics of relevant logics, and 
is used in several places in this book. It is known that if This an inconsistent 
RM3-theory determined by an assignment I, then Th* is an incomplete theory 
determined by taking I and changing only the set of designated values V = {T}. 
Proposition 3.4. F LT is true iff ""F LT is exactly B in NSN, and iff neither 
""FLT nor FLT is in NSN*; and FLT is false iff ""FLT is Tin NSN, and iff 
""FLT is in NSN* and FLT is not in NSN*. 
Proof. That ""FLT is Bin NSN iff neither ""FLT nor FLT is in NSN*, 
follows from the well known fact that both A and ""A are in an RM3-theory Th iff 
neither A nor ""A are in Th*. Now by an uncontroversial argument of Tarski, F LT 
is false iff for some finite x, y, z not classically identical with 0 and n not classical 
identical with 0, 1 or 2, xn + yn = zn holds in classical Robinson arithmetic. Hence, 
if ""FLT is exactly B in NSN, then there are no such finite x,y,z,n, and thus 
F LT is true. Conversely if F LT is true then there are no such finite x, y, z, n to 
raise the value of "" F LT to T in N S N, and"" F LT is exactly B. For the second 
part of the proposition, F LT is false iff these finite x, y, z, n exist, iff ""F LT is T 
in NSN. But also it is well known that A is T in Th iff A is in Th* and ""A is not 
in Th*. So ""FLT is Tin NSN iff ""FLT is in NSN* and FLT is not in NSN*.D 
Unfortunately, the job of proving ""F LT to be T in NSN seems to be no easier 
than finding a refuting instance to F LT, that is a finite x, y, z, n with xn + yn = zn, 
etc. ever was. 

CHAPTER 4: ORDER 
1. Order and Equality without Function Symbols 
So far, we have only been considering equational theories, that is, theories 
whose only primitive predicate symbol is =. We have been looking at how function 
symbols such as + and x behave inconsistently in such theories. In this chapter a 
second primitive predicate < is added to =, interpreted as 'less than'. In the first 
section, function symbols are omitted. The main result of this section is as follows. 
There is a well-known metatheorem of classical model theory to the effect that the 
theory of dense order without endpoints is ~o-categorical, that is, that all classical 
models of that theory of cardinality ~o are isomorphic. We see that this breaks 
down for RM3-theories, given a natural extension of the notion of isomorphism of 
models to the more general case. It follows that the classical metatheorem depends 
on the assumption of classical logic. Such is not always the case: various other 
results in this book are invariant with respect to changes in background logic away 
from the classical case. In the next section, function symbols are re-introduced and 
several results about these are summarised. 
The following axiomatises the classical theory of dense order without endpoints 
(see e.g. [22]). 
(1) Irreflexivity (x)(", x < x) 
(2) Asymmetry (x,y)(x < y :::>'" y < x) 
(3) Transitivity (x,y,z)((x < y&y < z):::> x < z) 
(4) Comparability (x,y)(('" x = y& '" x < y):::> Y < x) 
(5) Exclusiveness (x,y)((x = y :::> ('" x < y& '" y < x)&(x < y :::>'" x = y)) 
(6) No endpoints (x)(3y,z)(x < y&z < x) 
(7) Denseness (x,y)(x < y:::> (3z)(x < z&z < y)) 
(8) Mixing (x,y,z)(x = y:::> ((y < z:::> x < z)&(z < y:::> z < x))) 
It is well known that all classical models of cardinality ~o of these axioms are 
isomorphic. To compare with RM3-models, a definition of isomorphism is needed 

40 
Order 
which reduces to the usual in the classical case. The following seems adequate at 
least where every element of the domains is named. 
Definition 4.1. Two models (DI' II) and (D2,I2) are isomorphic iff there is a 
1-1 correspondence! : DI --t D2 such that for all names tI, ... tn, tn+!, ... t2n , if 
I2(tn+I) = !(II(tI)) and ... and I2(t2n) = !(II(tn)) then for all atomic F, FtI ... tn 
holds in II iff Ftn+! ... t2n holds in 12. 
Proposition 4.2. There are nonisomorphic RM3-models of the theory of dense 
order without endpoints. 
Proof. For both models, take as names the rational numbers Q. For (DI,!I) 
set DI = Q; set II(t) = t for all t; set II(ti = t2) = T if tl = h else II = F; 
and set II (ti < t2) = T if tl < t2 else II = F. That is II is the classical (and 
so RM3-) model of the {=, <} theory of Q. For (D2'!2) set D2 = the integers 
Z; set I2(t) = the integral part of t; set I2(ti = t2) = B if I2(tI) = I2(t2) else 
12 = F; and set I2(ti < t2) = B if I2(td :<:::: I2(t2) else 12 = F. By the Extendability 
lemma, 12 is an extension of II and so (1)-(8) above hold in 12. But there is no 
1-1 correspondence between Z and Q which preserves atomic sentences of II and 
12 , since any correspondence eventually reverses the order on some elements. 
0 
This shows that the proof of l{o-categoricity is not invariant with regard to 
background logic, but depends on the special properties of classical logic. Note 
also that 12 is transparent; since if tl = t2 holds then clearly for all atomic 
F, I2(FtI) = I2(Ft2), then use Proposition 2.13(1). The discreteness postulate 
(x)(3y)(x < y&(z)((x < z& '" y < z) ::) Y = z)) also holds in 12 which shows that 
discreteness and denseness postulates can be jointly satisfied inconsistently. 
2. Order and Equality with Function Symbols 
There are many such models and theories with different properties. These are 
studied in [34]. Summarising those results: 

Order and Equality With Function Symbols 
41 
(1) Primitive symbols {=, <, +, -, x}; names for all the integers; domain D = 
finite integers modulo m of Chapter 2; I(t) = t mod m; I( +, -, x) = (+, -, x) mod 
m; l(t1 = t2 ) = B if l(t1) = l(t2 ) else I = F; and l(t1 < t2) = B if t1 ~ t2 
else I = F. All sentences of the classical consistent complete theory of the ring 
of integers Z hold including the Sum Law (x,y,z)(x < y :J x + z < y + z) and 
Product Law (x,y,z)(x < y :J (0 < z :J x x z < y x z)). Functionality and 
hence transparency fail: t1 = t2 holds iff t1 mod m = t2 mod m; but t1 mod m = 
t2 mod m plus t1 < t3 do not ensure t2 < t3 since t2 might be too large. The 
equational subtheory is transparent. 
(2) As for (1) but with I(tl < t2) = B if I(tl) ~ l(t2) else I = F. These are 
transparent but not all sentences of the classical theory of Z with names hold, e.g. 
in mod 3, 1(2 < 4) = F because not 2 mod 3 ~ 4 mod 3 = 1. 
(3) As for (1) but with l(tl < t2) = B all terms tt, t2. These are transparent 
and all sentences of the {=, <, +, -, x} theory of Z with names hold, but at the 
cost of triviality in the {<, +, -, x} subtheory. 
(4) Primitive symbols {=, <, +, x, /}. Take the two-element model with names 
for the rationals at the end of Chapter 2 Section 3 and add I( tl < t2) = B if 
I(tl) :S l(t2) else I = F. This is transparent and extends the classical consistent 
complete arithmetic and order theory of the nonnegative rationals. 
(5) Primitive symbols {=, <, +, -, x, /}; names for all the real numbers; D = 
{O,l, ... ,p -I}; for any term t set I(t) = 0 if t :S 0 or t > p - 1 else I(t) = 
the greatest integer ~ t; set l(tl = t2) = B if l(tl) = l(t2) else I = F; and 
set I(tl < h) = B if I(tl) ~ l(t2) else I = F. The theory is transparent. The 
{ =, <} subtheory extends that of the classical consistent complete real numbers R, 
including the continuity schema ([50], p.31). The {=, +, -, x, /} subtheory extends 
the classical theory of fields. Also Sum and Product laws hold. It is not known 
whether all classical consequences of field axioms + (1)-(8) + continuity scheme 
hold. 

42 
Order 
(6) {=, <, +, -, x, /}j names for all real numbersj D = modpj J( +, -, x, /} 
are mod pj set J(t) = 0 if t ~ 0, J(t) = the least whole number 2: t if 0 < t ~ p-2, 
else J(t) = p-1j set J(tt = t2) = B if J(tt) = J(t2) else J = Fj and set J(tt < t2) = T 
if J(tt) < J(t2), J(tt < t2) = B if J(tt) = J(t2) else J = F. These are transpar-
ent, and the {=, <} subtheory extends that of classical R, and the {=, +, -, x, /} 
subtheory extends that of classical fields. But Sum and Product laws fail, and in 
different moduli. (Sum law: in mod 2 or mod prime p 2: 3, p-2 < p-1 holds but 
(p-2) + 1 < (p-1) + 1 does not hold. Product law: in mod p 2: 3, 1 < p-1 and 
0< p-1 are both T but J(l x (p-1) < (p-1) x (p-1)) = J(p-1 < 1) = F. 
Finally, inconsistency can be isolated to subtheories containing one primitive 
predicate and not the other, while retaining transparency. In mod p, both the 
following are transparent: 
(7) J(tt = t2) = B if J(tt) = J(t2) else J = F, and J(tt < t2) = T if J(td < J(t2) 
else J = F. 
(8) 
l(tt = t 2 ) = T if l(tt) 
J(tt) ~ J(t2) else I = F. 

CHAPTER 5: CALCULUS 
1. Introduction 
As noted in Chapter 1, there have been calls recently for inconsistent calculus, 
appealing to the history of calculus in which inconsistent claims abound, especially 
about infinitesimals (Newton, Leibniz, Bernoulli, I'Hospital, even Cauchy). How-
ever, inconsistent calculus has resisted development. There seem to be at least two 
reasons for this. First, as we have seen, the functional structure of fields interacts 
with inconsistency to produce triviality even in the purely equational part of the-
ories, in a way which normal paraconsistentist contradiction-containment devices, 
such as weakening ex contradictione quodlibet, do not prevent. Stronger theories, 
including set membership, terms of infinite length, order, limits and integration, 
are then infected with the same triviality. Second, the functional structure of in-
consistent set theory remains difficult to control, and seems to require sacrifice of 
logical principles in addition to, and more natural than, ECQ. (See Meyer et.al. 
[29], Slaney [53], but also below Chapter 14.) But unless there are distinctive in-
consistent theories of the order of strength of classical analysis, then the claim that 
the history of the calculus supports paraconsistency is undermined. Inconsistency 
might well instead be a symptom of confusion. 
This chapter extends inconsistency to the case of inconsistent equational the-
ories strong enough for a reasonable notion of differentiation of polynomials, in 
order to show that inconsistency does not cripple such an equational differential 
calculus. It turns out to be instructive to begin not with an inconsistent theory but 
with an incomplete consistent (intuitionist) theory; which can be seen to have some 
similarities with, and advantages over, the well-known intuitionist theory Synthetic 
Differential Geometry (SDG). It also has the advantage of showing how incomplete 
theories are just as amenable to treatment by these methods as inconsistent theo-
ries are. In section 2 a congruence relation is defined on the noninfinite hyperreal 
numbers, and the algebra of equivalence classes so obtained is shown to have the 

44 
Calculus 
structure of a nilpotent ring. This allows the functional properties of the incom-
plete theory to be defined in section 3. In section 4 the calculus of polynomials is 
described and results on incompleteness, nilpotence, Taylor formulae, polynomial 
differentiation and continuity are obtained. These are compared with SDG, and 
the similarities, advantages (mostly simplicity) and limitations of the comparison 
are discussed. In section 5 it is shown that a small change allows a very similar 
inconsistent theory to be defined. Section 6 deals with integration, and in the final 
section, various further directions are sketched. On the basis of these results it is 
argued that the fact that the same functional structure can underlie inconsistent, 
incomplete, or classical theories suggests that the functional aspects of mathematics 
are more important than squabbles at the sentential level over ECQ, inconsistency, 
incompleteness, etc. 
2. A Nilpotent Ring of Hyperreal Numbers 
We begin with the usual classical arithmetic of the field of hyperreal num-
bers R*, with operations {+, -, x, /}. Any hyperreal number has a representation 
H +r+d where H is an infinite number, r a real number and d an infinitesimal, 
the reciprocal of an infinite number. If two hyperreal numbers x, y are at most 
infinitesimally distinct, we write x ~ y. Thus any infinitesimal ~ o. The subfield 
of real numbers is called R. For each nonzero x in R*, the binary relation ~x is de-
fined by Xl ~x X2 =df (xI/x) is at most infinitesimally different from (xdx); that 
is (xI/x) ~ (xdx), that is (Xl -X2)/X is infinitesimal, written (Xl -X2)/X ~ O. For 
fixed x this is an equivalence relation on R*, as is easy to verify. It is not however a 
congruence. For example if (Xl - X2)/X is infinite w.r.t. X3, then Xl ~x X2 does not 
ensure (XI/X3) ~x (XdX3). However, if X is any infinitesimal 8, then a congruence 
on the noninfinite hyperreal numbers, w.r. t. the operations {+, -, x}, is obtained; 
as well as an associated ring of equivalence classes. So, fix 8; then we can define: 

A Nilpotent Ring of Hyperreal Numbers 
45 
Definition 5.1. Let S be the set of noninfinite hyperreals, that is of the form 
x + d where x is any real number and d any infinit~simal (possibly 0). Then 
D =df {d E S: for some positive integer k, dk /0 R:: O}; 
S- =df S with d restricted to D. 
Proposition 5.2. The relation R::O is a congruence on S and on S-. 
Proof. Let (Xl + dl) R::O (X2 + d2), that is ((Xl + dl) - (X2 + d2))/0 R::,O; 
and let (X3 + d3) R:: 0 (X4 + d4), that is ((X3 + d3) - (X4 + d4))/0 R:: O. 
Then 
(((Xl + dd + (X3 + d3)) - ((X2 + d2) + (X4 + d4)))/0 R:: 0, that is 
((Xl + dd + (X3 + d3)) ';::/j ((X2 + d2) + (X4 + d4)). 
The subtraction case is the same. For multiplication note that (Xl +dl) R::O (X2+d2) 
iff Xl = X2 and ddo R:: d2/0. Now 
((Xl + dl) X (X3 + d3)) - ((X2 + d2) X (X4 + d4)))/0 
= (XIX3 - X2X4 + X3dl - X4d2 + xld3 - X2d4 + dld3 - d2d4)/0. 
The first pair of terms cancel. The second pair are R:: since multiplication by a 
real number does not disturb R::, so their difference is infinitesimal. Ditto the other 
two pairs in the sum, so the whole sum is infinitesimal. This shows that R::O is a 
congruence for {+, -, x} on S. For S -, suppose that 
But each term of the sum R:: 0 so the whole sum is; and so (Xl + dl ) + (X3 + d3) is in 
S-, as is obviously (X2 + d2) + (X4 + d4). Subtraction is similar. For multiplication 
(Xl + dl) X (X3 + d3) = (XIX3 + xld3 + X3dl + dld3). Now 
so each term of the sum is in S- ; so the whole sum is as in the proof of the addition 
case above. 
D 

46 
Calculus 
Note that the proof of congruence breaks down for the case of division, for 
example if all Xi are 0 and dl - d2 = d3• It follows from Proposition 5.2 that the set 
of equivalence classes under ~[j form a ring (call it JR) w.r.t. the induced operations 
{+, -, x}. Denote the equivalence class of any element x + d by [x + d). JR has the 
following properties. 
Proposition 5.S. (1) For any real numbers XI, X2, [Xl] = [X2] iff Xl = X2. 
(2) For any infinitesimals db d2 , if [4] = [~] = [0] then [dl ] x [d2] = [0]. 
(3) For any nonnegative integer k, there is some infinitesimal d with [dk+1] = [0] 
but not W] = [0]. 
Proof. (1) If XbX2 are real, then not (Xl - X2)/[j ~ 0 unless Xl = X2. 
(2) Let dr = 4/[j and d; = ~/[j. By hypothesis, dr ~ 0 ~ d;. But 
dl d2/[j = (d~d~/[j2r/2 = (d~r/2(tI;r/2 , 
which is infinitesimal if dr and d; are. 
(3) Consider [j2, [j, [jl/2, [jl/3, ... , etc .. 
D 
Proposition 5.4. For any infinitesimal [j and any positive integer k, there is 
an infinitesimal d such that dk+1 / [j is infinitesimal while dk / [j is infinite. 
Proof. Let d = [j(k+1)/k(kH). Now 
But, 
dk / [j = [jk(k+1)/k(kH) / [j = [j(k+1)/(kH) / [j(kH)/(kH) = [j-l/(k+2) = 1/ [jl/(kH) 
which is infinite. 
Definition 5.5. Do =df [0]; and, for all positive integers k, 
Dk =df ([d) : [dk+1] = [0] and not W] = [O]}. 
Note that ([d) : d is in D} = Uall k(Dk). (For D see Definition 5.1.) 
D 
Proposition 5.6. For all positive integers k, (1) there is a [d) in Dk such that 
for all [dl ] in D, [dl ] x W] = [0]; and (2) there is a [d) in Dk and a [dl ] in DkH 

An Incomplete Theory 
47 
such that not [dl] x [ak] = [0]. 
Proof. (1) Let d be 81/ k• Now dk /8 = 1 not ~ O. But dk+1/8 = 1.81/ k ~ O. 
Hence [d] is in Dk • But also, for any infinitesimal dt, dl.dk /8 = dl ~ OJ so that 
[dl] x [dk ] = [0]. 
(2) Let d be 8(k+I )/k(k+2) as in Proposition 5.4, and let dl be 8/(dk). Now by the 
argument of Proposition 5.4, [d] is in D k . Further, 
So 
and 
d~k+2) /8 
d~k+3) /8 
8(k+2)/(k+2) /8(k+2)/(k+2) = 1 not ~ OJ 
8(k+3)/(k+2) /8(k+2)/(k+2) = 81/(k+2) ~ O. 
Hence dl is in Dk+2' Finally, (dl dk )/8 = 1 not ~ OJ so that not [dl] x [ak] = [0]. 0 
Definition 5.7. An element d of an algebra is nilpotent of degree k if dk+l = 0; 
and strictly nilpotent of degree k if dk+l = 0 but not dk = 0; and an algebra is 
(strictly) nilpotent of degree k if it has (strictly) nilpotent elements of degree k. 
Proposition 5.3(1) shows that 1R has a subfield isomorphic to the real numbers 
R. This field of equivalence classes will also be referred to as R. Now in 1R we can as 
usual write [xJk for [xk] and drop the multiplication signs or use dots. Proposition 
5.3(3) shows that 1R is strictly nilpotent of all degrees. Proposition 5.3(2) is relevant 
to the comparison with SDG in section 4. While all elements of Dk go to zero on 
being raised to the k + 1st power and not for any lesser power, Proposition 5.6 
shows that these elements fall into two classes: those whose kth power multiplied 
by any nilpotent element goes to zero, and those whose kth power has a nonzero 
product with some nilpotent element. This is also relevant to section 4. 
3. An Incomplete Theory 
This section specifies an incomplete model based on the three-valued intuitionist 
logic J3. In the following section theorems of calculus are proved in it. 

4S 
Calculus 
Definition 5.S. The theory C J is specified by: 
(1) 
background logic J3 (Three values {F,N,T} with 'V = {T}. See Definition 
2.9.); 
(2) 
names for all noninfinite hyperreal numbers; 
(3) 
term forming operators {+, -, x}; 
(4) 
the single binary relation =; 
(5) 
sentential operators {"', &, V, --+}; 
(6) 
Two sorts of object language variables, each with several sorts of associated 
quantifiers 
(6i) 
variables x, Xo, Xt, •.• and two associated pairs of quantifiers (V E JR), 
(3 E JR) and (V E R), (3 E R), and 
(6ii) 
variables d,do,dI , ... and associated pairs of quantifiers (V ED), 
(3 E D) and for every positive integer k, (V E Dk ), (3 E Dk ); 
(7) 
{:::>,=:,+-+} are defined in the usual way, (E!x E R)(Fx) is defined as 
(3 x E R) (Fx&(Vxo E R)(Fxo --+ x = xo»; 
(S) 
The model (D, l) is specified by 
(Si) 
D = JR 
(Sii) 
For every name t, l(t) = [t] 
(Siii) 
I ( +, -, x) are the corresponding ring operations on JR 
(Siv) 
For any terms tt, t2, set l(tl = t2 ) = T if l(tI) = l(t2), set 
l(tl = t2 ) = N if l(t1 ) =f:. l(t2) but the hyperreal number (tl - t2)/h 
is noninfinite, else set l(tl = t2 ) = F. 
(9) 
For every quantified sentence of the form (V v E X)Fv, l((V v E X)Fv) = 
glb{y: for some term t, l(t) is in X and l(Ft) = y}; and l((3v)Fv = lub{the 
same set}, where v is any variable and X is JR, R, D or Dk ; 
(10) 
CJ is then {A: l(A) = T}. 
The model just described is transparent. (This follows from the facts (1) that 
tl = t2 holds iff l(tl) = l(t2)' and hence (2) that if tl = t2 holds then l(FtI) = 
l(Ft2) for any atomic F. The latter then serves as the base of an obvious induction 
for all F.) This means that there is full functionality for calculation, so that 
advantage can be taken of facts about nilpotence such as I- IP = 0 for simplifying 

Incomplete Differential Calculus 
49 
calculation. Elimination of 'second order' terms in a series has looked attractive 
from as long ago as Newton. The theory C J is intuitionist in the senses 
(i) that J3 is three-valued intuitionist logic, and (ii) that C J is incomplete: since if 
1( 8 = 0) = N then 1( rv 8 = 0) = F, so that neither f- 8 = 0 nor f-rv 8 = 0, although 
f-rvrv 8 = 0 & rv 81/ 2 = O. Finally note that the wholly classical two-valued theory 
of 1R can be obtained by taking 1( t1 = t2) = T if 1( t1) = 1( t2) else 1 = F. This 
shows that classical two-valued model theory can be obtained as a special case. 
4. Incomplete Differential Calculus 
In this section it is shown that Taylor's formula and polynomial differentiation 
laws hold in C J. A definition of limits can be given, and it is proved that every 
function is continuous. It is shown that the theory has some similarities with a 
corresponding part of Synthetic Differential Geometry, and the dissimilarities are 
outlined. 
Definition 5.9. A Junctional expression (abbreviated to Junction) is the result 
of replacing any term or terms inside any term, by variables. A function with 
no remaining names denoting infinitesimals is' called a real function. If J is a 
function with a single free variable v (possibly occurring more than once) then 
this is indicated by J(v). If VI and V2 are variables of any sort, then J(V1 + V2) 
is the result of replacing v by VI + V2 throughout; and if tt, t2 are any terms then 
J(t1 + t2) is the result of replacing v by t1 + t2 throughout. Similarly for -
and 
X. (E!X1, ... , Xk E R) is defined as (E!X1 E R) ... (E!Xk E R). (See Definition 
5.8 (7).) 
Proposition 5.10. If f(x) is any real function, then for all positive integers k, 
Proof. If f(x) is a real function, then by the polynomial laws of R*, for any term 
t, 1(f(t)) is identical with l(to + tIt + ... + tntn), where the ti are names denoting 
real numbers. This is clear because identities are not destroyed in passing from R* 

50 
Calculus 
to JR. So we may restrict attention to functions of the form to + tlX + ... + tnxn 
where the ti are names for real numbers so that the l(ti) are in R. We abbreviate 
these functions by 2:::'=0 tixi. Then for any such f(x) and any term t from R arid 
any term d with l(d) in some Dk, f(t + d) is to + tl(t + d) + ... + tn(t + d)n. So 
1(f(t+d)) = l(to)+ (I(tt))(I(t)+l(d)) + ... etc. The operations on the right hand 
side of the last expression obey the polynomial laws, so that sum can be computed 
using the binomial expansion. If n ~ k, the nilpotence of the element d does not 
affect this expansion, and (0:) below follows by normal arithmetic. If n > k, those 
terms of the binomial expansion of 1(f(t + d)) which contain [dk+1] as a factor are 
identical with [0]. So 1(f(t + d)) computes to 
Hence by the assignment rules for quantifiers 
f- (V x E R)(3xl ... Xk E R)(V dE Dk) (f(x + d) = f(x) + ~ Xii) 
((3) 
The next part of the argument, for uniqueness, uses the postulate that the l(ti) 
are real. We need to conjoin to ((3) the following: 
(VXk+1 ... X2k E R)((V dE Dk) (f(t + d) = f(t) + ~xk+ii) 
--+ ((tl = Xk+1)& ... &(tk = X2k)), 
where the ti are a relabelling of the coefficients of (0:). Eliminating quantifiers to 
appropriately assigned terms, we need to prove that: 
If the consequent takes the value T then Cr) holds by the tables for --+. If the 
consequent does not take the value T then there are two cases: either (i) tk = t2k 
does not hold, or (ii) some other ti = tHi does not hold. 
(case i:) Iftk = t2k does not hold, then l(tk) =I- l(t2k). Now since tk and t2k are 
real, (tk-t2k)/8 is infinite, so l(tk-t2k) = F. But by Proposition 5.4, there is some 
infinitesimal hyperreal number d such that dk / 8 is infinite; hence (tk - t2k)dk / 8 is 

Incomplete Differential Calculus 
51 
infinite. If every other ti = tk+i holds, then [til = [tk+il and ti = tk+i in R. So in 
R*, 
But the latter is infinite w.r.t. 8. So in JR, 
But also in R*, 
(f(t + d) - (f(t) + ~tk+if)) /8 
is infinite. Hence the antecedent of h) is F and h) holds by the table for ~. 
(case ii:) Otherwise, let i be the least integer for which ti = tk+i does not hold. 
Then choosing the same d, in R* we have 
f(t + d) - (f(t) + ~tk+,d') = (t, - tk+,)d' + higher powers of d. 
But the first term is infinite w.r.t. 8 if dk is. So, as in case (i), in JR, 
But in R*, 
(f(t + d) - (f(t) + E 
tk+,f) ) /8 
is infinite. Hence again the antecedent of h) is F and so h) holds. 
Consider the case k = 1. Then for any [d] in DI and any real t, 
f- f(t + d) = f(t) + tId, for some term tl with I(tl) in R. 
o 
Definition 5.11. A function g(x) is called a derivative of f(x), if for any din 
DI and any t with I(t) in R, f- f(t + d) = f(t) + d.g(t). If g(x) is a derivative of 
f(x), it is also denoted by f'(x). 
It is clear independently from classical real number calculus that there is always 
at least one derivative for each real function f(x). So we have: 

52 
Calculus 
Proposition 5.12. (Taylor Formula) For any derivative f'(x), 
f- f(t + d) = f(t) + d.f'(t); or f- (V x E R)(V dE Dl)(f(X + d) = f(x) + d.f'(x)). 
Definition 5.13. An n-th degree polynomial in the indeterminate x is any 
function of the form to + tl X + ... + tnxn, where the ti are names, that is 2::£=0 tixi. 
Proposition 5.14. (Polynomial Differentiation) If f is any polynomial of 
the form 2::£=0 tixi with real coefficients ti and f'(x) is ~ny derivative of f, then 
f- (V x E R) (f'(x) = 2::£=1 it,x,-I). 
Proof. From the Taylor formula, f- (V x E R)(f(x + d) = f(x) + d.f'(x)) where 
I(d) is in D1 • Hence I(f(t + d)) = I(f(t)) + I(d).I(f'(t)) for any term t with I(t) 
in R. But I(f(t + d)) = I (L£=o t,(t + d)i). As in Proposition 5.10, this computes 
to 1(2::£=0 titi) + (I (2::£=1 C) t,ti-l) .I( d)) + (I (2::£=2 G) t,t'-2) .I( d2)) + higher 
powers of d. Since I(d2) = I(d3 ) = ... = [0], all of these can be dropped. Thus we 
have 
I(f(t + d)) = I(f(t)) + (I(d).I(f'(t))) 
and also 
= I(f(t)) + (I(d).I (~G) titi-l)). 
So since subtraction is one of the congruence operations, 
I(d).I(f'(t)) = I(d).I (~G) titi-l). 
But since I(d) is in Dl and I(t) and I(ti) are in R, this can only happen if 
I(f'(t)) = I (~G) tit'-I) . 
But t was arbitrarily chosen from R. Hence f- (V x E R) (f'( x) = 2::£=1 itixi- 1). 0 
Definition 5.15. 
(1) 
Li-Ttf(x) = tl =df (V dE D)(f(t + d) = tl V (::Jd1 E D)(f(t + d) - t1 = dd) 
(2) 
f is continuous at t =df lim f( x) = f( t) 
x-t 
(3) f is continuous =df (V x E R) (f is continuous at x). 

Incomplete Differential Calculus 
53 
A definition of one sided limits can be given, but that is not done here because 
of the following proposition. (See also Chapter 6.) It is also noted that in the above 
definition of limit, the case where not f- f(t) = tl does not arise, as the following 
proposition shows. 
Proposition 5.16. For every real function f(x), f- f is continuous. 
Proof. It has to be proved, for every real term t, that: 
f- (V dE D)(J(t + d) = f(t) V (3dl E D)(f(t + d) - f(t) = dl )). But it follows 
from Proposition 5.10 that f- (V d E Dk)(J(t + d) = f(t) + tId + ... + tkdk). If 
not all the real ti are = 0, then f- f( t + d) - f( t) = tId + ... + tkdk. It is obvious 
that raising the RHS to the power k is not (considered as a hyperreal number) 
infinitesimal w.r.t. 6 (since its first term is not); while raising the RHS to the 
power k + 1 is infinitesimal w.r.t. 6 (since each term is). Hence the RHS is in 
Dk. Thus f- (3dl E D)(J(t + d) - f(t) = dt}. The result follows by disjoining the 
alternatives and universal generalisation. 
o 
Synthetic Differential Geometry (SDG), as expounded in Kock [18] (see also 
Bell [3]), is likewise an incomplete theory, with neither 6 = 0 nor rv 6 = 0 holding. 
The theory of [18] has nilpotent elements of all degrees, while the theory of [3] 
concentrates on D I . Neither proceeds from a construction on the classical hyperreal 
numbers, nor uses three valued model theory. In these theories, also, every function 
is continuous. The method of obtaining derivatives from the Taylor formula as in 
Proposition 5.12 is similar to that in [18], and is a variant of the usual classical 
treatment. Like SDG, Propositions 5.10 and 5.14 use the calculatory advantages of 
nilpotent elements, since these ensure that higher order differentials can ultimately 
be ignored. 
The case x = 0 of Proposition 5.10 is Axiom I' of [18], with the proviso that R 
in Proposition 5.10 is replaced by the whole domain there. If however R is replaced 
by IR in Proposition 5.10 then it fails, as follows. Choose any dl in DI and let f(x) 
be the function dIx. Then certainly f- (3x E R)(V dE DI)(J(d) = f(O + xd)), the 

54 
Calculus 
x in question being d1• However, this x is not unique: for any other d2 in D we 
have I- (\I d E D1)( d.d2 = d.d1 = 0) while not I- d1 = d2 ; so that the antecedent of 
(\I dE D1)(f(d) = f(0)+d.d2) --t d1 = d2 holds while the consequent does not hold. 
Indeed, f could even have a noninfinitesimal coefficient, f( x) = (r + 8)x say. For 
then the coefficient fails to be unique, since I- (\I x E Dd((5 + 8)d = 0 = (5 + 25)d) 
while not I- 5 + 5 = 5 + 28. Thus the present theory is a theory of functions with 
real slopes as in classical nonstandard analysis. 
The essential difference with SDC is that the D1 part of the domain is postulated 
in SDC to contain elements d1, d2 such that not I- d1 d2 = 0, while in the present 
model this is not so (Proposition 5.3(2)). Correspondingly there fails the SDC 
Cancellation Principle (\I dE D1)(d.t1 =d.t2) --t t1 =t2; for example when l(t1) = [5] 
and l(t2) = [28] then the antecedent is T and the consequent is N. However, the 
Cancellation Principle holds for cases where the difference between l(tt) and l(t2) 
is infinite w.r.t. 8 if they are different at all, such as the real numbers. For example, 
I- (\I X1X2 E R)((\I dE Dd(d.X1 = d.X2) --t Xl = X2)' 
The failure of the Law of Excluded Middle (LEM) is of interest. The account of 
[18] links it to the holding of the Cancellation Principle and the continuity of every 
function. However in the present theory it is rather independent of the functional 
part of the construction, since the latter can also produce a classical two-valued 
model (end of section 3). The same point pertains to the inconsistent theory of the 
next section. This does not show that the 'correct' description is that of classical 
logic, however; to the contrary it suggests that fUllctionality is mathematically prior 
to sentential logic. 
SDC in [18] uses the mathematical machinery of Cartesian closed categories, 
which is considerably stronger than that of equational theories. On the other 
hand there is some simplicity in presenting the ideas of incompleteness, nilpotence, 
differentiability, limits, continuity etc. within the framework of nonclassical model 
theory. Also, the present approach permits investigation of similar theories with 
different nonclassical background logics (see section 5). Another point is that while 

Inconsistent Differential Calculus 
55 
[18] maintains that SDG is an essentially geometric treatment of analysis, it is 
interesting how close one can get to SDG with resources merely from algebraic 
number theory and model theory. 
5. Inconsistent Differential Calculus 
Definition 5.17. The theory C R is obtained by changing the definition of 
C J in the following ways (1) background logic is RM3 with elements {F, B, T} 
and designated elements V = {B, T}, (2) l(tl = t2) = T if tl = t2 considered as 
hyperreal numbers, else l(tl = t2) = B if l(tl) = 1(t2)' else l(tl = t2) = F. 
There are a number of other options here, for example background logic P3 
(this inconsistent theory can be called C P; see next two chapters), or dropping 
the first clause of (2). The latter produces a transparent theory, whereas CR is 
functional but not transparent. (Proof of functionality: By inspection, tl = t2 holds 
iff l(tl) = 1(t2). But [] is a congruence, so if 1(tl) = 1(t2) then l(t(tl)) = 1(t(t2)). 
Hence if t(tl) = t3 holds then l(t(tl)) = 1(t3), so that 1(t(t2)) = 1(t3)' and so 
t( t2) = t3 holds. Disproof of transparency: f- {)2 = 0, but while f- ~ 82 = 0, neither 
f-
~ ° = ° nor f-
~ 82 = 82 .) 
This means that on the one hand calculations 
using the advantages of f- 82 = ° can be carried out, while on the other hand one 
does not have to submit to f- ~ t = t for any term t, an improvement on earlier 
chapters. The loss of transparency does not appear a serious disadvantage: while it 
changes the logical properties of the theory, particularly which theories it extends, 
it does not affect calculation. Now it can be shown that the main Propositions of 
the incomplete theory can be reproved for the inconsistent theory. 
Proposition 5.18. If f(x) is any real function, then for every positive integer 
k, I- (VxER) (E!Xl ... xkER) (VdEDk) (i(x + d)=f(x)+Xld+ ... +xkdk). 
Proof. The proof that l(1(t + d)) computes to (0:) as in Proposition 5.10, is 
identical. To prove uniqueness, we need to prove (,). If the consequent of (,) is T, 
then b) holds. And for real coefficients ti,tHi, one never has l(t, = tHi) = B. 

56 
Calculus 
Hence consider the case I(t, = tk+i) = F. 
Then I(ti) =f:. I(tk+i). 
But also 
(t, - t k+i) / 8 considered as a hyperreal number is infinite, since the numerator is real 
and nonzero. Hence as in Proposition 5.10, for some d with [d] in Dk, di(ti - tk+i)/8 
is noninfinitesimal. So I(dit,) =f:. I(d'tk+i), and the antecedent of (-r) is F as re-
quired. 
o 
Proposition 5.19. If f is any polynomial of the form L~o t,x' with real 
coefficients ti, then f- (\I x E R) (J'(x) = L~=l itiXi-l). 
Proof. Similar to Proposition 5.14. 
o 
Proposition 5.20. For every real function f, f- f is continuous. 
Proof. Similar to Proposition 5.16. 
o 
To repeat an earlier point, inconsistent calculus is not being recommended as 
superior or truer, though its nilpotent elements have some of the calculatory ad-
vantages of SDG. The aim is only to show that it exists, that inconsistency permits 
a reasonable amount of calculus without collapse, and hopefully that inconsistent 
theories can be of mathematical interest. 
6. Integration 
This can be done in a similar way to the classical nonstandard account in 
Keisler [17]. The theory following is not much more complex than Keisler's; but on 
the other hand nilpotent elements appear not to convey any particular advantage, 
unlike in the case of differentiation. If there are any advantages at all, they may be 
that nilpotent elements allow 'smearing out zero' and a theory of delta functions 
as in Chapter 7. 
Definition 5.21. (Keisler) Let f(x) be a real function on an interval I. An 
area function for f is a two placed function A : R x R -+ R satisfying (i) Addition 
Property A(a,b) = A(a, c) + A(c,b) for all a :s; c :s; b in I, and (ii) Rectangle 

Integration 
57 
Property m(b - a) :5 A(a, b) :5 M(b - a) for all a :5 b in I, where m = min f on I 
and M = maxf on I. The finite Riemann Sum 2:~ f(x)L1x is defined to be: 
b 
L:f(x)L1x =df f(xo)L1x + f(Xl)L1x + ... + f(Xn-l)L1X + f(xn)(b - xn), 
a 
where L1x is any positive real number, n is the maximum integer such that 
a + nL1x :5 b, and Xo = a, Xl = X + L1x, ... , Xn = X + nL1x. The infinite Rie-
mann sum 2:~ f(x)dx, where dx is any nonzero infinitesimal, is the nonstand,ard 
natural extension of the finite Riemann sum. Intuitively, it is the same sum as the 
finite sum except that there are an infinite number of terms, that is n becomes the 
largest hyperinteger such that a + ndx :5 b. The definite integral of f from a to b 
lb f(x)dx is the standard part of the infinite Riemann sum. 
That these are well defined follows from the next Proposition. 
Proposition 5.22. (Keisler) 
(1) 
The infinite Riemannian sum is always a finite hyperreal number. 
(2) 
The definite integral from a to b is independent of the size of the (nonzero) 
infinitesimal dx. 
(3) 
The definite integral of f from a to b is the unique area function for f. 
(4) 
(i) l c.dx = c.(b - a) 
(ii) l 
c.f(x)dx = c·l f(x)dx 
(iii) lU+g)dx= lfdx + 19dx 
(iv) f:5 9 implies l 
fdx :5l gdx. 
(5) 
l 
J'(x)dx = f(b) - f(a). 
0 
Moving to C R, functional expressions can be generalised to any string in which 
x is the sole variable, with the proviso that the interpretation I(string) is a partial 
function on the domain and I(string(a)) = I(string)(I(a)). Now it is clear that 
(1 )-( 5) above hold for all infinitesimals d or dx, so in particular they hold for all 
infinitesimals d such that not rCR d = O. But passing to CR preserves functional 

58 
Calculus 
equality for functions restricted to such infinitesimals, provided that reference to 
hyperintegers is restricted to the metalanguage (infinitesimals such as 62 behave 
like zero in virtue of I- 62 = o ,plus functionality). Hence we have 
Proposition 5.22. (1)-(5) of the previous proposition hold of CR. 
0 
Further aspects of integration, such as indefinite ip.tegrals, the Second Funda-
mental Theorem, etc. can be dealt with in a similar way. In the special case of 
polynomial integration anti derivatives are easy to find directly, and so (1 )-(5) can 
be verified directly. 
7. Conclusion 
The inconsistent theory here can be regarded as yet another approach to the idea 
of an 'infinitesimal microscope' (see [17],[54],[55]). A microscope with 'resolving 
power' 6 can be said to be a theory which inconsistently identifies with zero and one 
another all quantities which are infinitesimal w.r.t. o. One is unable to distinguish 
between quantities below this 'order of infinitesimality' or 'order of relative identity'; 
they have all one another's properties in common. 
Further directions in which these ideas might be developed include inconsistent 
superreals (see [55]), inconsistent polynomial rings in one or more indeterminates, 
and introducing set membership (see Chapter 10). Finally, perhaps the present 
theories satisfy some of the inconsistent intuitions of the classical analysts; but 
even if not, inconsistent theories should be investigated. 

CHAPTER 6: INCONSISTENT CONTINUOUS 
FUNCTIONS 
1. Introduction 
The idea that motion or change is an inconsistent process has, as is well known, a 
long history. Recent nice work by Graham Priest [46] suggests that an inconsistent 
account of motion and change is at least possible. It is a further matter whether 
it is true; and despite Priest's arguments, there does not seem to be a compelling 
reason for rejecting the existing consistent account from classical physics, which is 
mathematically both simple and elegant. Priest argues that the classical account 
has it that motion is being in different places at different times; whereas what he 
wants is an intrinsic account of motion according to which an instantaneous state 
ought to be unambiguously change or non change, independently of its (distance) 
relations to other states. Against this, one is inclined to argue that the relations are 
nonetheless present; that an account in which the relations alone carry the change 
is therefore inevitably simpler; and that being in different places at different times 
is surely necessary for motion, and more importantly (at least given a positive 
definite metric) sufficient as well. 
As part of his, account, Priest appeals to the Leibniz Continuity Condition 
(Lee). This condition is that whatever holds throughout an interval holds at its 
limits, and there is evidence that Leibniz held it. Now there is a technical problem 
with the principle as thus stated. Since any strictly monotonic continuous function 
takes throughout any interval values less than its value at the right hand endpoint 
of the interval, then applying the Lee gives that the function takes a value both 
less than and equal to itself at the endpoint. But since any point is the endpoint 
of some such interval, the function is both less than and equal to itself at all points 
(and greater than itself at all points as well, since whatever is greater than itself is 
less than itself as well, by symmetry). 
Now, while Priest appeals to the Lee, not much of his account depends on it, 

60 
Inconsistent Continuous Functions 
I think. On the other hand, the LCC should not be dismissed too quickly. The 
above problem depends on applying the LCC to the relation 'less than'. But not 
so much harm ensues if the LCC is applied only to equations, as we see in this 
chapter. In other words, it can be argued that the correct sphere of application 
of the LCC is at the fundamental level of being expressed by the basic physical 
Laws of Nature, and laws and boundary conditions of dynamical systems, since all 
of these are expressed in functional-equational form. Indeed, the application of the 
LCC to at least some discontinuous functions has the consequence that they can 
be treated as inconsistently continuous, in a manner outlined in this chapter; and 
that the natural logic arising from them is closed set logic. 
The LCC serves to motivate the following account; however it is stressed that the 
theory stands independently of the LCC. We are concerned here with a special case, 
namely certain functions which from a classical point of view are not everywhere 
differentiable, but which can from an inconsistent point of view be regarded as 
having continuous derivatives. We see that the inconsistent derivative of such 
functions is continuous, given a natural extension of the meaning of the latter. 
Differentiating these in turn leads to delta functions, and in the next chapter an 
inconsistent account of these is proposed. 
2. Functionality 
Consider the continuous function g(t) = klt for all real numbers t s:; 0 and 
g(t) = k2t for all t > 0, where kl and k2 are classically different real numbers. 
The usual story about its derivative is that g'(t) = kl for all t < 0, and g'(t) = k2 
for all t > 0, but that g'(O) does not exist; since the left hand limit of g(8t)/8t 
as 8t --+ 0- is kt, while the right hand limit as 8t --+ 0+ is k2' and kl =I- k2. 
Inconsistently, however, there is no particular reason not to allow both rv kl = k2 
and also kl = k2. The latter kl = k2 would ensure both that LH derivative=RH 
derivative so that 9 is differentiable at t = 0, and also that the derivative function, 
is continuous at t = 0 and thus continuous everywhere. 

Functionality 
61 
Considering then the 'derivative function' f(t) = kl for all t :::; 0 and f(t) = k2 
for all t ;:::: 0, we have that f(O) = kl and f(O) = k2 ; and, since f is a function, 
also kl = k2 at t = o. For this to amount to an inconsistency, it must also be that 
'" kl = k2 at t = o. So a first consideration should be that enough of the arithmetic 
of the real numbers holds in the space of values of f at t = 0, that", kl = k2 holds. 
One might insist that a necessary condition on any account which represents the 
oddity of what is happening at t = 0, be that", kl = k2 represents the norm, with 
kl = k2 an extra abnormality at t = O. (Even the orthodox account recognizes 
abnormality after a fashion, in that declaring that g' does not exist at t = 0 is a 
kind of incompleteness.) 
It is known, however, that if kl = k2 where classically these are distinct real 
numbers, then there follows by purely {+, -, x, /} substitutions in classical real 
number identities, the undesirable conclusion that any real number a is identical 
with every other real number b. (Proof: 
kl - kl = kl - k1 . Substituting k2 
for k1, kl - kl = k2 - k1. 
Classically, LHS = 0; so 0 = k2 - k1. 
Classically 
((k2 - k1) x (b - a))j(k2 - k1) = ((k2 - kd X (b - a))j(k2 - k1). Substituting in 
LHS, (0 X (b - a))j(k2 - k1) = ((k2 - k1 ) X (b - a))j(k2 - k1). Classically LHS = 0 
and RHS = b - a, so 0 = b - a. Classically a + (b - a) = a + (b - a), so substituting 
o for b - a in LHS, a + 0 = a + (b - a). Classically LHS = a and RHS = b, so a = b.) 
Hence whatever is happening in the space of values of f at t = 0 has a reduced 
functional structure compared with that of the full field structure at t other than 
zero, or else the value space would have no structure at all at t = o. The latter in 
turn would make it impossible to distinguish at t = 0 between an inconsistent jump 
from kl to k2 and an inconsistent jump to any other k3 • One of the advantages of 
the present account is that this distinction can be sustained to a fair degree. 
In the above argument, once one gets to 0 = k2 - kI, if one then allows 'scale 
changes' by multiplying by a real number c, then one gets 0 = (k2 - k1 ) x c which 
spreads rapidly to a = b. So it is reasonable to say that the value space at t = 0 
lacks a multiplicative structure. But as we see there is no particular reason not to 

62 
Inconsistent Continuous )functions 
allow the extra additive consequences of 0 = k2 - ki . 
A natural account exploits the fact that for any real number r there is· a 
unique integer a and a unique real number b such that r = a.lk2 -
kil + band 
o :::; b < Ik2 - kil. So it is proposed to take the map h : R --+ [0, Ik2 - kII) with 
h(a.lk2 - kil + b) = bj and then at t = 0 to identify real-valued quantities c and d 
if h(c) = h(d). This produces 0 = k2 - ki and ki = k2 among other things. One 
can think of the space of values of f as undergoing an 'instantaneous slip' from 
ki to k2 at t = o. Another analogy is for an 'instantaneous cylindrification' of the 
value space, in which the whole positive and negative axes are wound respectively 
clockwise and anticlockwise around the finite halfopen interval [0, Ik2 - kII). 
Now the halfopen interval [0, Ik2 - kII) has a natural additive structure, defined 
by a+'b =df h(a+b), the latter + being real number sum. It is known that +' so de-
fined is a function on [0, Ik2 - kII). This makes h an additive group homomorphism, 
and it is seen later that in the inconsistent theory holding at t = 0, functionality of 
{ +, - } is preserved. Coming at it from another direction, let a ~ b =df a - b is an 
integral multiple of Ik2 - kII, where a and b are real numbers. It is not difficult to 
prove that ~ is a congruence w.r.t. addition ([4], p.148). Hence the map h : r --+ 
(the unique b such that r ~ band 0 :::; b < Ik2 - kII) takes the additive group of 
real numbers to the additive group on [0, Ik2 - kII) with a +' b =df h(a + b) and 
-'a =df Ik2 - kII- a. 
It is obviously important that there be at least some functions such as {+, -} in 
the value space of the derivative functionj otherwise it has no structure save identi-
ties and their denials. Quite a lot is definable in the additive group, for example all 
integer multiplications. However the corresponding definition of unrestricted multi-
plication fails of functionality, and so multiplication is left 'undefined' at t = O. (In 
the next section this is dealt with logically using incompleteness.) This looks bad 
only if one forgets the origin of differentiation in the gradients of a scalar field, or 
quantity spaces or phase spaces. There, one might insist, congruences of difference, 
or metrical distance on a quantity scale, are absolute. This defines 'twice, thrice, 

Logic 
63 
... the distance' on the difference as absolute. On the other hand, expansion or con-
traction of the value space by multiplying quantities by an un-unitted real number 
is merely a scale change and not a quantity change. That arithmetical laws might 
be different from time-to-time is easier intuitively to attribute to quantity spaces 
than to (apparently) universal real numbers. But it is not really an extra problem 
to deal formally with the value space of f as real numbers, rather than unitted 
quantities as here. One simply treats the situation formally as here, forgetting the 
implicit units following the values of g, g' and f. 
3. Logic 
To make this logically more precise, a language for describing the value space 
at various t and a background logic are needed. In the following it is convenient 
to think of the variable t of differentiation as ranging over times in accord with 
dynamical systems. It is seen later that the topology of the dynamical system 
described by the inconsistent function f(t) provides its own logic. 
Take as a language names for all real numbers, term forming operators 
{+, -, x, /}, and a single binary predicate =. 
As background logic take the 
logic P J4 (Definition 2.9), with four values {F, N, B, T} and designated values 
V' = {B, T}. An additive term is one containing no occurrences of {x, /}. Atomic 
sentences are assigned values by a function 1 : .c x Time ---+ {F, N, T, B} in accor-
dance with 
(1) 
For any time t other than 0 and any terms t1 , t2, 1(tl = t2, t) = T if tl = t2 is 
true in classical real number theory, else 1(tl = t2, t) = F. 
(2) If tl and t2 are both additive terms then 
(2.1) 1( tl = t2, 0) = T if tl = t2 is true in classical real number theory; and 
(2.2) 1(tl = t2, 0) = B if tl and t2 are classically distinct real numbers but 
h(tl) = h(t2), while 1(tl = t2, 0) = F if h(td -I h(t2). 
(3) If tl and t2 are not both additive terms then 1(tl = t2, 0) = N. 
Values for all nonatomic sentences and a corresponding theory for each t are then 

64 
Inconsistent Continuous Functions 
determined as in Definition 2.9. 
Proposition 6.1. I determines a functional theory at all times. 
Proof. It is obvious that this is so (relative to the functionality of the classical 
theory of the real numbers) at times other than t = 0, since the quantity space 
(space of values of f) behaves identically with the real numbers at those times. So 
suppose time= ° and let tl = t2 hold. That is l(tl = t2,0) E {B,T}; and so by 
construction of I both tl and t2 are additive. Therefore any atomic sentence Ftl 
is additive iff Ft2 is additive. As usual it suffices to prove the proposition for only 
one replacement of tl by h. If neither Ftl nor Fh is additive then neither hold 
by construction of I. If both are additive then let Ftl hold and be of the form 
t(tl) = t3, so that Ft2 is t(t2) = t3. Now since t(tl) = h holds, h(t(tl)) = h(t3). 
But since tl = t2 holds, h(tl) = h(t2). So by the fact that +' and -' are functions 
on [0, Ik2 - kll), h(t(t2)) = h(t(tl)); and since the latter = h(t3), Ft2 holds. If Ftl 
does not hold, then h(t(tl)) =f:. h(t3); whence by h(td = h(t2), h(t(t2)) =f:. h(t3), 
so that Ft2 does not hold. The argument is similar if Ftl is t3 = t(tl). Hence I 
determines a functional theory at time= ° 
also. 
o 
Proposition 6.2. The inconsistent zero degree theory determined at t = ° 
extends the additive part of classical real number theory (Re). 
Proof. By induction on the number of occurrences of {"', &, \f} in an additive 
sentence A, that (i) if A is true in Re then I(A,O) = T and (ii) if A is false in Re 
then I(A,O) E {F,B}. 
(Base:) Clear by construction of I. 
(",clause (i):) If '" A is true in Re then A is false in Re; so by inductive hypothesis 
(ii) I(A,O) E {F,B}, so 1(", A,O) = T. 
(",clause (ii):) If '" A is false in Re then A is true in Re; so by inductive hypothesis 
(i) I(A,O) = T, so 1(", A,O) = F E {F,B}. 
(&clause (i):) If C&D is true in Re then both C and D are true in Re so by 
inductive hypothesis (i) I(C,O) = I(D,O) = T, so I(C&D,O) = T. 

Logic 
65 
(&clause (ii):) If C&D is false in Re then one or both of C, D is false in Re. Let C 
be false. By inductive hypothesis (i) I(C, 0) E {F, B}, so that I(C&D, 0) E {F, B}. 
(Vclause (i):) If (Vx)Fx is true in Re then Ftl is true in Re for every name tl. By 
inductive hypothesis (i) I(Ftl) = T, so that I((Vx)Fx, O) = T. 
(Vclause (ii):) If (Vx)Fx is false in Re then Ftl is false in Re for some name tl. 
By inductive hypothesis (ii) I(FtbO) E {F,B}, so that I((Vx)Fx, 0) E {F,B}. 0 
Summarising, the theory describing the value space of f and g' is consistent 
complete Re at times other than t = 0. At t = 0, the theory in its additive part 
is inconsistent, complete and contains Re. In its nonadditive part it is incomplete, 
and overall it is functional. The additive part of Re holds at all times, and at the 
singularity t = ° 
the extra additive propositions ° = k2 - kl' kl = k2, kl + 1 = k2 + 1, 
etc. hold, making things inconsistent at that time. 
Consider any continuous function g(t) with the property that at all but a finite 
set {ti : 1 :"::: i :"::: n} of times/points 9 is differentiable; and that for all the ti, left and 
right derivatives are defined (but classically unequal). This determines a closed-
set topological space on the real numbers whose boundaries are the singletons {t;} 
and whose closed sets have the basis [-00, tl], [tb t2], ••• , [tn-I, tn], [tn' +00]. So one 
can identify the derivative function g' with a map from the set of times with the 
closed set topology to (the set of P J 4-theories of 1: x the real numbers), with the 
following two provisos: 
(1) if {t} is not a boundary then g'(t) = (Re, the classical derivative of gat t); 
(2) if {t} is a boundary then g'(t) = (Tht, the left hand derivative at t), where Tht 
is the additively inconsistent multiplicatively incomplete theory described above. 
Note that it would be equivalent if the right hand derivative were used instead; 
since in Tht , LH derivative = RH derivative. The continuous function 9 can itself 
be regarded as such a map, which shows that there is a proper generalisation here. 
For g, in which there are no boundaries, the closed set topology is just {R, A}; 
and for all t, g(t) = (Re, the classical value of 9 at t). For any such function g, 9 
is differentiable at t if g'(t) is defined; which it is at every t, so 9 is differentiable 

66 
Inconsistent Continuous Functions 
everywhere and its derivative is g'. Finally, a function is continuous at t if the LH 
limit at t = the RH limit at t = the value of the function at t. But this holds for 
g' at all t. Hence g' is continuous and 9 has a continuous derivative. 
It might be wondered whether the derivative g'(O) should contain information 
about whether 9 is increasing, decreasing, or stationary at t = O. This would 
seem to need an absolute distinction between positive and negative values of the 
derivative at t = 0; though since such a distinction could be programmed, no 
doubt there is functionality at some level. But in any case it isn't clear that 
there are straightforward intuitions about whether 9 is increasing if according to 
its LH derivative it is increasing but according to its RH derivative it is decreasing. 
(Stationary?) Perhaps the only cases where intuition gives a lead are when 9 is 
increasing according to both LH and RH derivatives, or decreasing according to 
both. But this conception already imports classical LH and RH neighbourhoods of 
t = O. Thus one might say that the inconsistent account describes the 'magnitude' 
of the rate of change of g, an 'instantaneous slip' from kl to k2 ; while the direction 
of change, where it is meaningful at all, is a matter of neighbourhoods. 
A function 'defines its own logic' in that it is associated with a closed set topol-
ogy which constitutes a paraconsistent logic (see Chapter 11). The propositions of 
the logic are closed sets of times at which various additive atomic equations hold. 
The negation of an additive proposition holds at the closure of the set-theoretic 
complement of times at which the proposition holds, so an additive proposition 
and its negation hold at the boundary. Multiplicative (nonadditive) propositions, 
however, hold only on open sets and thus fail to hold at the boundaries, as expected. 
The composite open-closed-boundary-space is a Boolean algebra with open set (in-
tuitionist) and closed set (paraconsistent) subalgebras or sublogics, which describe 
the values of multiplicative and additive propositions respectively. 

CHAPTER 7: THE DELTA FUNCTION 
1. Introduction 
In Chapter 6, differentiating the function g(t) = kIt for all t ::::; 0 and g(t) = k2t 
for all t ::::: 0, where kI and k2 are classically distinct real numbers, led to the 
inconsistent continuous function f(t) = g'(t) = kI for all t ::::; 0 and f(t) = k2 
for all t ::::: o. If a dynamic system is described by g(t), then the derivative takes 
an instantaneous jump at t = o. That it is instantaneous rather than taking an 
infinitesimal amount of time, is represented by the inconsistent continuity. The aim 
in this chapter is to differentiate one step further, finding f'(t). The new derivative 
can naturally be thought of as (k2 -
kd.~(t), where ~(t) has the two properties (i) 
~(t) = 0 for all t =j:. 0, and (ii) 1:
00 ~(t)dt = 1. Property (ii) means that a constant 
times the integral recovers the precise amount of the jump from kI to k2 • The delta 
function occupies an interesting niche in the history of mathematics. Long regarded 
as problematic but useful in elementary quantum theory and quantum field theory, 
it was eventually 'solved' in Schwartz' Theory of Distributions; but at the cost of a 
considerable increase in complexity, as well as an increase in the size of the function 
space for quantum mechanics. 
One can produce an account of something close to the delta function within 
classical nonstandard analysis. Considering the t-axis (the real line) and its value 
space as augmented by infinitesimals and their reciprocals the infinite numbers, 
one can draw a triangle with base 28 and height 1/8. The area of this triangle is 
(base x height) /2 = 1. The triangle is described by the function ~I (t) = 0 for all t 
with It I ::::: 8, ~I (t) = (1/ 82 ).t + (1/8) for -8 ::::; t ::::; 0, and ~I( t) = (-1/ 82).t + (1/8) 
for 0 ::::; t ::::; 8. The slopes of the sides are I/P for -8 ::::; t ::::; 0 and -1/82 for 
o ::::; t ::::; 8. Property (i) for the delta function, namely ~(t) = 0 for all t =j:. 0, is not 
quite right here. But it is nearly right, since ~l(t) = 0 for all real t =j:. o. Property 
(ii) for ~1 follows straightforwardly from any reasonable account of the integral as 
an area function, given the area under the triangle as described. This account of 

68 
The Delta Function 
the delta function differs from Robinson's approach in nonstandard analysis, which 
is more like a nonstandard account of the theory of distributions, in keeping with 
Robinson's operationist attitude to infinitesimals. But it is a reasonable'itccount 
all the same. 
Nevertheless, it is possible to exploit inconsistency to give an account where 
~(t) = 0 for all nonzero t; and which more reasonably gives an instantaneous 
account of the change in f(t) from kl to k2• Furthermore it is possible to give sense 
to the idea that the rate of change is different in an instantaneous jump from kl to 
k2, from an instantaneous jump from kl to k3 • 
2. Functionality 
In Chapter 5 the reciprocals of infinitesimals were avoided because they give 
problems with functionality. But these problems are not quite so insurmountable. It 
is shown in this chapter that a construction can be given wherein total functionality 
fails but some partial and reasonable control of functionality remains. Further, the 
area of failure of functionality has a reasonable motivation. In turn, this leads to 
an inconsistent account of the delta function. 
First, introduce the concepts of 'the bandwidth of zero' and 'the representative 
of zero'. In Chapter 5 certain infinitesimals were inconsistently identified with zero, 
while others were consistently nonzero. One can think of zero as 'smeared out' over 
the range or bandwidth of the former. A positive infinitesimal {j is taken as the 
bandwidth of zero, and {j2 is taken as the representative of zero. The idea is that 
all and only those numbers infinitesimal w.r.t. {j are inconsistently identified with 
zero, while {j2 represents zero for the purposes of multiplication. The bandwidth of 
zero gives the equivalence relation ~{j of Chapter 5. 

Functionality 
69 
Definition 7.1. The theory DR is given by 
(1) 
background logic RM3 
(2) 
names for every hyperreal number finite or infinitesimal w.r.t. 1/02 , that is 
names for all numbers x such that x.02 is finite or infinitesimal 
(3) 
term-forming operators {+,-, x,/} 
(4.1) 
If t is any name then l(t) = ttl 
(4.2) 
1(+) and 1( -) are addition and subtraction on the set of equivalence classes 
of numbers finite or infinitesimal w.r.t. 1/02 
(4.3) 
For multiplication, if tl and t2 are terms with [tl] = [0], then l(tl x t2) = 
l(t2 x tl) = [the representative of zero.t2] = [82.t2]. (Note that here x is the 
term forming operator and . is multiplication between hyperreal numbers.) 
(4.4) 
If neither [tl] = [0] nor [t2] = [0] then: (4.4.1) if not both ([tl] is infinite 
and [t2] is infinite), then l(tl x t2) = [tl.t2]; else (4.4.2) if both [tl] and [t2] 
are infinite, then l(tl x t2 ) is not defined. 
(5) 
l(tl = t2) = T if tl = t2, l(tl = t2) = B if tl =I t2 but l(tl) = l(t2), else 
l(tl = t2 ) = F. 
The notion of infinitude of equivalence classes is well defined in that every 
member is an infinite hyperreal number. Similarly for middlesized and infinitesimal 
numbers. Addition and subtraction of numbers finite or infinitesimal w.r.t. 1/02 
remain noninfinite w.r.t. 1/02 , so there is no need to restrict these operations. 
Division and reciprocation are set aside for a while. 
Proposition 7.2. (1) For any term t, f- t x 0 = 0 iff t.o is infinitesimal. (2) If 
t is noninfinite, then f- t x 0 = o. 
Proof. (1) f- t x 0 = 0 iff l(t x 0 = 0) E {B,T} iff l(t x 0) = 1(0). Now 
l(t x 0) = [82.t] and 1(0) = [0]. But [82.t] = [0] iff 02.t is infinitesimal w.r.t. 0, that 
is iff 02.t/O is infinitesimal, iff t.o is infinitesimal. (2) If tis noninfinite then t.o is 
infinitesimal; then apply (1). 
0 
Thus the use of a representative of zero does not disturb the 'nullifying' property 
of multiplication by zero of noninfinite numbers (e.g. reals). Similarly some but not 

70 
The Delta Function 
all infinite numbers with names in the theory are nullified by zero. For example, let 
H be the name of the infinite number which is the reciprocal of 62 in the classical 
hyperreals, let HI be the name of 2/62, let H2 be the name of 1/6, and let H3 be 
the name of 1/62/ 3• All these names occur in the theory since H162 is finite. But 
f- H x 0 = 1 and f- HI X 0 = 2 and f- H2 X 0 = 6 and f- H3 x 0 = 0, (though not 
f- H2 X 0 = 0, since 6/6 is not infinitesimal). 
As was seen in Chapter 5, multiplication of noninfinite numbers by noninfinite 
numbers is functional. But this is not in general true of multiplication of noninfinite 
numbers by infinite numbers. For example, f- 5 = 5 + 62 and f- H = H + 62 but not 
f- 5 x H = (5 + 62) x (H + 62) nor even f- 5 x H = (5 + 62) x H. This is because 
[(5 + 62).H] = [(5.H) + (62.H)] = [(5.H) + 1] -# [5.H], so that 1((5 + 62) x H) -# 
1(5 x H). Multiplication is however perfectly well-defined in the theory. The failure 
of functionality at this point does not seem particularly troublesome or bad. It is 
related to resolution of the smearing of zero, in that multiplication of the zero 
difference between two numbers by a sufficiently large infinite number can produce 
a nonzero (though possibly still infinitesimal) difference. We also have: 
Proposition 7.3. If l(tl x t2) is defined, then it is noninfinite w.r.t. 1/62 ; 
similarly for addition and subtraction. 
Proof. Names are restricted to numbers which are noninfinite w.r.t. 1/62 • The 
sum and difference of any such numbers are likewise restricted; while multiplication 
is defined only when at least one number is finite, and the product of a finite number 
by one noninfini te w.r. t. 1/62 is likewise. 
D 
Reciprocals and division can be added to the theory, for example by setting 
l(t-1) = [rl] for all t such that neither 6.t nor 6/t is infinite (e.g. all reals, 61/ 2, 
6-1/2, etc.). This gives l(t x t-1) = [t.t-1] = [1], thus f- t x t-1 = 1. However 
reciprocation is not everywhere functional. For example, let tl = 6 and t2 = 6 + 62. 
Then f- tl = t2; but (tll-t22)/6 = tll.t21(t2-tl)/6 = W+63tl.62/6 = 1/(6+62) 
which is not infinitesimal, so that not f- tIl = t22. Reciprocation of small enough 

Functionality 
71 
nonzero numbers thus 'unsmears identity'. As usual, however, reciprocation is 
functional on the middlesized numbers: if f- tl = t2 and both are middlesized; then 
since (tIl - t;1)/6 = (tlt2)-1.(t2 - tl)/6 and the latter is infinitesimal, so is the 
former. 
Summarising, the theory is functional for {+, -}; and functional for multipli-
cation where it is desirable, on middlesized numbers. Elsewhere, identities are 
unsmeared by multiplication by large enough numbers. Multiplication by zero nul-
lifies middlesized numbers, as well as all infinitesimals and some infinite numbers. 
Multiplication of zero by big enough numbers unsmears the zero to produce a 
product which is at most middlesized, and which depends on the size of the infinite 
number. There is no biggest infinite number but there is a biggest order of size, in 
that numbers infinite w.r.t. 1/62 do not exist. 
The latter dependency can be exploited in an account of derivatives of incon-
sistent continuous functions. 
Definition 7.4. 
~(t) is the function from {x : x is hyperreal and x.62 is 
noninfinite} to itself; with the property that ~(t) = 0 if t = 0 does not hold, else 
~(t) = H. 
To find the area function for ~ in DR, draw at zero a rectangle of base zero 
units (that is a vertical line above zero) with height H. Take the infinite Riemann 
sum over the interval [a, b] including 0 w.r.t. the partition determined by the 
infinitesimal dt = 62• The contributions of all terms for which ~(ti) = 0, are 
obviously zero. The only nonzero contribution to the infinite Riemann sum is the 
area of the line of height H at t = O. The area of a line of finite height is, naturally 
enough, zero: base x height = 0 x noninfinite number = O. But the area of a 
line of infinite length can be nonzero: 0 x H = 62 X H = 1. Clearly also, this is 
the magnitude of a unit instantaneous jump in an inconsistent continuous function. 
Thus ~(t) can serve as the derivative of such functions, and conversely the integral 
of ~ is the instantaneous one unit jump. Should the instantaneous jump be from 

72 
The Delta Function 
kl to k2' there is then a natural measure of the magnitude and sign of the rate of 
jump in (k2 -
kl).~(O), that is (k2 - kt}.H. Note also that the ~-function can be 
translated r units along the t-axis by ~T( t) =df ~(t + r). 
This method of integration doesn't work with the area functions of Chapter 5, 
since there resolution of the t-axis below the order of magnitude of (j2 is forbidden. 
So one can say that the normal area functions of C R apply until the function jumps 
instantaneously, and then its derivative is in a different space DR where Riemann 
sums are taken w.r.t. partitions of size 0, that is {j2. Needless to say, it is not 
claimed that this is the 'right' account of the delta function, only that it is an 
account. Also, it is not apparent how to go on to differentiate delta functions in 
turn by these methods, but then there appear not to be any meaningful intuitions 
about that anyway. 

CHAPTER 8: INCONSffiTENTSYSTEMSOF 
LINEAR EQUATIONS 
1. Introduction 
The existence of the inconsistent case of a system of linear equations (or for that 
matter any system of constraints, not necessarily linear) has been known for a long 
time, but there has been no attempt to analyse its structure. There would seem 
to be good reason to do so, if only because the state of affairs might arise in a real 
life control system (see sections 3 and 4). Using the methods developed so far, it 
is possible to say something about the structure of solutions to such cases; though 
it must be confessed that in the end the situation remains less than satisfactory. 
2. The Inconsistent Case 
Consider a system S of n linear equations in s unknowns Xl,"" Xs having 
an n x s coefficient matrix Me = [aii] and an n x (s + 1) augmented matrix 
M a = [M c, B], where B = col[bl ... ,bn ] is the column vector of constants. The 
usual story is that S has a solution iff the row rank r of Me = the row rank of 
M a, and S has a unique solution iff in addition r = s. We concentrate mostly on 
the first of these, looking briefly at the second later. Clearly r :S rowrank(Ma), 
since every row of Me is part of a row of M a. But if r < rowrank( M a), then 
elementary row operations on M a will produce an equivalent matrix with zeros 
everywhere below row r except in column s + 1. This corresponds to the equations 
o = br+1,O = br+2, • .• ,0 = bn where one or more of the br+i are nonzero. This is 
an inconsistency, so that it is impossible to satisfy S below row r. Hence S has no 
solutions. (See e.g. Perlis [44], Birkhoff and MacLane [4].) 
But if there were inconsistent arithmetics in which 0 = br+1, 0 = br+2 , ••• could 
all hold, then there would be no particular reason why all of the equations of S 
could not hold simultaneously. So we can begin by informally postulating structures 

74 
Inconsistent Systems of Linear Equations 
in which 0 = br +1,O = br +2,'" hold inconsistently, that is where'" 0 = br +l> 
'" 0 = br +2,'" and a reasonable amount of classical real number theory also hold, 
The distinctive role played in S by the column vector of constants motivates 
the following definition, particularly part (3). 
Definition 8.1. (1) A matrix M is row reduced if (a) every leading entry of a 
nonzero row is 1, and (b) every column containing such a leading entry 1 has all 
other entries zero. 
(2) M is in row echelon form (REF) if also (c) each zero row comes below all 
nonzero rows, and (d) leading coefficients begin further to the right as one goes 
down. 
(3) An augmented matrix Ma = [Me, B) is in weak row echelon form (WREF) if 
Me is in REF. 
Thus Main WREF might look like 
Mal: 
1 0 0 2 0 3 
0 1 0 0 0 2 
0 0 1 2 3 2 
0 0 0 0 0 5 
0 0 0 0 0 7 
when deleting the last column produces a matrix in row echelon form. 
It is obvious that any matrix regarded as an augmented matrix can be trans-
formed to one in WREF using elementary row operations, and that some sequence 
of operations on an augmented matrix M a suffices to reduce its coefficient matrix 
Me to its unique REF. Further, M a arises from a consistent set of equations just in 
case there are no rows with a nonzero only in the last column. Note that the usual 
process of determining a basis for the rowspace of M a considered simply as a matrix 
(rather than as an augmented matrix arising from a set of equations) goes beyond 
WREF to produce REF in Ma, that is a 1 in row r + 1 (where rowrank(Me) = r) 
and zeros everywhere else in that column. But as we see this is not so useful for 

The Inconsistent Case 
75 
dealing even with the consistent case, so we deal with 'YREF's. These diverge from 
REF's only when rowrank(Mc) < rowrank(Ma), that is when S is an inconsistent 
set of equations. 
The rowrank of Mccan be read off from any WREF row-equivalent to M a, 
as the number of nonzero rows discounting the last place. The rowspace of any 
matrix in WREF is identical with that of its unique REF. It does not seem to, 
be determinate whether one should say that the rowrank of M a is the number of 
nonzero rows in the WREF, or the generally lesser number of rowrank(Mc) + 1. 
The latter is favored by the classical treatment of linear algebra, but the former 
has certain advantages in inconsistent situations. 
In general more than one sequence of elementary row operations suffices to 
reduce Mc to REF. If and only if S is consistent, exactly those sequences of row 
operations reduce Ma to REF. If S is inconsistent, just those sequences of row 
operations reduce Ma to WREF. Furthermore, each such sequence produces a 
unique vector of constants in column s + 1 with at least one nonzero entry below 
row r. However, the rowspace spanned by the first r row vectors of a WREF of 
M a is not unique. For example, consider 
Ma2: 
1 0 0 2 0 3 
0 1 0 0 0 2 
0 0 1 2 3 2 
1 0 0 2 0 8 
0 1 0 0 0 9 
Subtracting row 1 from row 4 and row 2 from row 5 gives the WREF 
Ma3: 
1 0 0 2 0 3 
0 1 0 0 0 2 
0 0 1 2 3 2 
0 0 0 0 0 5 
0 0 0 0 0 7 

76 
Inconsistent Systems of Linear Equations 
While first interchanging the first and fourth rows then performing the same oper-
ations gives the WREF 
Ma4: 
1 0 0 2 0 8 
0 1 0 0 0 
2 
0 0 1 2 3 2 
0 0 0 0 0 -5 
0 0 0 0 0 7 
where the rowspace spanned by the first three rowvectors is different in M a3 from 
M a4. Nonetheless, two aspects are determinate. 
(a) 
Given a selection of r linearly independent rowvectors, reducing just these 
to REF uniquely determines the constants br+l, brH , ... lower down (since in 
the coefficient matrix Me every row lower down than row r is a unique linear 
combination of earlier rows, and this linear combination carries the br+i along 
with it). 
(b) 
There are only a bounded number of selections of r linearly independent 
rowvectors from the n x (s + 1) matrix M a. 
So we can think of an augmented matrix reduced to WREF as containing two 
parts: (i) the first r rows, spanning a (classical) r-dimensional vector subspace of 
V.+1(F), and constituting a consistent set of linear relationships between the vari-
ables Xl ••• X. which can be satisfied in some classical (s - r)-dimensional solution 
space (which is exactly how one would say it in the case where r = rowrank(Ma), 
see [4], p.169); plus (ii) a set of propositions of the form 0 = br+l, 0 = brH , •. . to 
be satisfied conjointly in an inconsistent arithmetic. (It is also desirable that these 
parts interact.) And furthermore there are a bounded number of consistent solution 
spaces and each determines a unique set of inconsistent arithmetical propositions. 
So one can informally define a solution structure for a set S of n linear equations 
in s unknowns to be a finite collection {CJ } where each CJ has two interacting 
parts, a classical (s - r )-dimensional solution space, and a structure in which a set 
of inconsistent identities 0 = br+i hold in an appropriate paraconsistent logic. A 

Control Theory 
77 
solution, then, would be a vector of constant values for Xl •.• x. satisfying the set 
of relationships of the consistent solution space (that is, lying in one of the (8 -
r)-dimensional classical solution spaces), and interacting with the corresponding 
inconsistent mathematical theory. In the case where S is consistent, these reduce 
to the classical definitions of solution space and solution, since the second part of 
the definitions covering inconsistency becomes inoperative. 
The situation would be less flexible if it was permitted to go beyond WREF to 
REF for M a by reducing all or even any of the 0 = br+i to 0 = 1 by multiplying by 
(br+i)-l; and even less flexible if one then cleared all other places in col[bl ... bnl. 
Aside from mathematical interest, at least one good reason for disallowing this is a 
functional one. Division by zero remains functionally chaotic despite all attempts to 
do so inconsistently. But if division by zero is disallowed, then division by anything 
equal to zero, such as br +1, ... , ought also to be disallowed, on pain of failure of 
functionality. That is, when 0 = br+1 holds then (br+d-l should be undefined. But 
it is (br +1)-1 which is needed to be the multiplier to reduce 0 = br +1 to 0 = 1, or 
to 0 = brH for that matter. That is to say, when dealing with inconsistent sets of 
equations, reduction to WREF is correct and preferred to REF, while there is no 
disagreement in the consistent case. A slight problem arises because in arriving at 
a WREF, multiplication by (br+d-1 might have been used in reducing Me to REF 
and it might seem that even this move should be disallowed. Against this it seems 
fair to say that in reducing Me to REF one is remaining within the consistent part 
of the solution space, so one is entitled to use (br +1)-1 with its classical meaning. 
3. Control Theory 
Modern control theory describes control systems in terms of a (column) vector u 
of inputs, a vector X of inner states, and a vector y of outputs. A plant functioning 
stably can be described as a linear transformation (matrix) M representing the 
laws governing the plant, and transforming input into output in accordance with 
y(t) = M.u(t), where t is the time variable. A more detailed analysis of such plants, 

78 
Inconsistent Systems of Linear Equations 
incorporating feedback and the state vector x, is standardly given by supposing 
four matrices A, B, C, D with the two relations: x(t + 1) = Ax(t) + Bu(t) and 
y(t) = Cx(t) + Du(t). However, it is not necessary to incorporate those relations 
at the present stage. 
An unexpected and persistent change is postulated in the output. Since the 
change is significant and nontransient, it can be regarded as originating from a 
change in the physical laws of the plant described by M. This leads to a distinc-
tion between the matrices Mold and Mnew. Mold (the original M) is responsible 
for the predicted value of the output, ypred; and Mnew is responsible for the ob-
served value of the output, yobs. Mold was known when the plant was functioning 
correctly; Mnew is unknown but its result yobs is known through observation. 
One can now define a machine to be malfunctioning iff yobs =I- ypred, otherwise 
wellfunctioning. 
A standard situation in modern control theory is to determine from an observed 
stream of outputs yobs(t) what is the nature of the linear plant, Mnew, responsible 
for them. The approach taken here is different. There might be a real-time prob-
lem: the problem of keeping some control before Mnew is ascertained, let alone 
rectified back to Mold. So one wants to see if there are ways of operating the plant 
(modifying the stream of inputs) under the anomalous conditions without complete 
shutdown or explosion. 
A pplying ideas from earlier in this chapter, one would like to form a model of 
the malfunctioning plant which exploits inconsistency to represent quantitatively 
the discrepancy between ypred and yobs. A desirable constraint would be that 
the inconsistency disappears when the plant wellfunctions. Accordingly, one can 
form the augmented checkmatrix for a plant, consisting of a core which is Mold, 
an extra column which is yobs, and a bottom row (checkrow) which is the sums 
of each of the columns except that the RH cell is I;ypred. Subjected to wref, it 
can be shown that the RH corner entry is zero if yobs = ypred. When the corner 
entry is nonzero, it is a parameter which identifies an inconsistent mathematical 

Control Theory 
79 
environment which can be represented in a software controller. There are a number 
of options for the way in which input can be modified by the controller with the 
aim of eventual wellfunctioning. 
That is, the controller forms an inconsistent model of the nature of the mal-
functioning plant. A desirable behaviour for malfunctioning plants is that, under 
the influence of the inconsistent controller, the plant eventually becomes wellfunc-
tioning simply by means of modifying the input. This proves to be possible. On 
the other hand, among plants which are not eventually wellfunctioning there can 
be defined several types. 
(a) 
A plant cycles iff yobs( t) = yobs( t + k) for some k and all t (or all t after 
some appropriate to). 
(b) 
A plant is persistent iff yobs( t) = yobs( t + k) for all k and all t (after 
some appropriate to). Note that it is possible to have a malfunctioning but 
persistent plant, i.e. in which yobs(t) remains constant but never equals 
ypred(t). 
(c) 
A plant is bounded iff no component of yobs(t) ever gets more than a fixed 
number k from zero, for all t. A plant may be bounded without either 
cycling or persistence. 
(d) 
A plant is defined (operationally) to explode iff some component of yobs 
exceeds a predetermined bound (in software simulations it has been taken 
to be 10000). 
For a plant which does not eventually wellfunction, any of the above behaviours 
(a)-(c) is a substitute in which functioning is not too degraded, so all of these 
behaviours are more desirable than explosion. 
All of the above behaviours have been observed in software simulations. 

80 
Inconsistent Systems of Linear Equations 
4. Applications, Problems and Special Cases 
An application might be a machine with a range of sensor inputs, controlled by 
a system of simultaneous equations. Supposing that one sensor becomes faulty, and 
begins returning a value zero for a particular variable, the matrix might go incon-
sistent and become impossible to invert to find stable settings. In the circumstance 
one does not want chaos, and it might be that the best fault-tolerant software is 
one which rides with the contradiction until things are straightened out. 
There is no problem about the logical aspects of solution structures for incon-
sistent systems of simultaneous equations, as is clear from previous chapters. But 
functionality is more than usually problematic. The difficulty is to find a theory in 
which all the br+i are identified with zero and their inverses undefined. The obvious 
manoeuvre is to go to an additive group as in Chapter 6, undefining all multipli-
cation but integer multiplication. The worst case here would be trying to satisfy 
jointly, say, 0 = 7r and 0 = 2, since there is no greatest common integer divisor for 
a single base equation. Unfortunately, the worst case looks to be the typical case. 
Nevertheless, there are a number of special cases which are more tractable. 
(1) If the field F over which the vector space is constructed is the integers 
modulo a finite or infinite prime, then there is no problem in taking the greatest 
common divisor of the bT+i . From the base 0 = br+i all the others follow, and the 
vector or vectors in the solution space are readily represented in the inconsistent 
arithmetic. Needless to say if the bT+i are relatively prime then the base is 0 = 1, 
which is bad if one remains with integers. But one can be lucky and avoid total 
collapse of functional structure when they are not relatively prime, which might 
serve to avoid total degeneration of information in a control system. (Birkhoff and 
MacLane treat the consistent case, see [4], pp.40-44.) 

Applications, Problems and Special Cases 
81 
(2) If the field is R, and there is only one 9 = br+i , and in the additive 
group on the interval [0, br+;) the vector relationships of the first r rows of the 
WREF can be represented, then combined with a judicious change of scale to 
expand that interval, this might be a practical proposal for control systems. Also, 
it appears fairly straightforward to separate several inconsistencies into several 
'logical dimensions' or 'logical subspaces' (with logical projection operators) in each 
of which only one inconsistency holds. This option is available and useful whatever 
one does to superpose the inconsistent substates. If such logical separation could 
correspond, or be made to correspond, to relative causal separation of subparts 
of the control system, then reasonable control might be achieved for each of the 
separately inconsistent subsystems, or at least the area of lack of control isolated 
(always a paraconsistentist ideal). 
(3) The role of computers as engines of empirical arithmetic can't be overlooked. 
Supposing that it is decided to input all data in the data-type integer (which is by 
no means impossible if a judicious choice of scale size is made), then for example 
Pascal comes with built-in maximum and minimum integers, just as in the finite 
inconsistent case. (e.g. MaxInt = 32767, -MaxInt = -32768, MaxLongInt = 
2147483647.) The inconvenience of small numbers compared with floating-point 
numbers might be outweighed by increased control over inconsistent situations. 
There might be no reason to switch on the fault-tolerance module until inconsis-
tency manifests itself. But even floating-point arithmetic is finite (and inevitably 
'approximate', that is approximate to something called a real number). Empirical 
arithmetic exists, and all computer calculations are carried out in it. So there does 
not seem to be anything wrong in principle with integer representations of a prob-
lem. (If there is a difficulty it is with how finite human brains can imagine that 
finite output represents something infinite, a real number.) But if integer represen-
tations are always OK for a control system, then perhaps there is no real difficulty 
in always exploiting their inconsistency-tolerance. 

82 
Inconsistent Systems of Linear Equations 
(4) A different style of solution is to associate the rows below r with incon-
sistencies in different dimensions in the state space of the plant: 0 = br+l gm, 
o = br+2 volts, ... and the like. Thus inconsistency in one dimension of the phase 
space ought not to affect consistency or inconsistency in an orthogonal dimension. 
This approach is still in an early stage of development. 

CHAPTER 9: PROJECTIVE SPACES 
1. Introduction 
A common construction (following more-or less that of Birkhoff and MacLane 
[4]) of the projective plane P2(F) over a field F, begins with the 3D vector 
space lt3(F) and then 'identifies' nonzero triples of members of F, (Xt,X2,X3) = 
(x~, x~, x;) if for some nonzero a E F and for all i :::; 3, Xi = ax;. The equivalence 
classes so formed are the points of P2(F). The lines of P2(F) correspond to, or 
'are', planes in lt3(F); that is sets of solutions (Xt,X2,X3) of linear homogeneous 
equations L: aixi = 0 where each ai E F and not all ai = o. One can then identify 
lines by (or 'identify' lines 'with') the triples of coefficients (al,a2,a3); noting that 
if a i- 0, then a L: aixi = 0 determines the same set of solutions as L: aixi = 0, so 
that the projective line whose coefficients are (al, a2, a3) is identical with the line 
In order to keep track of the source of the triples (Xt,X2,X3) 1ll this con-
struction, the notion of homogeneous coordinates is introduced. 
Again the 
terminology is somewhat anomalous: Birkhoff and MacLane (p.275) for exam-
ple speak of homogeneous coordinates of points as the triples (xt, X2, X3) 'with 
the identification' (xt, X2, X3) 
= a(xt, X2, X3) when a i- o. 
With the same 
'identification', triples (al, a2, a3) are homogeneous coordinates of lines. 
can then proceed to define '(Xt,X2,X3) on (al,a2,a3)' to mean L:aixi 
One 
o· , 
'(Xl,X2,X3) is a point' or 'P(Xt,X2,X3)' to mean '(:Jal,a2,a3)((xt,X2,X3) on 
(at, a2, a3))'; '(at, a2, a3) is a line' or 'L(xt, X2, X3)' to mean '(:Jat, a2, a3)((xt, X2, X3) 
on (al,a2,a3))'; and '(al,a2,a3) contains (Xt,X2,X3)' to mean '(Xt,X2,X3) on 
(at,a2,a3)'. The familiar duality is easily seen to follow, whereby the transfor-
mation (=, P, L,on,contains )-t( =, L, P,contains,on) preserves true sentences. 
However, if (Xl,X2,X3) and (axt,ax2,ax3) are distinct triples then they are not 
literally identical homogeneous coordinates. One should speak rather of different 
co-ordinates of the same point, with the recognition that qua representations of 

84 
Projective Spaces 
the one thing, a point, they behave congruently w.r.t. its properties. Similarly, 
triples (Xl,X2,X3) and (aXl,aX2,ax3) are not literally identical if they are distinct 
members of the one equivalence class, a point. There should then be an explanation 
of this common but literally false terminology; and of course one which does not 
disturb the entirely correct orthodox account in terms of equivalence classes just 
given, but rather augments it. In this chapter an explanation is offered in terms of 
literal inconsistent identities. 
First the case of inconsistent vector spaces is considered. In section 3 incon-
sistent projective planes are constructed, in which homogeneous coordinates are 
inconsistently identified. It turns out to be easier to inconsistentise projective 
spaces than vector spaces, as the example of the projective plane over R shows. 
In section 4, projective planes over consistent and inconsistent fields modulo an 
infinite prime are constructed. In these the usual projective duality holds for a 
strengthened set of concepts which contains 'finite' and 'infinite' as well. 
2. Vector Spaces 
Take background logic RM3, and consider anyone of the finite inconsistent 
fields modulo a prime p with names for all the integers, of Chapter 2. Call it F, 
and construct the theory 1I3(F) as follows. Add as terms all triples (tt, t2, t3) where 
the ti are terms from F. Take term-forming operators + and. (the latter usually 
suppressed) for vector addition and scalar multiplication. The domain D has all 
triples from {O, 1, ... ,p-1}, and the operations of vector addition and scalar multi-
plication on the usual classical vector space constructed on the finite classical field 
modulo p. Set I((tl' t2, t3)) = (tl mod p, t2 mod p, t3 mod p); set 1(+) =classical 
vector addition mod p and set 1(.) =classical scalar multiplication mod p. This 
induces as in Chapter 2, 
I((tl, t2, t3) + (t4' ts, t6)) = 1(+ ) (I((tI, t2, t3)),I((t4' ts, t6))) 
and 
I(t.(tI,t2,t3)) = I(.)(I(t),I((tI,t2,t3)))' 
Finally set I((tl' t2, t3) = (t4' ts, t6)) = B if I((tI, t2, t3)) = I((t4' ts, t6)), else I = F. 

Vector Spaces 
85 
Now, for example, f- (0,1,2) = (p,p+1,p+2) & ",(0,1,2) = (p,p+1,p+2), 
as well as f-
(0,1,2) = (p + 1).(0,1,2) & '" (0,1,2) = (p + 1).(0, 1,2), and 
f- (0,1,2)+(0,1,0) = (0, 2, 2) & "'(0,1,2)+(0,1,0) = (0, 2, 2), and 
f- "'(0,1,2) = (0, 2, 2), but not f- (0,1,2) = (0, 2, 2). 
Proposition 9.1. \t3(F) is transparent. 
Proof left to the reader. 
Proposition 9.2. All first order extensional sentences of the classical theory 
of vector spaces hold in \t3(F). 
Proof. Consider the classical finite vector space mod p; that is the above 
structure modified so that there are only a finite number of names {O, 1, ... ,p-1}, 
and I«tt, t2, t3) = (t4 , ts, ts)) = T if I«tt, t2, t3)) = I«t4 , ts, ts)), else I = F. 
As is well known this satisfies all the axioms for vector spaces and their classical 
consequences. Add the infinite number of names {p + I, ... } and all complex 
terms generated by the term-forming operators. For any new term t or (tt, t2 , t3) 
set I(t) = t mod p or I«tt, t2, t3)) = (tl mod p, t2 mod p, t3 mod p) respectively. 
Obviously the addition of the extra names makes no difference to the value of the 
sentence not containing them, since they map congruently onto existing names (or 
appeal to Proposition 2.14). Change the model so that I'(terml = term2) = B iff 
I'(terml) = l'(term2)' By Extendability (Proposition 2.10), I' extends I. But l' 
determines \t3(F), so all extensional sentences of classical vector space theory hold 
in \t3F. 
D 
It is also obvious that \t3(F) extends the classical theory of the integers. In 
addition it is clear that this method of construction of inconsistent vector spaces 
suffers the same limitations as inconsistent fields, because any limitations on the 
functionality of the field F translate immediately into limitations on vector addition 
and scalar multiplication. 

86 
Projective Spaces 
3. Projective Geometry 
Proceeding to projective geometries over these structures, add to the do-
main D the equivalence classes [(x,y,z)] of triples from {O,l, ... ,p -l}, where 
[(x, y, z)] = [w(x, y, z)] = [(WX, wy, wz)] for all W of- 0, the last three products being 
mod p. These equivalence classes form a classical projective geometry in the usual 
way. This can be described in the classical structure (D, I) where I( (tt, t 2 , t3 )) = 
[(I(tl)' I(t2)' I(t3))]; and I(terml = term2) = T iff I(terml) = I(term2) else I = F; 
and with 'point', 'line', 'on', and 'contains' defined in the usual way (see above this 
section, for a more full description see below this section). Notice that in the lan-
guage only the homogeneous coordinates (tl, t2, t3) appear as terms, the equivalence 
classes [(tt, tz, t3 )] do not appear. This is where the distinction between objects of 
the space and their names is being made: coordinate systems are naming systems, 
a natural view from elsewhere e.g. differential geometry. (Nonetheless it is appro-
priate to take the long term view that this distinction should be blurred, so as to 
be dealing with mathematical structures and objects with inconsistent properties.) 
However this I fails to reflect the origin of the ti as natural number terms and the 
(tl, t2, t3) as being inconsistently identified with certain (t4, t5, t6) in the underlying 
vector space. In addition, the aim of representing homogeneous coordinates in terms 
of inconsistent identifications is not realised. There are (at least) two structures in 
which these aims can be more adequately realised. 
For both of these structures, it is useful to introduce two new sets of metalin-
guistic variables x, x!, X2, ... and a, a!, a2, . .. ranging over names and {+, -, x, /} 
compositions of them, to reflect the differing roles of points and lines in the pro-
jective geometry. If Xl, X2, X3 are any such terms, introduce' P( XI, X2, X3)' intended 
to mean '(XI,X2,X3) is a point'. Also, if aI,a2,a3 are any such terms, introduce 
the predicate 'L(al,a2,a3)' intended to mean '(al,a2,a3) are the coefficients of a 
line'; and the two relations '(XI,X2,X3) on (aI,a2,a3)' for 'The point (XI,X2,X3) is 
on the line whose coefficients are (aI, a2, a3)', and '( aI, a2, a3) contains (Xl, X2, X3)' 
for 'The line whose coefficients are (ab a2, a3) contains the point (Xl, X2, X3)'. 

Projective Geometry 
87 
These predicates and relations are still only syntax, so it is necessary to specify 
the interpretation function for sentences containing them, and for identity sentences 
as well. Only then can the resultant theory be judged as a projective geometry. As 
I just said there are two ways to do this. The first way is as follows. 
Set I(P(Xl, X2, X3)) = B if [(I(XI)' I(X2), I(X3))] is a point in classical projective 
geometry on the domain else I = F; set I(L( at, a2, a3)) = B if [(I( al), I( a2)' I( a3),)] 
is the coefficient of a line in the domain; set I((XI,X2,X3) on (al,a2,a3)) = B 
if I((Xl,X2,X3)) is a point and I((at,a2,a3)) is a line and Laixi = 0; and set 
I((al,a2,a3) contains (XI,X2,X3)) = I((XI,X2,X3) on (al,a2,a3)). And then for 
identity sentences set I(terml = term2) = B if I(terml) = I(term2), else I = F. 
(The specification is somewhat roundabout for the case of finite geometries, but it 
is adequate and has the merit of permitting easy generalisations where the domain 
is not finite.) 
This model produces an inconsistent projective geometry (see below); but a 
second structure, which confines the inconsistency in a more sensitive fashion, is 
as follows. 
Let the interpretation of 'P', 'L', 'on', and 'contains' be classical, 
that is change B to T in the interpretation of these predicates. This obviously 
ensures that the first order sentences in the {P, L, on, contains} language which 
hold are exactly those of classical finite projective geometry mod p, including the 
characteristic (x,y)((Lx&Ly):) (3z)(Pz & z on x & z on y)), i.e. any lines have 
a point in common. (It needs identity to state 'exactly one'.) But also continue 
with I(terml = term2) = B if I(termd = I(term2), else I = F. This has the 
effect of confining the inconsistency to identity statements between what from the 
traditional point of view are homogeneous coordinates, and it is only from that 
source that inconsistency arises. This then is the promised account of 'identifying' 
homogeneous coordinates: homogeneous coordinates are inconsistently identified 
and disidentified just when they are coordinates of the same classical equivalence 
class. 
This structure is a projective geometry in the sense that all extensional first 

88 
Projective Spaces 
order sentences of projective geometry hold (by Extendability). There seems to be 
some difference as to what is the mark of a projective geometry, or what constitute 
the propositions of projective geometry. Birkhoff and MacLane ([4], p.275) have a 
simple account: any two distinct points are on a unique line plus duality, both of 
which hold in the inconsistent structures. Coxeter's ([9], p.230-1) is less simple, but 
his axioms are still first order, so must hold in the first order classical structures, 
so in the inconsistent structures. Both inconsistent models above are transparent 
(proof omitted). Summarising, 
Proposition 9.3. There are inconsistent transparent theories in which all 
sentences holding in classical projective geometry hold. 
This has been done here for the finite projective geometries, but it can also 
be done for P2(R), the projective plane over R. 
For all triples of real num-
bers XI,X2,X3 take the equivalence classes [(XI,X2,X3)] = [(WXI,WX2,WX3)] and 
set J(XI,X2,X3) = [(Xt,X2,X3)] and then give the same conditions on J as above. 
The point is that this does not collapse from functionality limitations on incon-
sistent R, because the functional language {+, -, x, /} is discarded in moving to 
the projective language {=, P, L, on, contains}. This example is discussed further 
in Chapter 10 in connection with its topological aspects. It is not necessary to 
have an inconsistent field to start with. The example shows this, but also note 
that inconsistency in the base field is irrelevant to the construction of the finite 
geometries above. 
4. Projective Geometry Modulo Infinity 
This section uses the type of construction of the previous section except that 
consistent and inconsistent fields modulo an infinite prime are used. In these struc-
tures the usual projective duality results can be strengthened to a language con-
taining 'finite' and 'infinite' when these are suitably defined. Sylvester's Theorem 
is also considered. 

Projective Geometry Modulo Infinity 
89 
There are both consistent and inconsistent projective structures over the 
fields modulo an infinite prime p. 
For both, for any terms t l , t 2 , t3 let 
I((tl,t2,t3)) = [tl modp,t2 modp,t3 modp)], where the equivalence classes are 
equal in the domain just when their members are a multiple mod p of one another. 
The consistent case is the same as for modulo finite p, with I(P(xI, X2, X3)) = T 
if (Xl, X2, X3) is a point in the domain projective space, else I = F; etc.; and 
I(terml = term2) = T if I(terml) = I(term2), else I = F. The two inconsistent 
cases change T to B respectively (a) for all atomic sentences, or (b) for all identi-
ties only. Both are transparent, and (b) confines the inconsistency to the effects of 
the inconsistent identification of homogeneous co-ordinates as before. Now some 
definitions are needed. 
Definitio~ 9.4. In either consistent or inconsistent theories, a point is infinite 
if it is identical only with points having at least one component Xi which is an 
infinite nonstandard number, else finite. Similarly for lines. 
An infinite line is not the same thing as a line at infinity, which does not appear 
in the present account. Problem: which inconsistent identities are needed to get 
it? 
Proposition 9.5. There are finite points and lines, and infinite points and 
lines. 
Proof. For finite points and lines, consider the equivalence class of any triple 
all of whose components are finite. For infinite triples, consider (1, -l,x) (any 
x), that is (1,p-1,x). If (l,-l,x) were finite, then for some finite tl,t2,t3 
f- (1, -1, x) = (tl, t2, t3). That is, for some k ::; p -1, [k(l, -1, x)] = [(tt, t2, t3)]. So 
in particular k. - 1 = t2 which is a finite number. Hence k must equal -t2. But 
it was seen in Chapter 3 that the additive inverse of a finite number is an infinite 
number (in fact p - t 2 ), so k is an infinite number. But then the first component 
k.1 is equal to tl which is thus infinite, contrary to the supposition that tl is finite. 
Hence (1, -1, x) is infinite, either as a point or as the coefficients of a line. 
0 

90 
Projective Spaces 
We recall that the first order duality principle for projective geometry is as 
follows: if S is any sentence in the language {=, P, L, on, contains} and S' is the 
result of interchanging 'P' with 'L' and 'on' with 'contains', then S holds iff S' 
holds. In the present consistent and inconsistent models there is an extended 
duality principle, that the same interchange preserves 'holds' in a strong language 
also containing 'finite' (and a fortiori 'infinite'). This might be described as an 
invariance theorem for 'finite' and 'infinite'. For this, the word 'finite' has to be 
included in the object language with an appropriate semantic interpretation, so for 
any number terms tl , t2 , t3 whose moduli are not all zero, set I(Finite(tt, t2 , t3)) = T 
if (tt, t2 , t3) is finite, else 1 = F. This obviously induces an interpretation on 
'infinite' =df '~finite'. Let S be a sentence in the language with 'finite' added, 
and let S' be the result of interchanging 'P' with 'L' and 'on' with 'contains'. 
Proposition 9.6. (Duality) S holds iff S' holds. 
Proof. By induction on the number of occurrences of {~, &, Ii} to prove that 
I(S) = I(S'). 
(Base:) Atomic sentences are of the form P(term), L(term), Finite(term), terml 
on term2, terml contains term2, and terml = term2. But by inspection of I, 
in all the models I(P(term)) = I(L(term)), and I(terml on term2) = I(terml 
contains term2). Nor do these reversals have any effect on identity or finitude: 
1 (terml = term2) holds independently of whether they are points or lines, and 
I(Finite( term)) is similarly independent. 
(~clause:) If I(S) = I(S') then I(~S) = I(~S'). 
(& clause:) Similar. 
(Ii clause:) If I(St) = I(S't) for all terms t then 1((x)Sx) = 1((x)S'x). 
0 
This proposition can be applied after the next one. 
Let (aI, a2, a3) be the 
coefficients of a line L where all of I(ai) -# 0 mod p. 

Projective Geometry Modulo Infinity 
91 
Proposition 9.7. If L is finite then every point on L is infinite. 
Proof. If L is a finite line and P were a finite point on it then for some 
(al,a2,a3) and (Xt,X2,X3) where all the ai and Xi are finite, none of the ai is 
classically identical with ° 
mod p, at least one of the Xi is not classically identical 
with ° 
mod p, and I: aixi = 0. But this is impossible since the sum of products 
would be a finite positive number. 
0 
Proposition 9.B. If P is a finite point satisfying the same conditions as L in 
the previous proposition, any line containing P is infinite. 
Proof. By applying duality. 
o 
Note that these break down for any of the following triples/lines/points: 
(xt, 0, 0) on (0, a2, a3) and (0, a2, 0) and (0,0, a3); (0, X2, 0) on (al' 0, a3) and (at, 0, 0) 
and (0,0, a3) etc. Say that a pair of points determine a line if both are on it, and 
that a pair of lines intersect in a point if both contain it. Then, 
Proposition 9.9. Every pair of finite points determine an infinite line; every 
pair of finite lines intersect in an infinite point. 
Proof. The first part follows from the previous proposition; the second part 
follows by duality. 
0 
While a finite point can only be on infinite lines, an infinite point can be on 
finite lines. Can an infinite point be on both finite and infinite lines? Can an 
infinite line contain only infinite points? 
Finally in this section we consider Sylvester's Theorem. This says that for any 
positive integer n, if n points are not collinear, then there exists a line through 
exactly two of them. Sylvester's Theorem holds in classical Euclidean geometry. 
But it is known that it fails in the classical finite projective planes modulo p. 
(Reason: In mod p, let n = p2 + p + 1. These p2 + p + 1 points are not all collinear; 
else some line has p2 + p + 1 points on it, whereas lines in this geometry have only 
p + 1 points on them. But there is no line containing exactly two of them; since 

92 
Projective Spaces 
again every line has p + 1 points on it, while the p2 + p + 1 points exhaust the 
whole space.) But this argument breaks down if p is an infinite prime, provided 
that n is restricted to finite positive integers, because then n cannot be chosen to 
be p2 + p + 1. So the question is whether Sylvester's Theorem holds for either 
the consistent or inconsistent projective geometries modulo infinite p? However, if 
n is allowed to be unrestricted, that is any nonstandard integer as well, then the 
above argument goes through and Sylvester's Theorem breaks down. Of course this 
nonstandard version of Sylvester's Theorem (for any finite or infinite n collinear 
points ... ) is a stronger statement, and thus it is not so surprising that it breaks 
down. 

CHAPTER 10: TOPOLOGY 
Quotient constructions are a natural place to find inconsistent structures. In 
this chapter, aspects of the quotient construction in topology are considered. Tp.is 
requires the introduction of the primitive binary predicate E into the object lan-
guage. It is seen that there is an interaction between the topological properties of 
the space from which the quotient topology arises, and the functionality of a natu-
ral class of inconsistent models and theories associated with them. A special case 
of quotient constructions is the ubiquitous practice in topology of joining, cutting 
or pasting, coming under the terminology of 'identification'. Similar points apply 
as in the previous chapter. It is suggested on the basis of the present chapter that 
there is no problem about taking this terminology literally in an inconsistent frame-
work. It is a convenient way of signalling the identification relationship between 
two spaces, to see one as an inconsistent functional extension of the other, or for 
that matter an incomplete cut-down. 
Let (X, 0) be a topological space where 0 is the collection of open subsets of 
X, let R be an equivalence relation on X, let XIR be the induced quotient set, 
let P be the induced projection P : X ....... XIR, and let Q be the induced quotient 
topology on XIR (that is, Q =df {5 ~ XIR: P-1(5) EO}). It is not difficult to 
find inconsistent transparent structures which take this data into account. 
To see this, let the language have as terms (i) all members of X, (ii) all subsets 
of X including the null set A, (iii) the constant term O. As before t, tt, t2 , •• • are 
metalinguistic variables ranging over terms; as well, 5,51,52, .•. are metalinguistic 
variables ranging over terms which are subsets of X. There are two binary pred-
icates {=, E}, and all sentences of the form t E 5 and 5 E 0 are stipulated to 
be atomic. The set of sentences is the usual closure under {"', &, \fl. Now given 
(X, 0, R) define a model by: 

94 
(1) 
l(t) = P(t) = [t] for all terms t in X. 
(2) 
1(5) = P(5) = P(R(5)) for all terms 5 ~ X, where 
R(5) =df {x : (3y)(Rxy&y E 5)}. 
(3) 
1(t1 = h) = B if 1(t1) = 1(t2 ), else 1 = F. 
(4) 
l(t E 5) = B if l(t) is in 1(5), else 1 = F. 
(5) 
1(51 = 52) = B if 1(51) = 1(52), else 1 = F. 
Topology 
(6) 
1(5 E 0) = B if 1(5) is open in 1(0), i.e. 1(5) El(O), else 1 = F. 
This produces an inconsistent extension of the classical consistent complete theory 
of the topology of (X, 0), and it is straightforward to prove that 1 is transparent. 
One could also have added into the object language terms for describing the con-
tents of XIR and its topology, but the results following do not depend on the theory 
containing descriptions of the behaviour of XIR, so it is better not to complicate 
the issue (but it is a direction worth pursuing elsewhere). The behaviour of XIR 
has to be taken into account metalinguistically in the statements and proofs of the 
propositions following, needless to say. Also, the term-forming operations {n, U} 
could be included in the object language connecting subsets of X or members of 
0, and an interpretation induced with 1(51 U 52) = 1(S1) U 1(S2) and similarly for 
n, but this is not done here. 
A more sophisticated model confines the inconsistency to those statements 
which from the classical point of view are 'really' false. Keeping (1) and (2) as 
before let 
(3') 
1(t1 = t2 ) = T ift1 = t2 in X, 1(t1 = t2) = B ift1 =I- t2 in X but 1(t1) = 1(t2), 
else 1 = F. 
(4') 
l(t E 5) = T if t is a member of 5, l(t E 5) = B if t is not a member of 5 
but l(t) is in 1(5), else 1 = F. 
(5') 
1(51 = S2) = T if 51 = 52 as subsets of X, 1(51 = 52) = B if 51 =I- 52 but 
1(51) = 1(52), else 1 = F. 
(6') 
l(S E 0) = T if S is open in 0, 1(5 E 0) = B if 5 is not open in 0 but 
1(5) is in 1(0), else 1 = F. 
This RM3-theory fails transparency if there is even one pair t1, t2 in X with 

Topology 
95 
Rtlt2 and tl not identical with t2 in X : for then we have l(tl = t2) = B = 
1( ",tl = t2) and so both tl = t2 and", tl = t2 hold; so that if the theory were 
transparent ",tl = tl would hold contradicting l(tl = tl) = T. But the theory is 
functional: an atomic equation holds iff it is true when interpreted in the classical 
theory of the equivalence classes in XIR, and the latter is certainly functional. This 
chapter shows, hopefully, that transparency is not a particularly strong desidera-
tum. 
The class of theories considered in the rest of this chapter is obtained by taking 
(1), (2), (3'), (4'), (5') and replacing (6') by: 
(6") 
l(S E 0) = T if S is open in 0, else l(S E 0) = F. (One could also have B 
instead of T without affecting the following results.) 
Given the data (X, 0, R) a unique structure satisfying (1 )-( 6") is induced, so it is 
named M(X, 0, R), or M for short. The following results show that the function-
ality of M(X, 0, R) is related to the (classical) topological properties of (X, 0) and 
the properties of R. 
Definition 10.1. The projection map P : (X,O) -t (XIR, Q) is said to be 
open iff for any S ~ X if S is open in 0 then P(S) is open in Q. (See Kelley [16], 
p.94.) 
Proposition 10.2. If M(X, 0, R) is functional then P is open. 
Proof. If P is not open, then by Kelley [16] Theorem 10 p.97, there is a subset 
S ~ X open in 0 such that R(S) is not open in O. Now l(S) = P(S) = P(R(S)) = 
l(R(S)). Hence l(S = R(S)) = T or B, that is 
S = R(S) holds in M 
(a) 
Now S is open in 0, so 
S E 0 holds in M 
((3) 
Further, R( S) is not open in 0, so 
R( S) E 0 does not hold in M. 

96 
Topology 
But (a), ((3) and (r) are jointly incompatible with the functionality of M. 
0 
Definition 10.3. 
0+ = df {5 ~ X 
0+ = {5 ~ X : P-l(P(5)) is open in O}. 
P(5) IS open III Q}; that IS 
In general 0+ is not a topology, which perhaps accounts for its neglect: while 
X and 1\ are in 0+ and 0+ is a closed under arbitrary unions, it is not always 
closed under finite intersections. However, the properties of 0+ are related to the 
topological properties of (X, 0) and the functionality of M(X, 0, R) as we will see. 
One observation to make is that in general neither 0 ~ 0+ (see Proposition 10.5) 
nor 0+ ~ 0 (see example following Proposition 10.11). Either of these can obtain 
without the other, however, as can 0 = 0+ (for example if 0 is the discrete or 
indiscrete topology), in which case 0+ is a topology. 
Proposition 10.4. If 0 = 0+ then M(X, 0, R) is functional. 
Proof. Note that if tll t2 are terms in X and t] = t2 holds in M then substitu-
tions of t2 for tl into atomic contexts are always functional: [tlJ = [t2J implies that 
([tIl is in [Sl iff [t21 is in [S]). Hence if M is not functional, there must be SI, 52 of 
X such that in M, SI = 52 and SI EO hold but 52 E 0 does not hold. If 51 E 0 
holds and 0 = 0+, then 51 is in 0+. So by definition of 0+, P( 5d is open in Q. 
If 51 = 52 holds in M, then P(SI) = P(52). Hence P(S2) is open in Q. But if 
52 E 0 does not hold, then 52 is not open in O. If 0 = 0+ and S2 is not open in 
0, then S2 is not in 0+. But this is incompatible with P(52 ) being open in Q. 0 
Proposition 10.5. P is open iff 0 ~ 0+. 
Proof. L to R: Let P be open and let 5 be in O. Since P is open, P(5) is in 
Q; so 5 is in 0+, by definition of 0+. R to L : Suppose P is not open. Then for 
some S ~ X, S is in 0 and P(S) is not in Q. By the latter, 5 is not in 0+; that 
is not 0 ~ 0+. 
0 

Topology 
97 
Proposition 10.6. If M(X, 0, R) is functional, then 0+ C;;; O. 
Proof. Suppose not 0+ C;;; 0; that is for some S C;;; X, S is in 0+ and S is not 
in O. If S is in 0+ then P(S) is in Q, so that P-l(P(S)) is in O. That is, 
p-l(p(S)) E 0 holds in M. 
(0) 
Now note that P(S) = P(P-l(P(S))). (Reason: [t] is in P(S) iff t is in P-l(P(S)) 
iff [t] is in P(P-1(P(S))).) Hence, I(S) = I(P-l(P(S))). That is, 
p-l(p(S)) = S holds in M. 
«(3) 
But since S is not in 0, 
S E 0 does not hold in M. 
However (0), «(3) and (-y) jointly imply that M is not functional. 
o 
Proposition 10.7. M(X, 0, R) is functional iff 0 = 0+. 
Proof. L to R If M is functional, then by Proposition 10.2, P is open. So by 
Proposition 10.5, 0 C;;; 0+. By Proposition 10.6, 0+ C;;; 0; hence 0 = 0+. R to L 
is Proposition lOA. 
o 
Obvious examples of inconsistent functional theories, then, are those arising 
from the discrete topology on any X and any R; since for these 0 = 0+. (Reason: 
Q = {S C;;; XIR : P-l(S) is in O}. But every P-l(S) is in the discrete topology 
0, so every S in XIR is in Q. Thus if S is in 0, then P(S) is in Q. Hence P is 
open.) Again, if R is the identity relation, then for any (X, 0), (XIR, Q) is just 
an isomorphic copy of (X,O); so that M(X, 0, R) is functional. We see presently 
that there are functional theories for other topologies. 
Definition 10.B. A space (X, 0, R) is R-discrete iff for all x in X, if there is 
a y in X with x -=f y and Rxy then the singleton {x} is open. 
R-discreteness is a kind of relativised discreteness, for example all spaces with 
the discrete topology are R-discrete for every R. Another property is: 

98 
Topology 
Proposition 10.9. If (X, 0, R) is R-discrete then P is open. 
Proof. Let (X, 0, R) be R-discrete and S be open in O. By Kelley [16] Theorem 
10(b) p.97, it suffices to show that R(S) is open in O. Let Sl = {x in S : (3y in 
X)(Rxy and x =f y)} and let S2 = S - Sl. Then Sl U S2 = Sand Sl n S2 = A 
and R(S2) = S2. Now R(S) = R(Sd u R(S2) = R(Sd U S2. But Sl <;;; R(Sl)' 
Therefore, R(S) = (R(Sl) - Sl) U Sl U S2 = (R(Sl) - Sd u s. Now for all x in 
R(Sl), there is some y in X with Rxy and x =f y; so by R-discreteness {x} is open 
in O. Hence for all x in R(Sd - Sl the same is true. Hence R(Sd - S1, as the 
union of all these {x}, is also open in O. But R(S) = (R(Sl) - Sl) u S, and Sis 
also open in 0; so R(S) is open in O. 
o 
The converse of Proposition 10.9 fails, see example at the end of the chapter. 
The two main theorems of the chapter are the next two, which show that the pres-
ence or absence of Hausdorffness for (X,O) is relevant to the connection between 
R-discreteness and functionality. 
Proposition 10.10. If (X, 0) is a T2 space, then M(X, 0, R) is functional only 
if (X, 0) is R-discrete. 
Proof. Let (X,O) be T2, let x be in X and suppose (3y)(Rxy and x =f y). It 
suffices to prove on the supposition of functionality that {x} is in O. Since (X,O) 
is T2, there are disjoint Sl, S2 in 0 such that x is in Sl but not S2 and y is in S2 but 
not Sl. Now since Rxy, P({y}) = P({x,y}); so P(S2) = P(S2 u {x}). Therefore, 
P-1(P(S2)) = P-1(P(S2 u {x})). But 0+ = {S <;;; X: P-1(P(S)) is in O}. Hence 
S2 is in 0+ iff S2 U {x} is in 0+. By functionality, 0 = 0+. Hence S2 is in 0 iff 
S2 u {x} is in 0 (both sides of 0 = 0+ are used here). But S2 is in 0, so S2 U {x} 
is in O. But Sl is in 0, so Sl n (S2 u {x}) is in O. Sl and S2 are disjoint, so 
Sl n (S2 u {x}) = Sl n {x} = {x} which is thus in O. 
0 
This proof needs all the resources of the hypothesis, in particular the Hausdorff 
condition that the separating open sets be disjoint, as the next Proposition shows. 

Topology 
99 
Proposition 10.11. There is a space (X, 0, R) such that (X,O) is Tl but 
neither T2 nor R-discrete, while M(X, 0, R) is functional. 
Proof. Let X = {O,1,2, ... }, let 0 = {cofinitesubsets of X} U {/\}, and let 
R = {(I, 2), (2, I)} u {(x, x) : x in X}. Now it is well known that (X, 0) is Tl but 
not T2 • Also, it is not R-discrete; because 1 is in X and R12 and 1 =f. 2 while {I} is 
not cofinite so not in O. It remains to prove that M is functional, that is 0 = 0+. 
(a) 0 ~ 0+ : This holds iff P is open, iff S is in 0 implies P(S) is in Q, iff S)s 
in 0 implies P-l(P(S)) is in 0, iff Sis cofinite implies P-l(P(S)) is cofinite. But 
S ~ P-l(P(S)), so if Sis cofinite so is P-l(P(S)). 
(b) 0+ ~ 0 : Let S be in 0+. Then p-1 (P( S)) is in 0 and so is cofinite. That 
is, P-l(P(S)) = X - {XI, ... ,xn }. Now there are two subcases: 
(bi) Neither 1 nor 2 is in P-l(P(S)). Then P-l(P(S)) = Sand Sis cofinite as 
required. 
(bii) Both 1 and 2 are in P-l(P(S)). (Since R12 there can't be one without 
the other.) But then S = X - {xl, ... ,xn,l} or S = X - {xl, ... ,xn ,2} or 
S = X - {xl, ... ,xn,1,2}. Whichever, S is cofinite. Thus for either (bi) or (bii), 
S is in 0 as required. 
0 
An example of a space which is T2 with open P but neither functional nor 
R-discrete (thereby showing that open P is weaker than functionality and R-
discreteness even given T2 ) is obtained from the earlier example of the projective 
plane over R (see Chapter 9 end of section 3). Let X = the sphere S2, let 0 be 
the usual topology on S2 which is T2, let Rxy iff x = y or (x, y) are an antipodal 
pair. Then XIR constitutes the projective plane and Q is the usual topology on 
it. Note that S is open in 0 iff S' is open in 0, where S' is the set of antipodes of 
members of S. But R(S) = SuS'; so if S is open R(S) is open. That is, P is an 
open map. But (X,O) is not R-discrete; no singleton is an open set. Hence neither 
is M functional. 

100 
Topology 
These results can be shown in a picture. 
Functionality; 0 = 0+ I 
i Tl 
lT2 
I? 
1 R~ __ ' 
tT~ fT' 
P open; 0 ~ 0+ 
I 
Problem: Under what conditions if any does R-discreteness imply functionality? 
There would also seem to be further directions to explore in this general area. Are 
there further conditions relating Tl to T2 to functionality? What of To spaces? 
The non-To space with the indiscrete topology (any X, R) is of course functional. 
Introducing an additional coarser topology Q- C Q on XIR has connections with 
these concepts; for example, it is known that P is open only if Q- = Q. The 
open closed duality can presumably also be exploited. The aim of this chapter, 
however, has been to show that there is interaction between aspects of inconsistent 
topological structures and their more traditional classical topological features. 

CHAPTER 11: CATEGORY THEORY 
(with Peter Lavers) 
1. Introduction 
It was claimed in Chapter 1 that the broad abstraction principles encountered 
in category theory look interestingly close to inconsistency. Foundational problems 
in category theory are well-summarised in Hatcher [15] pp.255-260, though he does 
not consider paraconsistency. The situation seems to be somewhat similar to that 
in the foundations of set theory, which is hardly surprising. A distinction can be 
made between large and small categories, the former being categories which, were 
they set-like, would contain so many sets that they would have to be proper classes 
(such as the category of sets). These tend to common, as Hatcher points out. 
The problem is that natural tendencies to abstraction lead one to want to consider 
several such categories as a category, and functors between them as morphisms of 
the category. The impulse to do so is normal category-theoretic thinking, but it 
appears that NBG set theory cannot make sense of it. Again, functor categories are 
categories whose objects are functors (between small categories perhaps) and whose 
morphisms are natural transformations between the functors. These appear not to 
be accommodated in a natural way within, say, NBG. Yet such constructions can be 
natural, apparently parallel to other acceptable constructions, and even required by 
the spirit of category theory. Needless to say several theories have been forthcoming 
to place the situation on a consistent footing, but these seem mostly to have various 
ad-hoceries, as with the more familiar case of set theory. At any rate, just as with 
set theory, the case for an inconsistent foundation for category theory, to allow 
adequately for its powerful abstraction principles, looks at least to be worth proper 
investigation. 
However in this chapter we concentrate on a certain kind of category, namely 
toposes. It is well-known that set theory gives rise to Boolean algebra. It was 
realised by Lawvere, Grothendieck and many others that set theory could be weak-

102 
Category Theory 
ened in a natural way to produce a broader class of category-theoretic structures, 
toposes; and that these stand to intuitionist logic, that is the logic of open sets, 
as sets do to classical logic. This brilliant theory proved to have many aspects. 
In quantification theory for example it was seen that toposes yielded a natural 
logic which could be described as higher-order intuitionist type theory. This is not 
surprising given that set theory also can naturally represent type theory, but the 
topos-theoretic representation is structurally deeper. 
Most of this chapter is concerned with the propositional aspects of topos logic. 
Specifying a topological space by its closed sets is as natural as specifying it by 
its open sets. So it would seem odd that topos theory should be associated with 
open sets rather than closed sets. Yet this is what would be the case if open set 
logic were the natural propositional logic of toposes. At any rate, there should be a 
simple 'topological' transformation of the theory of toposes, which stands to closed 
sets and their logic, as topos theory does to open sets and intuitionism. Further-
more, the logic of closed sets is paraconsistent. This is essentially the message of 
Goodman's [13], though we disagree with his pessimistic conclusions, particularly 
concerning implication (see this chapter, section 4). There are, in fact, a number 
of different paraconsistent logics of closed sets, depending on different definitions 
of theoremhood and deducibility. 
In section 2, we define paraconsistent algebras corresponding to closed set logic. 
In section 3 we show that a simple duality transformation of topos theory and its 
[-semantics will produce such paraconsistent logics. In section 4 it is shown that 
there is a reasonable implication operator on these dualised toposes which produces 
a corresponding reasonable implication operator on the logics. This operator can 
also be defined in toposes, which shows that even toposes allow additional rea-
sonable implications to the usual intuitionist implication. In section 5 we sketch 
quantification theory to show that intuitionism has no special claim on the quan-
tificational aspects of the theory. The topological duality of intuitionist and para-
consistent sentential logics, as well as implication on the latter, is also considered 

Closed Set Logic 
103 
in Mortensen and Leishman [40j. 
2. Closed Set Logic 
Definition 11.1. Paraconsistent algebras are distributive lattices with a maxi-
mal element Tr, a minimal element F and a complement operation r. We suppose 
for convenience that these are specified by equational theories, with the order :::; 
defined in the usual way as a :::; b =df a n b = a, equivalently a U b = b. In addi-
tion, paraconsistent algebras satisfy the condition that a U b = Tr iff ra U b = b, 
equivalently iff ra n b = ra. 
These ensure the following further properties of paraconsistent algebras. 
(i) 
aUra=Tr. 
(ii) 
rra U a = a, equivalently rra n a = rra, that is r ra :::; a. 
(iii) r(a n b) :::; ra U rb. 
(iv) r(anra)=Tr. 
(v) 
r(a U b) n (ra U rb) = r(a U b); that is r(a U b) :::; ra n rb. 
(vi) 
In general an ra i= F, and in general aU rra i= rra, i.e. not a :::; rra; but 
these can be equal e.g. when a = Tr or a = F. 
Any closed set topology determines a paraconsistent algebra when ra = the clo-
sure of the set-theoretic (Boolean) complement of the closed set a, U and n are 
set-theoretic union and intersection respectively, Tr = the whole space and F = 
the null set. 
In the next two sections we deal with a propositional language, closed under 
conjunctions /\, disjunctions V, and paraconsistent negations r. Implication --+ is 
not included at first but is considered in section 4. In section 5 quantifiers are 
added. 
Definition 11.2. A paraconsistent valuation is a function I: language --+ P 
assigning atomic wffs to members of a paraconsistent algebra P and matching /\ 

104 
Category Theory 
with n, V with U, and negations r with paraconsistent complements r. 
It is natural to define the consequent relation AI, . .. , An F B, where the A; 
and Bare wifs, to mean (VI)(glb{I(Ai) : 1 ::::; i ::::; n} ::::; I(B)). There are a num-
ber of options for theoremhood (semantic validity of a formula) w.r.t. a particular 
paraconsistent algebra: 
(1) 
FA =df (VI)(I(A) = Tr); 
(2) 
FA =df (VI)(I(A) -j. F); 
(3) 
FA =df (VI)(I(A) E D) where D is some proper filter, e.g. (VI)(I(A) ~ t) 
for some t -j. F. 
Corresponding to each of these there are definitions of theoremhood w.r.t. all 
paraconsistent algebras. If we take a paraconsistent valuation with I(A) = some 
non-null non-universal closed set a, then I(A 1\ rA) = the boundary of ai-F. If 
also I(B) = F and Th = {X : I(X) -j. F}, then both A, rA E Th but B (j. Th. 
(Alternatively, let Th = {X : I(X) E D} where D is some proper filter, e.g. 
D = {X : A 1\ rA ::::; X}.) But Th is a semitheory (respectively, theory) of any 
of the above logics, so they are paraconsistent. Note that A F B V rB but not in 
general A 1\ rA F B, nor A,rA F B. 
3. Propositional Logic in a Category 
A knowledge of basic category-theoretic and topos-theoretic concepts is assumed 
here. For a clear introduction, see e.g. Goldblatt [14]. The following definition then 
dualises the usual definitions for toposes. 
Definition 11.3. A complement-classijierfor a category E with terminal object 
1, is an object n together with an arrow F : 1 -+ n satisfying the condition that 

Propositional Logic in a Category 
for every moni~ arrow f : a >---+ b there exists a unique arrow X J such that 
1 
----+ n 
F 
105 
is a pullback. XJ is the complement-character of f. This generalises the situation 
in Set where F : {O} -t {O, I} has F(O) = 0, and XJ is the characteristic function 
of the set-complement of the image of f. That is, if f : a -t b is a 1-1 function, 
XJ : b -t {O, I} is given by XJ = 1 if x E b - f(a), and XJ(x) = 0 if x E f(a). 
An (elementary) complement-topos is a category with initial and terminal ob-
jects, pullbacks, pushouts, exponentiation, and a complement classifier. It is clear 
that, if E is it complement-topos and E' is the category obtained by renaming F 
as T and each XJ as XJ then E' is a topos; since initial and terminal objects, pull-
backs, pushouts and exponents are prior category-theoretic notions independent of 
classifiers. This enables a dualisation of all topos constructions substituting F for 
T and XJ for Xj, as follows. 
True Tr: 1 -t n is the complement-character of the initial object O. 
o 1 
1 
01 
--+ 
F 
1 1 
Tr=Xo, 
dJ 
n 
This is plausible for a complement-classifier. It is the dual of the definition l.. of 
for toposes. 
Negation ,.: n -t n is the complement-character of Tr 
This dualises -, for toposes. 
Tr 
1 --+ 
1 
1 --+ 
F 

106 
Category Theory 
Disjunction V: n x n -+ n is the complement-character of (F, F) : 1 -+ n x n 
(F,F) 
nxn 
1 ---+ 
1 
1 
V df X(F,F) 
1 
n 
F 
Compare with Set, where the complement of {(O, On in 2 x 2 is {(I, 1), (1,0), (0, 1 n. 
Conjunction 1\: n x n -+ n is given by 
[(Fn, In), (In, Fn)] 
F 
nxn 1 
A" XUFn"nWn,Fn" 
n 
Compare again Set, where the complement of conjunction is {(I, 0), (0, 1), (0, On. 
The above definitions of V and 1\ dualise by reversing those of 1\ and V respectively 
in toposes. 
Let E be a complement-topos with classifier F : 1 -+ n, and let E' be the topos 
obtained by renaming FasT and each XJ as XJ. Let a, b, c, . .. be variables rang-
ing over unspecified arrows of E, let S be an identity statement about E involving 
some of (a, b, c, ... ) as well as some subset of the constant arrows (F, Tr,r, V, 1\), 
and let S' be the statement obtained by substitllting (T, -1, -',1\, V) respectively for 
the latter. Then 
Proposition 11.4. (Duality Theorem) S is true in E if S' is true in E'. 
Proof. 
It is clear that the diagrams for (F,Tr,r, V,I\) are diagrams 
for (T, -1, -',1\, V) where these are renamed, and that compositions, pullbacks, 
pushouts, initial and terminal objects and exponents are prior category-theoretic 
notions unaffected by the renaming. So any construction establishing identity in E 
is under the renaming a construction establishing identity in E' , and vice versa. D 
Definition 11.5. As for the usual [-semantics for toposes, the truth values 
of a complement-topos E are the monies: 1 -+ n, also called elements of n. A 
paraconsistent valuation on E is a function I : language -+ n, in which the atomic 

Propositional Logic in a Category 
107 
wffs are assigned to truth values and the connectives {r, V, I\} agree with their 
complement-topos counterparts. 
Proposition 11.6. The truth values of E form a paraconsistent algebra, when 
Tr is interpreted as the maximal element and F is interpreted as the minimal ele-
ment, and 1\, V are interpreted as n and U respectively. 
Proof. This is a matter of verifying that the conditions for a paraconsistent 
algebra in section two are satisfied, and these are ensured by the duality theorem. 
First one needs a U b = a iff a n b = b; but the dual is a n b = a iff a U b = b which 
holds for open sets and for the elements of n in top os theory. For latticehood one 
needs first the partial order properties (1)-(3): 
(1) 
reflexivity, i.e. a ~ a, i.e. a U a = a n a = a 
(2) 
anti symmetry, i.e. (a U b = b and aU b = a) only if a = b 
(3) 
transitivity, i.e. (a U b = band b U c = c) only if a U c = c. Also: 
(4) 
anb~a,b,i.e. (anb)na=(anb)nb=anb 
(5) 
c ~ an b iff c ~ a and c ~ b, i.e. (a n b) n c = c iff (a n c = c and b n c = c) 
(6) 
a,b~aUb,i.e. aU(aUb)=bU(aUb)=aUb 
(7) 
aU b ~ c iff (a ~ c and b ~ c), i.e. (a U b) U c = c iff (a U c = c and b U c = c). 
Dualised, these are respectively 
(ld) a n a = a U a = a 
(2d) 
(a U b = b and an b = a) only if a = b 
(3d) 
(a n b = band b n c = c) only if a n c = c 
(4d) 
(a U b) U a = (a U b) U b = a U b 
(5d) 
(a U b) U c = c iff (a U c = c and b U c = c) 
(6d) 
a n (a n b) = b n (a n b) = a n b 
(7d) 
(a n b) n c = c iff ((a n c) = c and (b n c) = c). 
These are all facts about truth values in a topos E', indeed facts about lattices of 
open sets. For distributivity, one needs (8) aU (b n c) = (a U b) n (a U c) and 
an (bU c) = (a n b) U (a n c); which dualise to (8d) an (bu c) = (a n b) U (a n c) 
and aU (b n c) = (a U b) n (a U c) which both hold of the elements of toposes. 
The maximality of Tr and minimality of Fare (9) a U Tr = Tr and a n F = F 

108 
Category Theory 
respectively; which dualise to (9d) an 1.. = 1.. and aUT = T. These assert the 
minimality of 1.. and the maximality of T and hold of E' as desired. Finally one 
needs (10) aU b = Tr iff ra U b = b. Dualised this is (10d) an b = 1.. iff"a n b = b, 
i.e. an b = 1.. iff b :::: "ai but this is the condition for pseudo-complements in the 
topos E', and holds of open sets when "a is the interior of the Boolean complement 
of a and 1.. is the null set (Goldblatt [14], p.l79). 
0 
One can go to verify that the consequent further properties (i )-( vi) of paracon-
sistent algebras specified in section 2 also hold of complement-toposes. 
(i) 
aUra = Tr dualises to an"a = 1.. which holds of the truth values of a topos 
as well as of open sets. 
(ii) 
rra U a = a, i.e. rra :::: a, dualises to -'''a n a = a, i.e. a :::: -,-,a, which holds 
of open sets. 
(iii) r(a n b) = ra U rb dualises to -,(a U b) = -'a n -,b which holds of open sets. 
(iv) r( a n ra) = Tr dualises to -,( aU -,a) = l.. ; the Boolean complement of a U -,a 
is a boundary, so its interior is the null set. 
(v) 
r(a U b) n (ra n rb) = r(a U b), i.e. r(a U b) :::: ra n rb, dualises to -,(a n b) U 
(-,a U -,b) = -,(a n b), i.e. -'a U -,b:::: -,(a n b), which holds of open sets. 
(vi) an ra i- F, and aU rra i- rra i.e. not a :::: rra, dualise to aU -'a i- T 
and aU-'-'a i- -'-'a i.e. not -'-'a:::: a, and these are in general inequalities for 
open sets. 
But the inequalities become equalities when a = Tr or a = F; since Tr n rTr = F, 
Tr U rrTr = rrTr, F n rF = F and F U rrF = rrF dualise respectively to 
l.. U -,l.. = T, l.. n -,-,l.. = -,-,l.., T U -,T = T and Tn .,-,T = -,-,T, all of which hold 
in toposes. 
Thus we now have from the previous two propositions and according to the 
definitions of theoremhood and deducibility of section 2. 
Proposition 11.7. The set of all paraconsistent valuations on a complement-
topos determines a paraconsistent logic. 
o 

Implication 
109 
4. Implication 
It is time to come clean about implication, on which the authors of this chapter 
hold slightly different views. The usual intuitionist story defines =>: n x n --t n 
n 
as Xe , where e is the equaliser e : 0>-t n x n .:::::. n; and then for any arrows j, 9 
prj 
which are truth values: 1 --t n, defines j => 9 to be => 0 (f,g), where (f,g) is the 
usual product map: 1 --t n x n. 
We note here that III toposes there also exists e' as the equaliser 
u 
e' : ~ >-t n x n .:::::. n as well as versions substituting pr2 for prl. In the cor-
\J 
prj 
, 
responding complement-topos, the same constructions obviously exist, with the 
property that (f, g) factors through e in the topos iff (f, g) factors through e' in 
the complement-topos, and similarly with e and e' reversed. 
PL thinks that the right dualisation of Xe in the topos is Xel in the complement-
topos. Xe' 
0 (f,g) corresponds to Curry's 9 - j; but this produces j --t j = F, 
for every truth value f. It isn't obvious how to avoid this consequence if one has 
X without X. PL favors having both; which strictly takes one outside toposes, but 
has the advantage of allowing a truth range and a falsity range for every concept. 
CM thinks that there is at least one simple and reasonable implication on any 
lattice, namely j => 9 = Tr if j ::; g, else j => 9 = F. This can be produced in 
complement toposes as follows. 
Proposition 11.8. Let j and 9 be truth values j, 9 : 1 --t n. Then the product 
map (f, g) is exactly one of two types. 
Type 1. The domain d of the pullback arrow (i,j) : d --t 0 is not isomorphic 
with 1. 
d 
(i, j) 
0 
1 
PB 
le 
1 
>-----+ nxn 
(f, g) 

110 
Type 2. (J, g) factors through e : @>-+ n x n 
@ 
/le 
1 >------+ n x n 
(f, g) 
where (J,g)F is the factorisation of (J,g) through e. 
Category Theory 
Proof. Consists of proving that (J,g) is of type 2 iff d ~ 1 in diagram l. 
L to R : Draw the diagram: 
It is desired to prove that! is iso. Now (J,g) 0 ! = e 0 (i,j) by the pullback. But 
(J,g) = eo (J,g)F by the factorisation. So eo (J,g)F 0 ! = eo (i,j). But e is monic, 
so left-cancellable; hence (J,g) 0 ! = (i,j). But (i,j) is monic since (J,g) is, by 
the pullback. So (J,g) 0 ! is monic. But then! is monic (Goldblatt p.39 Ex(2)). 
Now! is certainly epic, so ! is both epic and monic. But in any complement-topos, 
as in any topos, an epic monic is iso (proof of this by running through Goldblatt 
pp.l09-110 substituting F for T and Xl for Xj, and then for the Corollary noting 
that Theorem 2 p.57 is independent of the dualisation). Thus d ~ 1. 
R to L : If ! is iso then it has an inverse ! -1. Then (J, g) F can be defined as 
(i,j) 0 !-1. This is because the arrow (i,j) 0 !-1 : 1 --+ @ is unique in making the 
diagram commute: if k : 1 --+ @ is any other arrow making the diagram commute, 
then we have that (J, g) = e 0 (i,j) 0 !-1 = e 0 k; but since e is monic and 
left-cancellable, k = (i,j) 0 !-1 as required for the definition. That is, (J,g) factors 
through @, so (J, g) is of type 2. 
0 
Now let l1,g1'/2,g2 be truth values such that (J1,g1) is type 1 and (!2,g2) is 
type 2 .. {Note that there is at least one of each type: (Tr, F) is type 1 and (F, Tr) 

Implication 
III 
is type 2.) Draw the composite diagram: 
d 
(i, j) 
@ 
(f2' g2)F 
1 
1 
PB 
1
e ~ 
(f1,gl) 
1 
nxn 
1 
9".119,,, 
1 
n 
F 
where d,# 1; and where '*"9' is defined to be XU"91) and '*hg2 is defined to be 
Trnxn, i.e. Tr 0 Inxn, where Inxn : n x n -t 1. (Note that '* "g, could be defined 
as Fnxn with the same result.) 
Definition 11.9. Let f, 9 be any truth values. Then 
f,*g=df '*fg o (f,g). 
Note that f '* 9 : 1 -t n is a truth value, and the '* fg : n x n -t n. 
Proposition 11.10. f '* 9 = Tr if f ::::; g; else f '* 9 = F. 
Proof. If f 
~ g, then (f,g) factors through e; hence '*1g= Troxo, and 
f '* 9 = Trnxn 0 (f, g). The latter can be shown to equal Tr as follows: 
Trnxn 0 (f, g) = (Tr 0 Inxo) 0 (f, g) = Tr 0 (Inxn 0 (f, g)). 
Now Inxn 0 (f,g) : 1 -t 1; but there is a unique arrow 1 -t 1, viz h. So 
f '* 9 = Tr 0 h = Tr. 
Else (f,g) is of the type 1 and '*fg= XU,g); so that f '* 9 = XU,g) 0 (f,g) = F. D 
There is obviously an identical account of implication for toposes, so it is not 
even true that toposes support a single account of implication, even setting aside 
the existence of complement-toposes. The present account is reasonable from at 
least two points of view; it is a reasonable implication, and its category-theoretic 

112 
Category Theory 
account is not too complex. Also the latter is reasonably general in that it can 
obviously be easily modified to produce other implications. 
We stress that the importance of implication can be over estimated: implication 
is an object-language expression of the metalinguistic p, which is always available 
for {V,/\,r} logic as in section 2. These constructions also bear out the fact that 
some natural implications such as the intuitionist Xe are "Sensitive to the classifier; 
while others such as that of the present section have deeper, topological invariance. 
It seems, further, that it is the topological aspects which support intuitionist and 
paraconsistent theories as alternatives to classical theories. 
5. Quantification Theory 
Our main concern has not been quantification theory; if only because of its 
extent, variety and complexity, but also because it is the topological duality of 
intuitionism and paraconsistency which mostly interests us; but something should 
be said. It seems to us that there are no further substantial changes to be made 
to obtain a reasonable quantifier logic. Elementary quantification logic needs a 
re-interpretation in the light of the duality. It is seen that this is achieved by 
replacement of (Va, :la) by (:la, Va) throughout, as might be expected given their 
roles as generalised conjunction and disjunction. Higher-order logic seems to be 
independent of the dualisation, since it derives from Cartesian closedness of the 
category, which is prior to the dualisation. Again this is not unexpected given that 
set theory supports classical type theory. These points are expanded on briefly 
below. 
This section follows the admirable exposition in Goldblatt [14] pp.238-248. One 
has for toposes (i) Vab = T if a = b, else Vab of T, and (ii) :lab = T if b of A, 
else :lab of T; where a is any object in the category and functions as the domain 
of quantification or universal set for the quantifiers and A is the null set. The 
elements of a are the morphisms x : 1 -t a which provide the interpretation of 

Quantification Theory 
113 
terms; m-place predicates (atomic or complex) are morphisms from am to n, with 
a distinguished set of elements namely those mapped to T. Closed sentences take 
values in n which is a complete Heyting algebra, and then are combined by the 
intuitionist sentential operators. 
A diagram can be constructed. 
r true" 1 
In" 
I ~ Ii 
1 
( 
~ 
_________________ am 
x 
I X 
x 
F-
Ca 
a 
Va 
a 
a 
or 
or 
1
1• 
Xrtrue.l 
x" 
1 
n 
T 
~m is an arbitrary m-adic predicate, [~lm is its semantic interpretation as a map 
from am -+ n, and r true; and 1~li are exponential adjoints of truea 0 pra and 
[~lm 0 Tim+! respectively. Va is defined to be the character of rtrue;. Moving to 
complement-toposes, it is reasonable to take designated values to be all elements 
other than F, as mentioned in section 2. Replacing T by the F of complement-
toposes, renaming truea as falsea and r true; as rfalse;, and renaming Va as :la, one 
has by the same construction as in toposes, that :lab = F if a = b, else :lab -=I- F. 
Now this is reasonable if b is the set of elements of a for which ~ is 'absolutely 
false' or perhaps 'consistently false', that is F. That is to say, :lavi~m is F if the 
counter-extension b of ~ is identical with a. Thus :la is the complement-character 
of rfalse;. Similarly, in toposes :la is the character of the image of the composite 
Pa 0 Ca, where Pa is the first projection arrow: na x a -+ na. Renaming this as Va 
in complement-toposes, one obtains Vab = F if b -=I- A, else Vab -=I- F. Again this is 
reasonable if b is the set of elements of a of which ~ is absolutely false. That is, 
Vav~ is F when the set of elements of a of which ~ is consistently false is non-null, 
else V a v~ is non-F. 

114 
Category Theory 
There are very many aspects of quantification theory of toposes which we do 
not deal with, but identity and higher order types deserve mention. It is customary 
to treat identity as a logical symbol; so that it is built into the assignment clause 
for identity that r t = t does not hold. In light of the earlier chapters, this is not 
natural for complement-toposes, and so one should discard assignment clauses for 
identity such as that on Goldblatt p.246. Higher order logic and type theory is 
obtained in topos theory because of the fact that toposes, being Cartesian closed 
categories, contain all powerobjects, which serve as semantic values of syntactic 
types. However, powerobjects are prior to the classifier, so it is to be expected that 
these constructions go over to complement-toposes unchanged. This is perhaps not 
so surprising given that a parallel construction can be done for classical logic and 
set theory with powersets. 
6. Conclusion 
It hardly bears saying that a complement-topos really is a topos, it is just a 
matter of how one understands the notion of a subobject classifier. This can be 
masked by the usual terminology of T : 1 ~ n, rather than F as we have. There 
are various natural paraconsistent propositional logics arising from the [-semantics 
of complement-toposes, and thus from toposes. The bias toward intuitionism is at 
least not justified by these structural aspects of a topos, since it depends on how 
they are interpreted. 
We conclude this section by raising the question of whether there is a construc-
tion internal to topos theory (rather than dualising 'outside' the topos as we have) 
which also yields paraconsistent logic. This seems not unreasonable. It also seems 
reasonable to think that there are other avenues of the dualisation; for example 
closed set sheaves, which are accordingly explored in the next chapter. 

CHAPTER 12: CLOSED SET SHEAVES AND THEIR 
CATEGORIES 
(by William James) 
1. Introduction 
With this chapter we examine categorial sheaves over the closed sets of a topo-
logical space. Aside from the historical interest that sheaves seem to have been 
defined over closed sets first before the more usual definition over open sets, there 
are a number of other reasons for developing the theory of sheaves over closed sets. 
First of all having a base topology of closed sets gives us a working concept of 
boundary that does not exist for the open set sheaf notion. One area in which 
this may work for us is the mathematics of physics. Lawvere in the introduction 
to Categories in Continuum Physics [21] mentions the speculation that there is a 
role for a closed set sheaf in thermodynamics as a functor from a category of parts 
of a body to a category of "abstract thermodynamical state-and-process systems" 
(p.9). Another reason for closed set sheaves is their effect on categorial logic. A 
closed set topology ordered by set inclusion is a paraconsistent algebra. Via the 
sheaves we can introduce this paraconsistency to toposes. 
The first two sections contain a brief description of some of the existing theory of 
categorial sheaves. We note that categories of sheaves as standardly understood are 
toposes. It will be our claim that categories of SET-valued sheaves over the closed 
sets of a topological space are toposes in just the same way. Since the existence of a 
subobject classifier and the resulting subobject classifying maps is a defining feature 
of a topos, we will be obliged to show, contrary to some standard presentations, 
that there is a construction for the classifying arrows X of sheaf monics that does 
not rely on U-completeness of the base space topology. We establish the necessary 
construction as a corollary to a theorem at the end of section two. This clears the 
way for section three where we briefly justify the notion of a sheaf over closed sets 
and the claim that the category of all sheaves over the closed sets of topological 

116 
Closed Set Sheaves and Categories 
space is a topos. 
In essence what we describe is a category, indeed a topos, of sheaves over a 
closed set topology understood as a poset category. It should be noted that our 
discussion ultimately is given in terms of the theory of j-sheaves and as a result 
the categories we describe are not necessarily equivalent to categories of continuous 
local homeomorphisms or sheaf spaces. We therefore emphasise a particular type 
of j-sheaf category: one that includes a set theoretic covering system for the base 
topology. It will then be appropriate to describe our particular construction as a 
category of sheaves. 
For a category C any contravariant functor cop -+ SET is called a SET-valued 
presheaf The SET-valued sheaves are a special subset of the presheaves. Through-
out this discussion we assume that C is a small category. 
2. Pretopologies and Topologies for Categories 
This section follows similar discussions in Johnstone [15aJ and in Goldblatt [14J. 
Definition 12.1. A pretopologyon a category C with pullbacks is a system 
P where for each C-object U there is a set P(U). Each P(U) contains families of 
C-morphisms {Ui ~ 
U : i E I}. The following conditions are satisfied. 
(i) 
for each U E C, {idu} E P(U); 
(ii) 
if V -+ U in C and {Ui ~ 
U : i E I} E P(U), then {V Xu Ui ~ 
V : i E I} 
in P(V). Note 11"1 is the pullback in C of Qi along V -+ U; 
(iii) 
if {Ui ~ 
U: i E I} E P(U), and for each i E I, {Vik ~ 
Ui : k E I<;} E 
P(U;), then {Vik ~ 
Ui ~ 
U : i E I, k E Ki } E P(U). Note that Vik is 
an example of a double indexed object rather than the intersection of Vi and 

Pretopologies and Topologies for Categories 
117 
The notion of a pretopology is a categorial generalisation of a system of (set the-
oretic) covers on a topology T where a coverfor U E T is a set {U; : Ui E T, i E I} 
such that U{Ui : i E I} = U. The generalisation is achieved by noting that the 
topology ordered by inclusion is a (poset) category and that any cover corresponds 
to a collection of inclusion arrows Ui --+ U. Given this, any family of arrows con-
tained in P(U) of a pretopology is also called a cover. 
Definition 12.2. In analogy with sheaves over a topological space we have 
the notion of sheaves over categories with pretopologies. We shall say that any 
contravariant functor F : cop ----> SET is a sheaf just in case for each U E C and for 
each {Ui ~ 
U : i E I} E P(U), we have an equaliser 
do 
F(U)----t II F(U;) ====t II F(Ui Xu Uj ) 
iEI 
d1 
i,j 
where do and d1 are product arrows determined respectively by the images under 
F of the first and second projection maps Ui Xu Uj --+ Ui and Ui Xu Uj --+ Uj, all 
i,j E I. 
Pretopologies do not in general uniquely determine a category of sheaves. To 
do that we need the notion of a (categorial) topology. 
Definition 12.3. For an object U in a category C aU-sieve is a family R 
of C-morphisms with codomain U such that if V ~ U E Rand W !!.." V is any 
C-morphism, then the composite W !!.." V ~ U E R. (Some writers make no 
terminological distinction between sieves and their categorial duals. Others do, 
and name the duals cribles. Still others, notably Goldblatt [14], use the opposite 
naming convention, their crible being our sieve). A topology on C is a system J 
of sets J(U) for each U E C where each J(U) is a set of U-sieves called covering 
sieves. We have the following conditions: 

118 
Closed Set Sheaves and Categories 
A system J is a topology for C if: 
(i) 
for any U E C, the maximal sieve {o:: cod(o:) = U} E J(U); 
(ii) 
if R 
E 
J(U) 
and V 
~ U is 
a 
morphism of C, 
then 
1*(R) = {W ~ V : f . 0: E R} is in J(V); 
(iii) 
if R E J(U) and 5 is a sieve on U where for each (V ~ U) E R we have 
1*(5) in J(V), then 5 E J(U). 
Note that a collection of morphisms with codomain U can be a U-sieve without 
being a covering sieve on U. 
A small category C together with a topology J is called a site. We now define a 
sheaf on a site (C, J) to be any contravariant functor F : cop --. SET satisfying the 
equaliser condition expressed in terms of covering sieves for U rather than covers. 
A category of sheaves on a site is called a Grothendieck topos and denoted sh(C, J). 
Proposition 12.4. (Johnstone, [15a]) Any Grothendieck topos is an elemen-
tary topos. 
0 
Proposition 12.5. Given a pretopology P we can define a topology J that will 
give rise to the same sheaves on C. We say that for any U E C, we have R E J(U) 
iff R contains a pretopology cover {O:i : i E I} E P( U). 
0 
Definition 12.6. The category of all presheaves on C is denoted SETCoP and 
when C is a small category, SETCoP is a topos (Goldblatt, [14], pp.204-210). The 
classifier object in SETCoP is a presheaf f! : cop --. SET where for U E C, 
f!(U) = {all sieves on U}, 
and for V ~ U in C, f!(J) : f!(U) --. f!(V) (also denoted f!~) is given by 
f!(U) 3 5 f-+ {W ~ V : f . 0: E 5} E f!(V). 
When all arrows in C are inclusions this becomes 5 f-+ {W : W <;:; V and W E 5}. 

Pretopologies and Topologies for Categories 
119 
A topology J exists as a presheaf J : cop -+ SET where we have C 3 U 1--+ J(U) 
and for any V .L U in C the map J(f) : J(U) -+ J(V) is given by R 1--+ f*(R). 
Clearly, J is a subobject of n; that is, an inclusion J -+ n exists. The classifying 
map associated with this inclusion is denoted by j, and since it has proven possible 
to describe the same category of sheaves on C in terms of either J or j, that map 
j : n -+ n is also called a topology. Note that J is a topology on C and j is a 
topology in SETCoP • 
The notion of a topology as an endomorphism of the classifier object has been 
extended to all elementary toposes. 
Defi~ition 12.7. Any map j : n -+ n in a topos £ is a topology in £ if the 
following conditions are met: 
(i) 
j. true = true; 
(ii) j'j=j; 
(iii) n· (j x j) = j . n. 
Sheaves are then distinguished objects of £ identified with respect to j. Such objects 
are called j-sheaves. A monic X' ~ X E £ is called j-dense if its classifying map 
x'" factors through J >-t n. 
Proposition 12.8. For any topos £, an object F is a j-sheaf if and only if for 
any £-arrow fJ : X' -+ F and any j-dense monic a : X' >-t X there is exactly one 
fJ' : X -+ F such that the following diagram commutes: 
F 
The category of sheaves identified in this manner is a full sub-category of £ and 
will be denoted shj(£). 

120 
Closed Set Sheaves and Categories 
Proposition 12.9. (Johnstone, [15a]) If £ is a topos with topology j : n -+ n, 
then shj (£) is also a topos. 
o 
3. Subobject Classifiers 
We have seen described in Definition 12.6 the standard construction of the 
classifier object for SET-valued presheaf categories. We complete the description 
by giving the cosntruction for the classifier arrow true and subobject classifying 
arrows. We follow this with a dependent construction for the subobject classifier 
of a j-sheaf category. We include a theorem about that construction. 
Definition 12.10. The map true: 1 -+ n in SETcop is a natural transformation 
given by components true .. for all a E C. The functor 1 is given by C 3 U 1-+ {0} 
with the obvious restriction maps. Clearly this is a terminal object for SETCoP. 
The components of true are true .. : {0} -+ n(a) where true .. (0) = maximal a-sieve. 
Equally, 1 is a j-sheaf for any j (trivially true by Proposition 12.8) and will be 
terminal for the sheaf category shj(SETcop ). 
For any SETcop -monic T : F>-+ G the classifying arrow X T is a natural trans-
formation G -+ n given by components (X T) .. : G( a) -+ n( a) such that for any 
x E G(a), we have 
(XT) .. (X) = {b -+ a: Gb(x) E Tb(F(b))} 
where b -+ a is a C-morphism, Gg is the restriction map G(a) -+ G(b), and Tb is the 
b-component F(b) -+ G(b) of the natural transformation T. It is straightforward to 
confirm that X T is a natural transformation and is the unique map that makes the 
following a pullback in SErcop. 

Subobject Classifiers 
121 
Proposition 12.11 (as taken from [14], p.371). The category shj{SETCoP ) has a 
subobject classifier and it can be described by the following SETCOf' -diagram where 
e is an equaliser and truej is the unique arrow making the diagram commute: 
e 
idn 
fh 
,f2===m 
~ 
;I' 
j 
true/··......... / 
true 
1 
So, given that we are dealing with SET-valued functors, for all a E C, we have 
flj(a) = {S : S E f2(a) and (idn)a(S) = ja(S)}. 
o 
We intend now to show that the classifying maps, X~, for monies, T : F>-t G in 
shj(SETCoP ) ¥e similarly related to classifying maps for monies in SETCOf'. First 
we need 
Proposition 12.12. (Johnstone, [ISa]) For any topos £ with topology j, the 
category shj (£) has finite limits and the inclusion functor shj(£) -+ £ preserves 
them. 
o 
In essence, the limit in £ of a finite diagram of j-sheaves is a j-sheaf. And 
in particular a pullback in shj(SETCoP ) is a pullback in SETCOf' and a pullback in 
SETCOf' of j-sheaves is a pullback in shj(SETCoP ). As a corollary, any shj(£)-monic 
is monic in £ and any morphism between j-sheaves that is monic in £ is monic in 
shj (£). This holds since any map A ~ B is monic if and only if the following is a 
pullback. 
----+ 
B 
u 

122 
Closed Set Sheaves and Categories 
Proposition 12.13. When £ is a topos with topology j and T : F>--+ G is a 
shj(£)-monic, we have x,. = e· X! . 
Proof. Consider the diagram 
E 
Let T be a monic and the inner square be a pullback in shj (£). Let X = e· X!. We 
will refer to parts of the above diagram by (clockwise) vertices. So, {F, G, nj, I} is 
the inner square, that is, the pullback diagram for truej and X!. 
Map e is an equaliser and therefore monic, so 
X! . T = truej . f iff e . X! . T = X . T = e . truej . f 
(The conditional, if LHS then RHS, is trivial). In other words {F, G, nj, I} com-
mutes iff {F,G,n,l} commutes. Likewise, we prove that {E,G,nj,l} commutes 
iff {E, G, n, I} commutes and indeed that {F, G, nj, I} is a pullback iff {F, G, n, I} 
is a pullback. But {E, G, nj, I} is a pullback; and since e . truej = true, there is, 
by definition, exactly one X that makes {E,G,n,l} a pullback in £, namely X,.. 
SO, e . X! = x,. . 
0 
Corollary. For SET-valued j-sheaves over a category C, any a E C, and any 
sheaf monomorphism T, we have x!(a) = x,.(a). 
Proof. The nature of equalisers in SET. 
o 

Closed Set Sheaves 
123 
4. Closed Set Sheaves 
Typically sheaves over topological spaces are defined in terms of the open sets 
of the base space. The notion of a category of sheaves over a site allows us to define 
a category of sheaves over the closed sets of a topological space and announce that 
these categories are toposes. 
Given a closed set topology T we can define a covering system C where for each 
U E T we have C(U) = {{Ui : Ui E T} : U = U{Ui : Ui E T}}. Now, any topology T 
is partially ordered by set inclusion, so any topology forms a poset category where 
all morphisms are the inclusions. For that category let R = {Ui ~ 
U : i E I} 
be any pretopology cover. Since between any two objects of T there can be at 
most on earrow and it must be an inclusion, we can interpret R to be a family 
{dom(ai) : ai E R} of elements of T. The defining conditions for a pretopology 
become: 
(i) 
for each U E T, {U} E P(U); 
(ii) 
if V ~ U in T and {Ui : i E I} E P(U), then {V n Ui : i E I} E P(V); 
(iii) 
if {Ui : i E I} E P(U) and for each i E I there exists {Yii : k E K;} E P(Ui), 
then {Yii : k E 1<;, i E I} E P(U). 
Plainly, if we define C as suggested above then, in essence, we have a pretopology 
for the poset category. Given a pretopology C we can define a (categorial) topology 
J for category SETToP that will give rise to the same category of sheaves. 
The constructions for the toposes sh(T, J) and shj(SETPP ) are then standard. 
We can use either an appropriate version of the equaliser condition Definition 12.2, 
or Proposition 12.8, to identify those functors in SETPP that are sheaves over 
closed sets. In sum: 
Proposition 12.14. The category of sheaves over the closed sets of a topological 
space forms a topos. 

124 
Closed Set Sheaves and Categories 
This theory can be extended in a number of directions. One is to identify 
constructions in toposes of closed set sheaves dual to various morphisms in toposes. 
It is asserted here that the pseudo-difference arrow (p.108), dual to intuitionist 
implication, does exist in such categories (proof omitted, see forthcoming). 

CHAPTER 13: DUALITY 
The first people to take the view that incompleteness and inconsistency are 
somehow equally reasonable, seem to have been Da Costa and the Brazilian school 
of logicians, and independently the Routleys. The idea expressed itself in Brazilian 
logic in the paraconsistent C-Iogics, dualising by abandoning the law of Noncon-
tradiction '" (A & "'A), rather than Excluded Middle A V '" A as in intuitionismj 
and additionally adopting the opposite Double Negation axiom to intuitionism. 
The Routleys proposed their *-operation on theories (see Definition 3.4 or below), 
which had the property that for any background logic satisfying minimal condi-
tions, the * of an incomplete theory is an inconsistent theory and vice versa. The 
capacity to admit both inconsistent and incomplete theories was seen as essential 
to, and explicative of, relevance, at least at the propositional level. Neither the 
Brazilians nor the Routleys appealed to topological duality, which has only be-
come clear more recently, but which would seem to be an expression of Brazilian 
intuitions. 
This chapter briefly surveys the *-operationj then applies it to open and closed 
set theories, then finds an alternative to the *-operation which has different but 
similar effects. 
Recalling Definitions 2.8 and 3.4, an L-semitheory is a set of sentences Th closed 
under the rule: if A is in Th and rL A -t B then B is in Th. An L-theory is an 
L-semitheory closed under conjunctions. An L-semitheory is prime if whenever a 
disjunction is in it at least one of the disjuncts is also. And for the *-operation, 
Th* = {A : ",A is not in Th}. 

126 
Duality 
Proposition 13.1. (Routleys) 
(1) If f-L (A -t B) -t (rvB -t rvA) then Th is an L-semitheory iff Th* is an 
L-semitheory. 
(2) If in addition De Morgan's Laws and the Double Negation Law are theorems 
of L then Th is an L-theory iff Th* is a prime L-semitheory. 
(3) 
Under the same conditions as (2), This a prime L-theory iff T h* is a prime 
L-theory. 
(4) 
If h A +-7 rvrvA (Double Negation Law) then Th** = Th. 
(5) 
If f- L A +-7 rvrv A then This inconsistent iff T h * is incomplete. 
(6) If L = classical logic and Th is nontrivial then Th* = Th. 
(1), (3) and (6) can be described as *-invariance results. (4) is an involution 
result. Attention is drawn to (5) which is a duality result of a different kind from 
the previous chapter. However, * also has interesting effects on theories of open set 
logics and closed set logics. 
Definition 13.2. A theory on a closed set logic or open set logic is simple iff 
sentences are assigned only to either (i) the whole space, (ii) the null set, (iii) any 
boundary, (iv) any coboundary, that is the whole space minus a boundary. 
Obviously (iii) and (iv) cannot both hold if the logic has only open sets, or 
only closed sets, in it (PJ4 has both). Also, theories need not be simple: consider 
the closed set topology {!\, {x}, (-00, x], [x, +(0), R} where, the third and fourth 
elements are not boundaries. 
Proposition 13.3. 
(1) Let L be a closed set logic with all elements but F designated. If Th is an 
inconsistent complete simple theory then Th* is the consistent complete (simple) 
theory formed by dropping all sentences A such that both A and rvA both hold in 
Th. 

Duality 
127 
(2) Let L be an open set logic with just T designated. If Th is a consistent 
incomplete simple theory then Th* is the consistent complete theory formed by 
adding all sentences A such that neither A nor rvA hold in Th. 
Proof. 
(1) Let A and rvA be in Th. Clearly by the definition of *, A is not in Th*. But 
in Th, I(A) must be a boundary, so I(rvrvA) = the null set, and so rvrvA is not in 
Th. Hence ",A is in Th*. 
(2) Let neither A nor ",A be in Th. By the definition of *, A is in Th*. But in 
Th, I(A) must be a coboundary, so I(rv"'A) = the whole space and ",,,,A is in Th. 
Hence ",A is not in Th*. 
0 
Thus, to inconsistentise a consistent complete theory one can add various atomic 
sentences A such that rv A holds, and evaluate as a simple theory in a closed set 
logic; whereas to incompletise, one can drop various atomic sentences A such that 
rvA does not hold and evaluate as a simple theory in an open set logic. 
Definition 13.4. TP = df {A: ",A is in Th}. 
Proposition 13.5. 
(1) Let L be a closed set logic and Th be an inconsistent complete simple theory. 
Then TP is the consistent complete theory formed by dropping all ",(2n+I) A and 
adding all ",(2n) A, such that A is atomic and both A and ",A are in Th. 
(2) Let L be an open set logic and Th be a consistent incomplete simple theory. 
Then TP is the consistent complete theory formed by adding all ",(2n+l) A and 
dropping all rv(2n) A, such that A is atomic and neither A nor rvA are in Th. 
Proof. 
(1) Let A and rvA hold in Th. Clearly A is in TP. Since Th is simple, rvrvA is 
not in Th, so ",A is not in TP. Since ",,,,rvA is in Th, ",,,,A is in Th x etc. 
(2) Let neither A nor rvA be in Th. Clearly A is not in TP. Since Th is simple, 
rv",A is in Th, so ",A is in TP. Since ",,,,rvA is not in Th, rv",A is not in TP etc. 
o 

128 
Duality 
These results contribute to the duality between incompleteness and inconsis-
tency, and at the same time demonstrate the utility of * and x in connection with 
these notions. 

CHAPTER 14: FOUNDATIONS: 
PROVABILITY, TRUTH AND SETS 
(with Joshua Cole) 
1. Introduction 
It is appropriate to end with a chapter on topics in what has been called in this 
I 
century the foundations of mathematics, if only to draw attention to the disavowal 
of foundationalism in mathematics, but also to draw the attention of mathemati-
cians to the fact that the foundations constitute a mathematically interesting area. 
Furthermore, the paraconsistent approach grows historically out of logic, which has 
certainly been part of the usual conception of foundational studies. 
Three areas are considered: provability, truth and sets. First there is considered 
the fate of the classical G8del sentence and thus the concept of provability, in the 
finite inconsistent arithmetics. It turns out that it becomes a truth predicate in a 
certain weak sense. The question of stronger senses of the truth predicate (which 
can be distinguished inconsistently but not classically) remains open. Second, we 
review the well-known use of a fixed point method in connection with the truth 
predicate, as demonstrated by Kripke. Third, we review the application of the fixed 
point method by Gilmore and Brady to set theory. This demonstrates the existence 
of incomplete and inconsistent set theories with naive comprehension. In the latter 
the inconsistent Russell set can be demonstrated to exist (non-well-founded sets). 
This is a highly desirable state of affairs, since it has the prospect of mathematics 
being able to rely on the full generality of set abstraction: given any property, one 
can collect up into a set just the things having that property. It turns out that both 
uses of the fixed point method produce incomplete as well as inconsistent theories, 
which are Routley-*-duals of one another. 

130 
Foundations: Provability, Truth and Sets 
2. Provability 
G8del's first and second incompleteness theorems arise by means of a partial 
mapping of the metalanguage of arithmetic into its object language. Specifically, 
one represents (a) the concept of provability via the provability predicate Prov(x), 
and (b) the capacity for self reference via the Diagonal Lemma. From these it is a 
short argument to the first incompleteness theorem, namely that if an (axiomatis-
able) arithmetical theory Th is consistent then it is incomplete. On the other hand, 
if the mapping of the metalanguage were not partial but total in the sense that 
one were able to represent the truth predicate in the object language while retain-
ing self reference/diagonalisability, then one could demonstrate the inconsistency 
of Thj that is, Tarski's theorem, which essentially amounts to the Liar paradox. 
The parallel between the G8del sentence 'This sentence is unprovable' and the 
Liar sentence 'This sentence is false', is obvious and striking, and has been noted 
many times. That is to say, the provability predicate is the nearest one gets within 
consistent arithmetic to the truth predicate, the G8del sentence is the consistent 
arithmetical analog of the Liar sentence, and the first incompleteness theorem is 
the consistent counterpart of the Liar paradox. 
This section aims to contribute to these observations by demonstrating that 
when one moves to inconsistent extensions of classical arithmetics, specifically the 
finite moduli arithmetics, then the provability predicate becomes, in a sense to be 
specified, a truth predicate. The consequence of this result is that in appropriate 
inconsistent theories the G8del sentence is, in the same sense, the Liar sentence. 
2.1 Consistent Preliminaries 
In this section, the terminology and approach to the classical logic case of the 
G8del theorems is summarised, drawing on the approach of Boolos and Jeffrey [4aJ. 
We deal with classical arithmetical theories containing Robinson arithmetic Q as a 
subtheory, including Peano arithmetic Pi. 

Provability 
131 
Definition 14.1. If X is any arithmetical sentence, r X.., denotes the G8del 
number of X. A predicate F(x) is said to be a provability predicate for a theory 
Th iff for any sentence X : 
(i) 
if f-Th X then f-Th F(rX"') 
and (ii) 
f-Th F(rX:) y"'):) (F(rX"'):) F(ry,)) 
and (iii) 
f-Th F(rX"') :) F(rF(rX"')"'). 
If F(x) is a provability predicate for Th, we denote F(x) also by ProvTh(x)j but it 
should be noted that in general there is more than one provability predicate for a 
given Th. 
Proposition 14.2. Peano Arithmetic P# and Robinson Arithmetic Q have 
provability predicates. 
Definition 14.3. A set S of sentences is said to be definable in Q iff there is a 
predicate Prov.(x) such that for any sentence X 
(i) 
if XES then f-QProv.(rX"') 
and (ii) 
if X rt S then f-Q ",Prov.(rX"'). 
Proposition 14.4. Any recursive set, and in particular the set of theorems of 
any axiomatisable complete theory, is definable in Q. 
Definition 14.5. A function f(x) is said to be representable in Q iff there 
is a predicate F(x,y) such that for any natural numbers a,b if f(a) = b then 
f-Q (Vy)(F(m, y) == y = n), where m, n represent a, b respectively in the arithmeti-
cal language of F. (This definition generalises to the case where x is an n-tuple 
but that does not concern us here.) 
Proposition 14.6. Every recursive function is representable in Q. 
Proposition 14.7. (Diagonal Lemma) For any predicate F(x), there is a 
sentence H such that f-Q H == F(rH"'). In particular, since ",ProvQ(x) and 
",Provp#(x) are such predicates, there are sentences GQ and Gp# such that 
f-Q GQ ==",ProvQ(rGri) and f-Q Gp# ==",provp#(rGpi). 

132 
Foundations: Provability, Truth and Sets 
Intuitively, H "says" in Q and any supertheory: 'This sentence has the property 
F', while GQ and Gp# "say" 'This sentence is unprovable in Q/ P#'. GTh is called 
a/the Godel sentence for Th. 
Proposition 14.8. Any axiomatisable complete theory containing Q is incon-
sistent. 
Proposition 14.9. (G8del's first incompleteness theorem). Any consistent 
axiomatisable theory containing Q is incomplete. 
Definition 14.10. A truth predicate for a theory Th is any predicate Tr(x) 
having the property that for any X, f-Th X == Tr(rX"'). 
Proposition 14.11. Any (classical) theory containing Q and having a truth 
predicate is inconsistent. 
2.2 The Inconsistent Case 
Moving to the inconsistent finite arithmetics RM3i , we recall the following facts 
from Chapter 2. The RM3i are all inconsistent, complete and decidable. More than 
the last, there is a recursive function fR(x) returning 2, 1 or 0 respectively as x is 
the G8del number of a sentence assigned T, B or F respectively in R, where R is 
short for any of the RM3i • By represent ability, therefore, there is an arithmetical 
predicate FR with the corresponding representability properties. That is, in Q, 
FR ( r X.." y) is provably true of 2, 1 or 0 only, where r X'" is the G8del number of a 
sentence assigned T, B or F respectively in R. It is therefore natural to make the 
following definition: 
Definition 14.12. ProvR(x) =df FR(x, 1) V FR(x, 2). 
Proposition 14.13. The predicate ProvR(x) is a provability predicate for R. 
Proof. From the previous section, three conditions must be satisfied to be a 
provability predicate. 

Provability 
133 
Ad (i): Iff-R X then by represent ability (Proposition 14.6), f-Q FR(rX"', 2). Hence, 
since Q c R, f-R FR(rX"', 2). So, by the three-valued tables for V, f-RProvR( rX"'). 
Ad (ii) and (iii): note that ProvR never takes the value T, for any X. This is because 
ofthe transparency of R: back in Q, for fixed (rX"'), FR(rX"',y) is provably true 
of just one y, namely 2, 1 or 0, and is provably false of all other y. Passing to R, 
then, the negation of FR remains provable of all yother than 2, 1 or o. But in 
RM33 , say, (that is mod 3) we have that 2, 1 and 0 are provably equal to some of 
these y (e.g. 5, 4 and 3 respectively). But RM33 is transparent (as are all the R)j 
that is, provable identities are intersubstitutable in all contexts. So ",FR holds of 
2, 1, and 0 in R, so that FR is B or F in R when y is 2, 1 or O. By the tables for 
V, this ensures that for those values of y, ProvR is B or F also. But by the tables 
for RM3, a :J sentence with such an antecedent takes a designated value. 
0 
Now it can be shown that in the above defined sense (Definition 14.10), ProvR 
is a truth predicate for R. 
Proposition 14.14. For all X, f-R (X == ProvR(rX"')). 
Proof. From the three-valued tables for ==, X == Y fails to hold only when 
one side takes the value T and the other side takes the value F. Now if X is T 
then since Prov is a provability predicate, then by (i) of the previous proposition, 
f-RProvR(rX"'). That is, the latter does not take the value F in R. On the other 
hand, by the argument for (ii) and (iii) of the previous Proposition, ProvR(rX"') 
is never T. Consequently, when X is F, their == holds as required. 
0 
This proposition is not a trivial reconstruction by means of the Extendability 
lemma of something which holds in Q: f-R cannot be replaced by f-Q else Q would 
be inconsistent (by the Diagonal lemma applied to the predicate '" Prov R( x)). It 
is now shown that the G8del sentence models the Li.ar sentence in the sense that 
both the G8del sentence and its negation are theorems of the RM3i . The G8del 
sentence for R is that sentence whose existence is guaranteed by diagonalisation in 
Qj that is, the sentence which expresses in Q the statement 'I am unprovable in 
R'. 

134 
Foundations: Provability, Truth and Sets 
Proposition 14.15. f-R GR and f-wvGR. 
Proof. First note that the existence of G R is ensured by the classical Diag-
onal Lemma (Proposition 14.7), as the sentence such that given the predicate 
~ProvR(x), f-Q GR == ~ provR(rG;i). Suppose not f-R GR. By representabil-
ity, f-Q~ ProvR(rG;i). By the Diagonal Lemma, f-Q GR, so that, since Q C R, 
f-R GR. That is, from not f-R GR it follows that f-R GR ; hence f-R GR. By repre-
sent ability again, f-Q ProvR(rG;i). By the Diagonal Lemma again, f-Q~GR. But 
Q c R, so f-R~GR. 
0 
A further interesting fact follows here: that the denial of the Godel sentence 
for any of the R is already provable in Q. This is as it should be: since the R 
are decidable, when G is provable in R then this fact is provable in Q, hence by 
diagonalisation so is the denial of G. It further follows that if Q is consistent, then 
the Godel sentence for R is unprovable in Q. 
Proposition 14.16. (Strong diagonalisation for GR ). 
Proof. From Proposition 14.14, GR is B in any of the R. Since ProvR is a 
provability predicate and GR holds, so does ProvR. But by the argument of the 
previous proposition ProvR is never T. Thus ProvR is exactly B, so that ~ProvR 
is also. The RM3 tables for +-? then ensure the Proposition. 
0 
Problem: Prov is a weak truth predicate in the sense that the == of Proposi-
tion 14.4 does not guarantee detachability in general; though being a provability 
predicate there is detachability one way (Proposition 14.13(i)). We have just seen 
the stronger detachability is present for GR via the stronger connective +-? 
Can 
Proposition 14.14 be reproved with +-? replacing ==, or at least detachability the 
other way, perhaps with a modification to the natural Prov that we have used? 
There is a point here about Lob's theorem. This says that, in any theory Th 
extending Q and in the same language, if F is a provability predicate for Th, then 

Truth 
135 
if f-Th F( r A') ::) A then f-Th A. This might look like an insuperable barrier 
to Prov being a truth predicate, since a truth predicate would have the above 
properties so that triviality would follow. However, Lob's theorem breaks down in 
the inconsistent finite models. This is because the proof of Lob's theorem essentially 
requires one to deduce the consequent of a ::) statement from its antecedent, which 
one cannot do in these inconsistent nontrivial theories. Now it is possible that 
a stronger version of Lob's theorem can be obtained for the stronger language 
containing ---+ as well as ::), since the property f- Tr( r A') f-+ A would certainLy 
ensure that Tr would be a provability predicate, and the ---+ has the necessary 
deductive force. However, while possible, this is not obviously true, since adding 
to the language formally voids the diagonal lemma which is applied in the usual 
proof of Lob's theorem, so that Lob's theorem might break down for this addition 
to the language. In the following sections it is seen that a truth predicate can be 
added to the classical language without triviality. 
3. Truth 
3.1 The Fixed Point Method 
The fixed point method is an iterative method for constructing a model for 
a collection of axioms. In general terms we take as starting point an already 
established model and extend it by adding new logical predicate symbols with 
their attendant governing axioms. The axioms to be modelled need to have a 
conditional or biconditional main connective and may be quantified. The model 
for the new axioms is given a (transfinite) inductive definition. Some simple rules 
are iterated to eventually produce the new extended model. It should be noted that 
the underlying logic of models generated in this way are non-classical. Depending 
on your philosophical disposition the logic can be incomplete or inconsistent, as we 
shall see. 
These sections will be structured in the following way. Firstly the method is 

136 
Foundations: Pr.ovability, Truth and Sets 
described in general terms. Then, contrary to historical sequence, it is shown how 
the method has been used by Kripke to model the T-scheme in languages which 
contain their own truth predicate. Then we see how the method can be used to 
model axioms in set theory. In particular it provides a method for modelling the 
axioms of comprehension and extensionality. Gilmore appears to have been the 
first to use the method to model the axiom of comprehension in a restricted, non-
extensional set theory. Later Brady showed how to model the extensionality axiom 
as well in an inconsistent logic. Then followed Kripke, while later use of the method 
has been made by Feferman in connection with the foundations of category theory. 
Finally there is brief speculation on the possibility of further applications for this 
method. 
Suppose that we have a language .c which we wish to extend by adding an 
n-ary predicate pn. Let.c have an interpretation I with domain D. The usual 
interpretation for a predicate is in terms of a subset of Dn. That is, an n-ary 
relation on D. We define the interpretation of pn in terms of an ordered pair 
(S1, S2) where both S1 and S2 are n-ary relations on D. S1 is called the extension 
of P and S2 is called the antiextension. The axiom to be modelled will be of a 
biconditional form: A iff B, where A is a sentence of the form pn(a1, a2, ... , an) 
and B is a formula containing some of at, a2, . .. , an-
Basically the model is built up in stages by repeatedly adding to the interpre-
tation of P to force sentences which are instances of the axiom's LHS A to be 
interpreted true or false whenever its corresponding RHS B is interpreted as true 
or false respectively at the previous stage. Each time the model is extended in 
this way a whole new collection of sentences become available as true RHSs of the 
axiom, thus requiring the model to be again expanded to include a new collection 
of corresponding LHSs to acount for the axiom's truth. 
Eventually, through the magic of infinity, there will be a stage where for each 
candidate RHS true (false) in the interpretation, its corresponding LHS will already 
be interpreted true (false). Such points will be called fixed points. So we have ex-

Truth 
137 
tended the original language £ to contain a new predicate pn. We have extended 
the original interpretation I by interpreting pn in terms of the pair (Sb S2). The 
interpretation of everything else remains unchanged. Let 10 be the original inter-
pretation I. The fixed point method will generate a succession of interpretations 
10 , II, 12, • •• • In successive interpretations the interpretaiton of pn which is the 
ordered pair (SI, S2) is modified by extending the relations of Sb S2 or both. 
If we think of successive changes to the interpretation as being the results of 
applications of a rule </>, i.e. In+! = </>(In), any fixed point of </>, i.e. interpretation 
I;. such that </>(1;.) = h., will be an interpretation which will model the extended 
language. 
3.2 The fixed point method applied to truth theory 
The liar paradox and its variations have been thought to arise from the capacity 
of languages to express their own truth and falsity predicates. The Tarski hierarchy 
of languages is an elaborate attempt to avoid the paradoxes by postulating infinitely 
many levels of language, each with its own truth predicate Truen • Sentences at level 
n can only be named in level n + 1 and greater. This is complicated and unnatural 
and doesn't correspond well with the facts. In natural languages we are clearly 
able to name sentences in the language without jumping to higher and higher 
levels. There is only one level not many. 
In his 1975 paper 'Outline of a Theory of Truth' [19], Kripke showed that it is 
possible for a language to contain its own truth predicate and yet still avoid the 
liar and related paradoxes. Using the fixed point method Kripke outlined a more 
intuitive theory of truth than the Tarski language hierarchy. Although Kripke was 
not the first to use the method, his paper is used to illustrate the fixed point method 
because its application to truth theory has particular intuitive appeal. 
The truth predicate T is governed by the T-scheme axiom: 

138 
Foundations: Provability, Truth and Sets 
Using the fixed point method we are able to show that an uncontroversiallanguage 
not containing its own truth predicate can be extended to contain its own truth 
predicate which behaves according to the T-scheme. We start with a language £ 
(-', V, &, J, ==, 3, '17') and extend it by adding the unary predicate T(x). The axiom 
to be modelled, the T-scheme, has a == main connective. 
We will interpret the truth predicate T in the extended language by the pair 
(51,52 ) of unary relations on D (i.e. subsets of D). The interpretation of every-
thing else in the extended language will remain as before, closed sentences being 
interpreted in the values {True,False}. Initially T will be interpreted as (0,0) and 
it will be built up in stages by applying a function <p until a fixed point is reached. 
The function <p appends new sentences to the extension 51 and anti extension 52 
of T according to the wff evaluation rules. That is <p( (51,52)) = (5~, 5~). The wff 
evaluation rules are applied with T only partially interpreted by (51,52 ) and the 
elements of D which are codes of sentences interpreted True are collected together 
to form 5~. Elements of D which are not codes of sentences or are the codes 
of sentences intepreted False are collected together to form 5~. This explains how 
interpretations 1o, II, 12 , ..• are defined. For a limit ordinal the situation is different. 
Let A be a limit ordinal, then 5i ,>. = ua <>.5i ,a for i = 1,2. 
The problem can be seen as the problem of explaining to someone the notion 
of truth. We assume that they understand the meanings of all sentences in the 
language except those containing the word 'true'. The initial complete ignorance 
of the notion of truth is indicated by the empty interpretation (0,0). The concept 
of truth is built up in stages by applying a simple rule: we are entitled to assert (or 
deny) that any sentence is true (or false) under the exact same circumstances we 
can assert (or deny) that sentence itself. This is the function <p in our formalisation. 
Our subject has a complete understanding of when sentences not containing the 
word 'true' can be asserted or denied. By applying the rule about truth they 
are able to glean a partial understanding of sentences containing the word 'true'. 
By applying the rule once from a situation of complete ignorance sentences like 

Truth 
139 
"'Dogs are mammals' is true" and" 'The moon is a piece of cheese' is true" will 
be interpreted as True and False respectively. However, sentences like' "'Dogs are 
mammals' is true" is true' will still not be interpreted. This partial understanding 
of sentences containing the word 'true' is formalised by (SI,I, S2,1)' Applying the 
rule governing truth again will result in this last sentence being correctly interpreted 
True. At a fixed point h" c/>((SI,A' S2,A)) = (SI,A' S2,A)' So, applying the rule about 
the word 'true' adds nothing further to the concept. At such a point we will say 
that the model is saturated and the language contains its own truth predicate. 
Now the theory of truth which results from this treatment can be shown to 
be incomplete. That is, some sentences never get assigned a truth value. Some 
sentences are considered neither true nor false. An example is the Liar sentence. 
Assume it does get assigned a truth value and let 0: be the least ordinal such that 
1",(LIAR) = True (False). Once we permit such a sentence to have a truth value we 
unleash its paradoxical potential. Applying the rule c/> we generate 1"'+1 which has 
the effect of reversing the Liar's truth value. That is 1"'+1 (LIAR) = False(True}. 
This contradicts the monotonicity of the operation c/> which will be proved in the 
section which follows. 
3.3 The proof that fixed points model the T-scheme 
To prove that fixed points provide a model for the T-scheme axiom we require 
a simple lemma about the construction. 
Lemma 1. If 0: :S (3 then for any sentence S if 1",(S) = True, then 
1{3(S) = True. If o:(S) = False, then 1{3(S) = False. 
This lemma says that the interpretation of the truth predicate T is only ever 
changed by giving a truth value to sentences which were previously not interpreted. 
Once a sentence becomes interpreted as a truth value, its value never changes in 
subsequent interpretations. If we define the relation :S between interpretations as 
I", :S 1{3 iff SI,,,, ~ SI,{3 and S2,,,, ~ S2,{3 then lemma 1 says that c/> is a monotone 

140 
Foundations: Provability, Truth and Sets 
increasing operation on ::;. 
Proof of Lemma 1. The proof is by induction on the number of connectives 
in S. If S is an atomic sentence then lemma 1 holds. Assume for sentences A and 
B that the lemma holds. We prove that lemma 1 holds for a sentence S where S 
is of the form lA, A VB, A&B, (3x)A, (x)A. 
e.g. Let la(A&B) = True. By the wff evaluation rules la(A) = la(B) = True. 
By the induction hypothesis, liJ(A) = liJ(B) = True. So liJ(A&B) = True. There 
is a similar proof for la(A&B) = False. 
Divide the proof that the fixed point method generates a model for the T -scheme 
into two parts: one for each direction of the biconditional. The modelling of the 
schema for general sentence a is proved by showing the modelling of one instance 
of the schema for an arbitrarily chosen sentence S. 
Let 1;.. be a fixed point of the method. That is, </>((S1,>.., S2,>")) = (S1,>.., S2,>..). 
Left to right: We assume 1;..(T(S)) = True, and show that 1;..(5) = True. Let 
a be the least ordinal for which la(T(S)) = True. a will be a successor ordinal 
because (i) it is non-zero, and (ii) if it were a limit ordinal then by the method 
of construction there would be an ordinal (3 < a such that liJ(T(S)) = True, thus 
contradicting the assumption that a was the least such ordinal. 
If a is a successor ordinal and the least ordinal for which la(T(S)) = True, then 
by the method of construction it must be the case that la-1(S) = True. Now, since 
la-1 ::; la it follows by lemma 1 that la(S) = True as required. A similar proof 
can be run assuming 1;..(T(S)) = False and showing that I>..(S) = False. 
Right to left: We assume 1;..(S) = True and show that 1;..(T(S)) = True. By 
the method of construction it follows that 1;..+1(T(S)) = True. But since 1;.. is a 
fixed point I>.. = 1;..+1' So 1;..(T(S)) = True as required. If 1;..(S) = False it follows 
by a similar argument that 1;..(T(S)) = False. 
o 

The Fixed Point Method Applied to Set Theory 
141 
3.4 The proof that there are fixed points 
The method has a certain intuitive appeal and fixed points would seem to be 
the kind of solution to the problem of representing the truth predicate that we are 
looking for. However, it is not immediately obvious that fixed point solutions will 
always exist. 
The proof that there are fixed points is a simple argument based on some 
assumptions about the language being modelled and the function 4>. The method 
will generate a chain of ordered pairs of n-ary relations on D modelling the predicate 
pn in our language: 
At each stage in the construction more sentences in the language (or their names) 
are being added to the extension and antiextension of pn. At every stage, at least 
one new sentence gets decided. An assignment to extension or antiextension is 
never changed by a later assignment. The relations of extension and antiextension 
only increase in size, they never retract. This feature of the method results from 
the monotonicity of the function 4>. 
There are only denumerably many sentences our language which contain the 
predicate pn. You could show a 1-1 correspondence with the natural numbers by 
listing the sentences containing pn in alphabetical order or similar. 
So for some A of the second number class, (S1,>., S2,>.) = 4>((S1,>., S2,>')). 
4. The Fixed Point Method Applied to Set Theory 
P.C. Gilmore appears to have been the first person to use the fixed point method 
in a recognisable form although he attributes its origins to a persistence lemma by 
Roger C. Lyndon in 1959. In his paper, 'The Consistency of Partial Set Theory 
Without Extensionality' [12a], Gilmore shows how to model the comprehension 

142 
Foundations: Provability, Truth and Sets 
axiom in a partial set theory. To say that the theory is partial means that for a set 
S in the theory, its characteristic function 
Is(x) ~ { : 
is a partial function. 
if xES 
if x rf. S 
The theory extends predicate logic with two new primitive binary predicates E 
and rf.. New terms in the theory are formulae of the form {x: P,Q} where P and 
Q are 'positive' formulae. That is, formulae in which only conjunction, disjunction 
and quantifications are used. 
The axioms to be modelled are the pair: 
(1) (x)[(x E {y: P(y),Q(y)} V (P(x)&Q(x))) == P(x)] 
(2) (x)[(x rf. {y: P(y),Q(y)} V (P(x)&Q(x))) == Q(x)] 
The main connectives in these two axioms are disjunctions and the method 
requires a conditional or biconditional main connective. Gilmore gives a pair of 
conditional sentences for each axiom (1) and (2) whose conjunction is logically 
equivalent to the original axiom. 
(1.1) (x)[(x E {x: P(x),Q(x)}):::) P(x)] 
(1.2) (x)[(P(x)&,Q(x)):::) x E {y: P(y),Q(y)}] 
(2.1) (x)[(x rf. {x: P(x),Q(x)}):::) Q(x)] 
(2.2) (x)[,(P(x)&Q(x)):::) x rf. {y: P(y),Q(y)}] 
He shows how these four sentences are modelled using the fixed point method. 
We interpret E and rf. by a pair of sets (S1, S2). S1 and S2 are built up in 
stages by applying a simple rule: assume we have (S1,,,, S2,,,) already defined for an 
ordinal a. We generate Sl,,,+1 by appending to S1,,, sentences a E {x : P( x), Q( x)} 
for all sentences P(a)&,Q(a) such that I,,(P(a)&,Q(a)) = T;ue. Similarly we 
generate S2,,,+1 by appending to S2,,, sentences a rf. {x : P( x), Q( x)} for all sentences 
,P(a)&Q(a) such that I,,(,P(a)&Q(a)) = True. This amounts to a definition of 
the function <P. 

The Fixed Point Method Applied to Set Theory 
143 
For a limit ordinal A, S;,A = U"<,xS;,,, for i = 1,2. 
We let 10 of the construction be a model for the language without the new 
predicates E and rf. with (S1,0, S2,0) = (0,0). 
Again the proof that the fixed point method generates a model for the set theory 
axioms requires first a lemma that ¢> is monotone. 
Lemma 2. If a ~ f3 then for any sentence S if 1,,(S) = True, then 1{3(S) = 
True. If 1,,(S) = False, then 1{3(S) = False (d. Lemma 1). 
Proof. The proof proceeds as an induction on the number of logical connectives 
in the sentence S. This is Lyndon's persistence lemma. 
o 
Armed with this lemma we can now set about proving that the fixed point 
method generates a model for the four sentences (1.1), (1.2), (2.1), (2.2). Let 1A be 
a fixed point. That is, let h = h+1' 
(1.1): Assume for arbitrary a that h(a E {x: P(x), Q(x)}) = True. We want 
to show that h(P(a)) = True. Let a be the least ordinal for which 1,,(a E {x : 
P(x),Q(x)}) = True. a is a successor ordinal. So by the method of construction 
1,,,_1(P(a)&-,Q(a)) = True. Now a-I::; A, so by Lemma 1 h(P(a)&-,Q(a)) = 
True. Hence h(P(a)) = True. 
(2.1): Assume for arbitrary a that h(a rf. {x: P(x),Q(x)}) = True. We want 
to show that h(Q(a)) = True. Let a be the least ordinal for which 1,,(a E {x : 
P(x),Q(x)}) = True. a is a successor ordinal. So by the method of construction 
1"_1(-,P(a)&Q(a)) = True. Now a-I ~ A, so by Lemma 1, IA(-,P(a) & Q(a)) = 
True. Hence h(Q(a)) = True. 
(1.2): Assume for arbitrary a that h(P(a)&-,(Q(a)) = True. We want to 
show that h(a E {x : P(x),Q(x)}) = True. 
By the method of construction 
IA+1(a E {x: P(x), Q(x)}) = True. But h = h+1' so h(a E {x: P(x), Q(x)}) = 
True. 

144 
Foundations: Provability, Truth and Sets 
(2.2): Assume for arbitrary a such that l;..(.,P(a)&Q(a)) = True. We want 
to show that l;.. (a (j. {x : P( x), Q( x)}) = True. By the method of construction 
h.+l(a (j. {x : P(x), Q(x)}) = True. But l;.. = 1>-+1, so l;..(a (j. {x : P(x), Q(x)}) = 
True. 
o 
We can be assured of the existence of fixed points by virtue of a proof similar 
to last time. 
Like Kripke's truth theory, Gilmore's set theory is incomplete. Neither of the 
following sentences will be interpreted true: 
where R' = {x : x E x, x (j. x}. 
R'E R' 
R'(j.R' 
Let 0: be the first stage at which le,(R' E R') = True. By the method of construction 
0: is a successor ordinal and l",_l(R' E R') = True contradicting the assumption 
that 0: was the least such ordinal. A similar proof can be provided for R' (j. R'. 
So we are able to model a version of the axiom of comprehension of set theory 
using this method. Gilmore's paper is significant because it led the way for a 
number of useful applications of the method. In 1971 Ross Brady showed that 
both the axiom of comprehension and a version of the axiom of extensionality 
could be modelled using transfinite induction in a paper 'The Consistency of the 
Axioms of Abstraction and Extensionality in a Three-Valued Logic' [5a]. This 
paper is interesting not so much for its modelling of extensionality, but because it 
models the axioms in paraconsistent three-valued logic. Where Kripke and Gilmore 
are incomplete, Brady is inconsistent. But the difference between the modellings 
is only superficial - inconsistent models can be simply transformed to become 
incomplete and vice versa. 

The Fixed Point Method Applied to Set Theory 
145 
Brady models a more familiar version of the axiom schema of comprehension: 
(3y)(x)(x E Y +-+ P(x,ZI, ... ,zn)) 
We extend propositional logic by adding the new primitive predicate symbol E 
which is governed by a familiar comprehension axiom. Brady's model has a back-
ground logic Lukasiewicz three-valued. The values are I,!, 0 and the first two are 
designated. 
Initially all wffs of the form x E y are assigned the truth value !. This is the 
initial interpretation 10 • As the construction proceeds, more and more of these 
sentences get assigned either a value 0 or 1 according to a rule ¢> : assuming we 
have 1", defined for some ordinal a. Then 1"'+1 is generated from 1", by making 
the following .changes: 1"'+1(a E {x : P(x)}) = 1",(P(a)). That is, sentences 
a E {x: P(x)} get assigned a value 1 (0) at stage a+ 1 whenever the sentence P(a) 
was interpreted 1 (0) at stage a. For a limit ordinal A, l;.(a E {x: P(x)}) = 1 (0) 
iffor some a ~ A,10/(P(a)) = 1 (0). 
Like in the previous two constructions, we again have a set of sentences which 
is the extension of the new predicate symbol and a set of sentences which is its 
antiextension. These are the sentences assigned the values 1 and 0 respectively. 
Unlike the previous constructions every sentence gets assigned a truth value, be-
cause initially all wffs of the form x E yare assigned the value!. Now! is a 
designated truth value so that paradoxical sentences involving E get assigned a 
designated truth value. 
It can be proved that R ¢ R where R = {x : x ¢ x} never gets assigned 
a value 0 or 1 because that would contradict the monotonicity of ¢>. Also, the 
sentence R' E R' where R' = {x : x EX} never gets assigned a truth value 0 or 1 
because there can be no first level at which this value is assigned. Such sentences 
remain with the initial truth value !. But it is only a matter of convention whether 
sentences which never get assigned a truth value of true or false by the method are 
considered to have no truth value at all, or a third undesignated truth value, or a 

146 
Foundations: Provability, Truth and Sets 
third designated truth value. The method does not stipulate which. 
The axiom of extensionality for set theory does not lend itself to a simple mod-
elling by the fixed point method. This is because it is not in required form. We 
add to our language a new predicate = for sets and model the axiom: 
(x)(y)(z)(x = Y :J (x E z == Y E z)) 
This has a conditional main connective but we need the sentence containing the 
new predicate = on its right for the method to be simply applied. 
Brady models a different axiom of extensionality: 
(x)(y)[(v)(v E x +-+ v E y) :J (z)(x E Z +-+ Y E z)] 
using transfinite induction. This axiom does not contain any new predicate symbol 
= and the construction does not fit the general fixed point method procedure. 
5. Further Applications 
Clearly the fixed point method has quite general application in mathematics. 
It can be used to model axioms which introduce a new predicate symbol and which 
are in the appropriate form. The purpose of studying this method was in the hope 
that it could be used to model some axioms of category theory. 
The current foundations for category theory seem unnecessarily restrictive in 
the kinds of categories they allow us to construct. Categories are restricted in size 
so as to avoid Russell-type paradoxes. The thought is that it might be possible to 
give a comprehension axiom for category theory which permits the construction of 
the types of categories which seem intuitively possible but which are forbidden by 
the current foundations. The modelling of such an axiom could perhaps employ 
methods similar to ones used in here. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[1] 
Anderson, Alan and Nuel Belnap, Entailment, Princeton, 1975. 
[2] 
Asenjo, F., 'Towards an Antinomic Mathematics' in [48]. 
[3] 
Bell, J., 'Infinitesimals', Synthese, 75 (1988),285-316. 
[4] 
Birkhoff, G. and S. MacLane, A Survey of Modern Algebra, 3rd edition, New 
York, Macmillan, 1965. 
[4a] 
Boolos, G. and R.C. Jeffrey, Computability and Logic (Second Edition), Cam-
bridge, Cambridge University Press, 1980. 
[5] 
Brady, Ross, 'The Nontriviality of Dialectical Set Theory', in [48]. 
[5a] 
Brady, Ross, 'The Consistency of the Axioms of Abstraction and Extensional-
ity in a Three-Valued Logic', Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic (NDJFL), 
12 (1971), 447-453. 
[6] 
Burgess, J., 'Relevance: a Fallacy?" NDJFL, 22 (1981), 97-104. 
[7] 
Burgess, J., 'Common Sense and Relevance', NDJFL, 24 (1983), 41-53. 
[8] 
Coleman, Edwin, The Role of Notation in Mathematics, Ph.D. dissertation, 
The University of Adelaide, 1988. 
[9] 
Coxeter, H.S.M., Introduction to Geometry, New York, Wiley, 1967. 
[10] 
Da Costa, Newton, C.A., 'On the Theory of Inconsistent Formal Systems', 
NDJFL, 15 (1974), 497-510. 
[11] 
Dunn, J. Michael, 'A Theorem in Three Valued Model Theory with Connec-
tions to Number Theory, Type Theory, and Relevant Logic', Studia Logica, 
38 (1979), 149-169. 

148 
Bibliography 
[12] 
Fitting, Melvin, 'Bilattices and the Theory of Truth', Journal of Philosophical 
Logic, 18 (1989), 225-256. 
[12a] 
Gilmore, P.C., 'The Consistency of Partial Set Theory Without Extensional-
ity', in D. Scott (ed.), Symposium in Pure Mathematics, University of Cali-
fornia, Los Angeles 1967: Axiomatic Set Theory, Proceedings of Symposia in 
Pure Mathematics, Vol.XIII Pt.2, AMS 1974. 
[13] 
Goodman, Nicholas, 'The Logic of Contradictions', ZeitschriJt fur Mathema-
tische Logic und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 27 (1981), 119-126. 
[14] 
Goldblatt, Robert, Topoi, Revised edn., Amsterdam, North-Holland, Else-
vier, 1984. 
[15] 
Hatcher, W.S., The Logical Foundations of Mathematics, Oxford Pergamon, 
1982. 
[15a] 
Johnstone, P.T., Topos Theory, Academic Press, 1977. 
[16] 
Kelley, J.L., General Topology, New York, Van Nostrand, 1955. 
[17] 
Keisler, Jerome, Foundations of Infinitesimal Calculus, and Elementary Cal-
culus, Boston, Prindle, Weber and Schmidt, 1976. 
[18] 
Kock, Anders, Synthetic Differential Geometry, Cambridge University Press, 
1981. 
[19] 
Kripke, Saul, 'Outline of a Theory of Truth', The Journal of Philosophy, 72 
(1975),690-716. 
[20] 
Lavers, Peter, 'Relevance and Disjunctive Syllogism', NDJFL, 29 (1988), 
34-44. 
[21] 
Lawvere, F.W., and S.H. Schanuel, Categories in Continuum Physics, 
Springer Lecture Notes in Mathematics No.1174, 1986. 
[22] 
Mendelson, E., Introduction to Mathematical Logic, New York, Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, 1964. 

Bibliography 
149 
[23] 
Meyer, Robert K., 'Relevant Arithmetic', Bulletin of the Section of Logic of 
the Polish Academy of Science, 5 (1976), 133-137. 
[24] 
Meyer, Robert K., The Consistency of Arithmetic, Research Papers in Logic, 
Australian National University, 1976. 
[25] 
Meyer, Robert K., Arithmetic Formulated Relevantly, Research Papers in 
Logic, Australian National University, 1976. 
[26] 
Meyer, Robert K. and Errol Martin, 'Logic on the Australian Plan', The 
Journal of Philosophical Logic, 15 (1986), 305-332. 
[27] 
Meyer, Robert K. and Chris Mortensen, 'Inconsistent Models for Relevant 
Arithmetics', The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 49 (1984), 917-929. 
[28] 
Meyer, Robert K. and Chris Mortensen, Alien Intruders in Relevant Arith-
metic, Technical Reports in Automated Reasoning, TR-ARP-6/87 (1987). 
[29] 
Meyer, Robert K., R. Routley and J.M. Dunn, 'Curry's Paradox', Analysis, 
39 (1979), 124-128. 
[30] 
Mortensen, Chris, 'Every Quotient Algebra for C1 is Trivial', NDJFL, 21 
(1980), 694-700. 
[31] 
Mortensen, Chris, 'The Validity of Disjunctive Syllogism is Not So Easily 
Proved', NDJFL, 24 (1983), 35-40. 
[32] 
Mortensen, Chris, 'Reply to Burgess and to Read', NDJFL, 27 (1986), 319-
337. 
[33] 
Mortensen, Chris, 'Inconsistent Nonstandard Arithmetic', The Journal of 
Symbolic Logic, 52 (1987), 512-518. 
[34] 
Mortensen, Chris, 'Inconsistent Number Systems', NDJFL, 29 (1988), 45-60. 
[35] 
Mortensen, Chris, 'Anything is Possible', Erkenntnis, 30 (1989), 319-337. 
[36] 
Mortensen, Chris, 'Paraconsistency and C1', in [48]. 

150 
Bibliography 
[37] 
Mortensen, Chris, 'Models for Inconsistent and Incomplete Differential Cal-
culus', NDJFL, 31 (1990),274-285. 
[38] 
Mortensen, Chris, and Tim Burgess, 'On Logical Strength and Weakness', 
History and Philosophy of Logic, 10 (1989), 47-51. 
[39] 
Mortensen, Chris, and Peter Lavers, '[-semantics for Dual Toposes is para-
consistent', (manuscript). 
[40] 
Mortensen Chris, and Steve Leishman, Computing Dual Paraconsistent and 
Intuitionist Logics, Technical Reports in Automated Reasoning, TR-ARP-
9/89, 1989. 
[41] 
Mortensen Chris, and Robert K. Meyer, 'Relevant Quantum Arithmetic', 
in de Alcantara (ed.) Mathematical Logic and Formal Systems, New York, 
Marcel Dekker, 1984, 221-226. 
[42] 
Mortensen Chris and Graham Priest, 'The Truth Teller Paradox', Logique et 
Analyse, 95-6 (1981), 381-388. 
[43] 
Patterson, E.M., Topology, (Second Edition), Edinburgh, Oliver and Boyd, 
1963. 
[44] 
Perlis, S., Theory of Matrices, Reading, Addison-Wesley, 1952. 
[45] 
Priest, Graham, 'The Logic of Paradox', The Journal of Philosophical Logic, 
8 (1979), 219-241. 
[46] 
Priest, Graham, In Contradiction, Dordrecht, Nijhoff, 1987. 
[47] 
Priest, Graham and Richard Routley, On Paraconsistency, Research Papers 
in Logic 13, A.N.D., 1983, reprinted in [48]. 
[48] 
Priest, Graham, Richard Routley and Jean Norman (eds.), Paraconsistent 
Logic, Munchen, Philosophia Verlag, 1989. 

Bibliography 
151 
[49] 
Read, Stephen, 'Burgess on Relevance: a Fallacy Indeed', NDJFL, 24 (1983), 
473-481. 
[50] 
Rogers, R., Mathematical Logic and Formalised Theories, Amsterdam, 
North-Holland, 1971. 
[51] 
Routley, Richard, Ultralogic as Universal, reprinted as the appendix in his Ex-
ploring Meinong's Jungle and Beyond, Australian National University, 1980. 
[52] 
Routley, Richard and Val Routley, 'The Semantics of First Degree Entail-
ment', Nous, 6 (1972), 335-359. 
[53] 
Slaney, John, 'RWX is not Curry Paraconsistent', in [48]. 
[54] 
Stroyan, K., 'Infinitesimal Analysis of Curves and Surfaces', in J. Barwise 
(ed.), Handbook of Mathematical Logic, Amsterdam, North-Holland, 1977. 
[55] 
Tall, David, 'Looking at Graphs Through Infinitesimal Microscopes, Win-
dows, and Telescopes', The Mathematical Gazette, 64 (1980), 22-49. 
[56] 
Tarski, Alfred, A Decision Method for Elementary Algebra and Geometry, 
Berkeley, University of California Press, 1981. 

INDEX OF DEFINITIONS & NAMES 
additive term 
63 
Coxeter 
88,147 
Anderson 
2,17,147 
Curry 
3,109 
area function 
56 
CJ 
48 
Asenjo 
4,147 
CR 
55 
atomic sentences 
20 
Da Costa 
1,11,125,147 
atomic terms 
20 
definite integral 
57 
Bell 
53 
derivative 
51 
Belnap 
2,17,147 
designated values 
22 
Benham 
ac.,35,37 
determine (a theory) 
22 
Bernoulli 
43 
determine (a line) 
91 
Birkhoff 
73,83,88,147 
Dunn 
2-4,30,147 
Bohr 
8 
D 
45 
Brady 
3,7,129,136,144-7 
Do 
46 
Burgess J 
147 
Dk 
46 
Burgess T 
150 
DR 
69 
Cauchy 
43 
element (of topos) 
106 
coefficients (of 
Engels 
1 
projective line) 
83 
extends 
21 
Cole 
ac.,129 
extensional 
21 
Coleman 
ac.,4,147 
extension of 
21,27 
complement-character 105 
Feferman 
136 
complement-classifier 
104-5 
Fermat 
37 
complement-topos 
105 
Fine 
2 
complete 
21 
finite model 
27 
consistent 
18,21 
finite point or line 
89 
continuous 
52 
finite Riemann sum 
57 
continuous at t 
52 
Fitting 
11,148 

153 
function 
49 
Keisler 
56-7,148 
functional 
24 
Kelley 
103,148 
functional expression 
49 
Kock 
53,148 
function symbols 
20 
Kripke 
7,11,129, 
Gilmore 
129,141,144,148 
136-7,144,148 
Godel 
5,9,17,18,129-34 
language 
15,20 
Goldblatt 
108,110,112,114, 
Lavers 
ac.,101,148 
116-8,148 
Lawvere 
101,115,148 
Goodman 
102,148 
Lelbniz 
6,43,59-60 
Grothendieck 
101,118 
Leishman 
ac.,103,150 
Hatcher 
101,148 
Lewis CI 
7 
Hausdorff 
98 
I'Hospital 
43 
Hazen 
ac. 
limit 
52 
Hegel 
1 
Lob 
134-5 
Heraclitus 
1 
logic 
21 
Hilbert 
17,19 
LRQ 
32 
holds 
22 
LR# 
32 
homogeneous coordinates 
83 
L-semitheory 
21 
incomplete 
21,27 
L-theory 
21 
inconsistent 
18,21,27 
Lyndon 
141,143 
infinite model 
27 
MacLane 
73,83,88,147 
infinite point of line 
89 
Martin 
3,149 
infinite Riemann sum 
57 
Marx 
7 
isomorphic models 
40 
Mattaliano 
ac. 
intersection (of 
McRobbie 
ac. 
projective lines) 
91 
Meyer 
2-5,15-9,43, 
James 
ac.,115 
149-50 
J3 
23 
model 
27 
Johnstone 
116,118,120-1 
M(X,O,R) 
95 

154 
names 
20 
reflexive 
25 
Newton 
43 
Routley 
1-4,151 
nilpotent 
47 
Routleys 
125-6 
nonstandard model 
Routley and Routley 
2,151 
of arithmetic 
33 
Routley-* operation 
38 
nontrivial 
18,21 
row echelon form (REF) 
74 
normal 
25 
row reduced 
74 
NSN 
36 
Russell 
1-3,7, 
open projection map 
95 
129,146 
0+ 
96 
R (the logic) 
16 
paraconsistent logic 
1 
IR 
46 
paraconsistent algebra 
103 
RMQ 
16 
paraconsistent valuation 
103-4,106-7 
RM3 
22 
Peano 
9,17-8,33-4 
RM(2n + l)m 
31 
130-1 
RM3w 
31 
Perlis 
73,150 
RMw 
31 
Plumwood 
2 
RM# 
17 
polynomial 
52 
RM## 
17 
prereflexive 
25 
RQ 
16 
Priest 
1,2,4,30,59,150 R# 
17 
prime theory 
21 
R## 
17 
primitive predicates 
20 
Rc 
64 
P3 
23 
Read 
151 
PJ4 
23 
Rogers 
151 
P# 
17 
Schwartz 
8,67 
P## 
17 
sentential operators 
20 
quantifiers 
21 
Slaney 
3,43,151 
quotient topology 
93 
Speck 
ac. 
R-discrete 
97 
strictly nilpotent 
47 
real function 
49 
Sylvester 
88,91-2 

155 
S 
45 
s-
45 
Stroyan 
151 
Tall 
151 
Tarski 
38,151 
Taylor 
6,44,49,52-3 
term-forming operators 
20 
transparent 
24,27 
trivial 
18,21 
truth values (of a 
complement-topos) 
106 
Urquhart 
2 
variables 
21 
weak row echelon form 
(WREF) 
74 
Weierstrass 
4,8 
zero degree 
21 

Other Mathematics and Its Applications titles of interest: 
P.H. Sellers: Combinatorial Complexes. A Mathematical Theory of Algorithms. 
1979,200 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-1000-7 
P.M. Cohn: Universal Algebra. 1981,432 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-1213- 1 (hb), ISBN 90-277-1254-9 (pb, 
J. Moekor: Groups of Divisibility. 1983, 192 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-1539-4 
A Wwarynezyk: Group Representations and Special Functions. 1986,704 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2294-3 (pb), ISBN 90-277-1269-7 (hb) 
I. Bueur: Selected Topics in Algebra and its Interrelations with Logic, Number 
Theory and Algebraic Geometry. 1984,416 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-1671-4 
H. Walther: Ten Applications of Graph Theory. 1985,264 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-1599-8 
L. Beran: Orthomodular Lattices. Algebraic Approach. 1985,416 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-1715-X 
A pazman: Foundations of Optimum Experimental Design. 1986,248 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-1865-2 
K. Wagner and G. Weehsung: Computational Complexity. 1986,552 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2146-7 
AN. Philippou, G.E. Bergum and AF. Horodam (eds.): Fibonacci Numbers and 
Their Applications. 1986,328 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2234-X 
C. Nastaseseu and F. van Oystaeyen: Dimensions of Ring Theory. 1987,372 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2461-X 
Shang-Ching Chou: Mechanical Geometry Theorem Proving. 1987, 376 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2650-7 
D. Przeworska-Rolewiez: Algebraic Analysis. 1988,640 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2443-1 
C.T.J. Dodson: Categories, Bundles and Spacetime Topology. 1988,264 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2771-6 
V.D. Goppa: Geometry and Codes. 1988, 168 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2776-7 
AA Markov and N.M. Nagorny: The Theory of Algorithms. 1988, 396 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2773-2 
E. Kratzel: Lattice Points. 1989,322 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2733-3 
AM.W. Glass and W.Ch. Holland (eds.): Lattice-Ordered Groups. Advances and 
Techniques. 1989,400 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-0116-1 
N.E. Hurt: Phase Retrieval and Zero Crossings: Mathematical Methods in Image 
Reconstruction. 1989,320 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-0210-9 
Du Dingzhu and Hu Guoding (eds.): Combinatorics, Computing and Complexity. 
1989,248 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-0308-3 

Other Mathematics and Its Applications titles of interest: 
AYa. Helemskii: The Homology of Banach and Topological Algebras. 1989, 
356 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-0217-6 
J. Martinez (ed.): Ordered Algebraic Structures. 1989,304 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-0489-6 
V.I. Varshavsky: Self-Timed Control of Concurrent Processes. The Design of 
Aperiodic Logical Circuits in Computers and Discrete Systems. 1989,428 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-0525-6 
E. Goles and S. Martinez: Neural and Automata Networks. Dynamical Behavior 
and Applications. 1990,264 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-0632-5 
A Crumeyrolle: Orthogonal and Symplectic Clifford Algebras. Spinor Structures. 
1990, 364 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-0541-8 
S. Albeverio, Ph. Blanchard and D. Testard (eds.): Stochastics, Algebra and 
Analysis in Classical and Quantum Dynamics. 1990,264 pp. ISBN Q-7923-0637-6 
G. Karpilovsky: Symmetric and G-Algebras. With Applications to Group Represen-
tations. 1990,384 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-0761-5 
J. Bosak: Decomposition of Graphs. 1990,268 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-0747-X 
J. Adamek and V. Trnkova: Automata and Algebras in Categories. 1990,488 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-0010-6 
AB. Venkov: Spectral Theory of Automorphic Functions and Its Applications. 
1991,280 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-0487-X 
M.A Tsfasman and S.G. Vladuts: Algebraic Geometric Codes. 1991,668 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-0727-5 
H.J. Voss: Cycles and Bridges in Graphs. 1991,288 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-0899-9 
V.K. Kharchenko: Automorphisms and Derivations of Associative Rings. 1991, 
386 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-1382-8 
AYu. Olshanskii: Geometry of Defining Relations in Groups. 1991,513 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-1394-1 
F. Brackx and D. Constales: Computer Algebra with LISP and REDUCE. An 
Introduction to Computer-Aided Pure Mathematics. 1992,286 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-1441-7 
N.M. Korobov: Exponential Sums and their Applications. 1992,210 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-1647-9 
D.G. Skordev: Computability in Combinatory Spaces. An Algebraic Generalization 
of Abstract First Order Computability. 1992,320 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-1576-6 
E. Goles and S. Martinez: Statistical Physics, Automata Networks and Dynamical 
Systems. 1992,208 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-1595-2 

Other Mathematics and Its Applications titles of interest: 
M.A Frumkin: Systolic Computations. 1992,320 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-1708-4 
J. Alajbegovic and J. Mockor: Approximation Theorems in Commutative Algebra. 
1992,330 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-1948-6 
LA Faradzev, AA Ivanov, M.M. Klin and AJ. Woldar: Investigations in Al-
gebraic Theory of Combinatorial Objects. 1993,516 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-1927-3 
I.E. Shparlinski: Computational and Algorithmic Problems in Finite Fields. 1992, 
266 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-2057-3 
P. Feinsilver and R. Schott: Algebraic Structures and Operator Calculus. Vol. I. 
Representations and Probability Theory. 1993,224 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-2116-2 
AG. Pinus: Boolean Constructions in Universal Algebras. 1993,350 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-2117-0 
V.V. Alexandrov and N.D. Gorsky: Image Representation and Processing. A 
Recursive Approach. 1993,200 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-2136-7 
L.A Bokut' and G.P. Kukin: Algorithmic and Combinatorial Algebra. 1994, 
384 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-2313-0 
Y. Bahturin: Basic Structures of Modern Algebra. 1993, 419 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-2459-5 
R. Krichevsky: Universal Compression and Retrieval. 1994,219 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-2672-5 
A. Elduque and H.C. Myung: Mutations of Alternative Algebras. 1994,226 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-2735-7 
E. Goles and S. Martinez (eds.): Cellular Automata, Dynamical Systems and 
Neural Networks. 1994, 189 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-2772-1 
AG. Kusraev and S.S. Kutateladze: Nonstandard Methods of Analysis. 1994, 
444 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-2892-2 
P. Feinsilver and R. Schott: Algebraic Structures and Operator Calculus. Vol. II. 
Special Functions and Computer Science. 1994, 148 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-2921-X 
V.M. Kopytov and N. Ya. Medvedev: The Theory of Lattice-Ordered Groups. 
1994,400 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-3169-9 
H. Inassaridze: Algebraic K-Theory. 1995,438 pp. 
C. Mortensen: Inconsistent Mathematics. 1995, 155 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-3185-0 
ISBN 0-7923-3186-9 

