
Praise for
Individuals and Interactions
“In my opinion, this is the handbook for Agile teams. I have been wishing for this 
book since we implemented Agile several years ago. In many Agile process books, 
the team aspect of Agile has been glossed over in favor of the technical aspects; this 
book is a welcome change.”
—Sarah Edrie, Director of Quality Engineering, Harvard Business School
“Cloud Computing, Distributed Architecture, Test Driven Development...these 
are simple to master compared to building an agile, efficient, and top-performing 
team. The path from skilled developer/tester to successful manager, team leader, and 
beyond is now more easily attainable with the insights, knowledge, and guidance 
provided by Ken Howard and Barry Rogers in Individuals and Interactions: An 
Agile Guide.”
—R.L. Bogetti, www.RLBogetti.com, Lead System Designer, 
Baxter Healthcare
“This book provides fantastic insight on how individuals act and relate as a team. 
Ken and Barry give great examples and exercises to help the reader understand 
behaviors of each individual and use this knowledge to perform better as a team.”
—Lisa Shoop, Director Product Development, Sabre-Holdings
“Individuals and Interactions is a masterfully crafted must-read for anyone who 
is serious about understanding and applying the human-centered values of Agile 
development. It is like Patrick Lencioni meets the Poppendiecks to write 
‘Agile through the Looking-Glass.’ Here the ‘Looking-Glass’ is the powerful DISC 
framework, and we see it used to enable different kind of TDD (Team-Driven 
Development) through the use of stories, examples, models, and guidance.”
—Brad Appleton, Agile coach/consultant in a Fortune 100 telecom 
company; coauthor of Software Configuration Management Patterns
“This book is essential reading for any engineering team that’s serious about Agile 
development. Its chapters on team dynamics and development lay the foundation for 
learning all of the factors that enable a team to transform itself into an Agile success 
story.”
—Bernard Farrell, Consultant Software Engineer at EMC Corporation

This page intentionally left blank 

Individuals and 
Interactions

This page intentionally left blank 

Upper Saddle River, NJ • Boston • Indianapolis • San Francisco 
New York • Toronto • Montreal • London • Munich • Paris • Madrid 
Cape Town • Sydney • Tokyo • Singapore • Mexico City
Individuals and 
Interactions:
An Agile Guide
Ken Howard 
Barry Rogers 

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distin-
guish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those designa-
tions appear in this book, and the publisher was aware of a trademark 
claim, the designations have been printed with initial capital letters or 
in all capitals. 
The authors and publisher have taken care in the preparation of this 
book, but make no expressed or implied warranty of any kind and as-
sume no responsibility for errors or omissions. No liability is assumed 
for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising 
out of the use of the information or programs contained herein. 
The publisher offers excellent discounts on this book when ordered in 
quantity for bulk purchases or special sales, which may include elec-
tronic versions and/or custom covers and content particular to your 
business, training goals, marketing focus, and branding interests. For 
more information, please contact: 
U.S. Corporate and Government Sales
(800) 382-3419
corpsales@pearsontechgroup.com
For sales outside the United States please contact: 
International Sales
international@pearson.com
Visit us on the Web: informit.com/aw
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Howard, Ken, 1962-
 Individuals and interactions : an agile guide / Ken Howard, Barry 
Rogers.
    p. cm.
    Includes bibliographical references and index.
    ISBN 978-0-321-71409-1 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Teams in the 
workplace. 2. Communication. I. Rogers, Barry, 1963- II.
Title.
 HD66.H695 2011
 658.4’022--dc22
                                   2011001898 
Copyright © 2011 Pearson Education, Inc. 
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. This pub-
lication is protected by copyright, and permission must be obtained 
from the publisher prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a 
retrieval system, or transmission in any form or by any means, elec-
tronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or likewise. For infor-
mation regarding permissions, write to: 
   Pearson Education, Inc
   Rights and Contracts Department
   501 Boylston Street, Suite 900
   Boston, MA 02116
   Fax (617) 671-3447 
Text printed in the United States on recycled paper at RR. Donnelley 
and Sons, Crawfordsville, Indiana. 
First printing April 2011 
ISBN-13: 978-0-321-71409-1 
ISBN-10: 0-321-71409-1 

Writing a book like this cannot be done alone. 
It requires a tremendous amount of knowledge, skills, 
experience, and support. I dedicate this book to those 
who supported me throughout this process: 
My family—Mom & Dad, Kacy, Joe, Sean, TJ, Danni, 
Nikki; each never doubted I would get this done. 
Armand Garcia shared his extensive expertise 
in psychology, which helped me understand why 
we humans behave the way we do. 
Finally, to my colleagues at Improving Enterprises: 
Thanks for teaching me through your demonstration 
of how individuals can interact productively, 
and reminding me that we are a work in progress, 
always improving. 
—Ken Howard 
I dedicate this book to my darling, 
“high S” wife, Jane. Thanks for all your support 
throughout my career. I also dedicate it to my two 
beautiful daughters, Alicia and Nicole (“DI” and 
“SC,” respectively). I love you all.   I thank Dr. Abelson 
for his wisdom and feedback regarding the DISC 
content in the book.   I also thank my good friend, 
partner, and CEO, Curtis Hite for his encouragement 
to everyone at Improving Enterprises to broaden our 
reaches in helping the software community. 
I appreciate your support as well as your friendship. 
—Barry Rogers 

This page intentionally left blank 

Contents
Preface 
xv 
Introduction 
1
A Brief History of Organizational Behavior 
2
Stage 1: People Are Machines 
(Late 1800s–Mid 1900s) 
2
Stage 2: People Are Emotional Beings 
(1940s–1970s) 
3
Stage 3: Organization Is a Machine 
(1980s–2000s) 
4
Stage 4: Empowered Teams Transform 
the Organization (Current Trend) 
6
Birds of a Feather... 
6
PART I 
INDIVIDUALS AND INTERACTIONS   9
 
Chapter 1 Autonomous Securities, LLC 
11
Chapter 2 Behavior and Individuals 
13
Communication Framework 
14
DISC History 
15
DISC Definition 
15
So Why Is This Important? 
17
Understanding and Accepting Others 
17
Communicate in Your Own Language 
19
The Language of DISC 
20
Strategies for Communicating 
21
How Do You Take a DISC Assessment? 
22
Closing 
23 
ix

x
Individuals and Interactions
Chapter 3 Team Dynamics 
25
An Apoplectic Dilemma 
25
A Different Approach to Teams 
26
Capitalizing on Strengths 
28
The Anarchical Team 
30
The Evolution of a Maturing Team 
30
Conflict 
33
Now What? 
40
Closing 
42 
Chapter 4 Communication 
43
Lingo 
45
Empathy 
46
Eye Contact 
48
Ambiguity 
49
Body Language 
50
Cultural Awareness 
53
Reflecting Body Language 
54
Small Talk 
54
Collaborative Conversations 
57
The Power of Shutting Up 
64
Communication Latency 
65
We the People... 
68
Closing 
69 
Chapter 5 Collaboration 
73
Working as a Team 
73
Vox Populi 
74
Group Survival 
77
Problem-Solving Versus Decision Making 
78
Individuals and Decisions 
79
Groups and Decisions 
79
Group Influence 
80
Six Degrees of the Perfect Ice Cream Sundae 
83
Diametrically Opposing Forces 
85
Closing 
88 

Chapter 6 Behavior and Teams 
89
Harmony/Conflict 
89
Why Not Hire a Team with Members That Will 
All Naturally Get Along? 
92
Be Prepared for Conflict 
93
Stressed Out 
94
Fill the Gaps 
94
Organizational or Team Culture 
95
Closing 
95 
Chapter 7 Change 
97
A True Story 
97
Why Is Change Difficult? 
99
Change Squirm 
102
Change Apprehension 
103
Fear of Changes to Self-Actualization Needs 104
Fear of Changes to Esteem Needs 
105
Fear of Changes to Love/Belonging Needs 
105
Fear of Changes to Safety Needs 
106
Fear of Changes to Physiological Needs 
106
Change Coach 
107
Change Catalyst 
108
Tracing to the Roots 
109
Grass Roots Resistance to Change 
110
Exposing the Origins 
111
Exercise 
113
Closing 
114 
Chapter 8 Motivators 
115
Individual Workplace Motivators 
115
Theoretical 
116
Utilitarian/Economic 
116
Aesthetic 
117
Social 
117
Individualistic/Political 
117
Traditional/Regulatory 
117
Why Is This Important? 
118
Strategies for Motivating 
119
xi
Contents

xii
Individuals and Interactions
Leveraging Strengths 
122
Leadership and Environment 
123
Closing 
124 
PART II 
WORKSHOP   127
 
Chapter 9 Team Dynamics Workshop 
129
Preparation 
129
Workshop Instructions 
130
Pre-Workshop 
130
The Workshop 
132
Chapter 10 Communication Origami 
139
Materials 
140
Setup 
140
Facilitation 
141
Post-Exercise Discussion 
141 
Chapter 11  Bridge Building 
145
Materials 
146
Setup 
146
Facilitation 
147
Post-Exercise Discussion 
148
Chapter 12 Moon Survival 
151
Setup 
152
Facilitation 
152
Individual Exercise 
152
Team Exercise 
153
Scoring 
153
Post-Exercise Discussion 
153
Moon Survival Expert Analysis 
158 
Chapter 13 BalderDISC 
163
Materials 
164
Setup 
164
Facilitation 
165
Post-Exercise Discussion 
166 

xiii
Chapter 14 Assessing Concordance and Discordance 
169
Materials 
169
Setup 
170
Facilitation 
170
Post-Exercise Discussion 
171 
Chapter 15  Change Exercise 
175
Overview 
175
Setup 
176
The Drawing Board 
177
The Teams 
177
Facilitation 
178
Post-Exercise Discussion 
179 
Chapter 16 Groups and Decisions 
183
Setup 
183
DISC-Homogeneous Behavior 
185 
Appendix 
How to Take the DISC    
 187
References  
195 
 
Index   
199

This page intentionally left blank 

xv
Preface
The Agile Manifesto resulted after that legendary group of 
individuals met at a Utah ski resort in February, 2001. 
It’s ironic that despite buy-in and adoption of the mani-
festo, most of what has been published, spoken about, 
and even practiced are things from the right half of the 
manifesto. You have probably used many of the common 
agile-related items such as Scrum, user stories, eXtreme 
Programming, test-driven development, product backlogs, 
task boards, and the list goes on and on. At a high level, 
the majority of these are either processes or tools. Yet the 
Agile Manifesto espouses individuals and interactions over 
processes and tools. 
So, why is there so much focus on process and tools? 
Because they are all enablers of the values depicted in the 
Agile Manifesto. For example, if you maintain a product 
backlog as part of the Scrum process, you have a priori-
tized list of features, and every four weeks (or whatever 
your iteration cycle is) you develop potentially shippable 
code. At the end of each iteration, the product owner helps 
the development team determine what they will develop 
next. You can easily see that these items enable “respond-
ing to change over following a plan”; “working software 
over comprehensive documentation” and   “customer col-
laboration over contract negotiation.” 
The one value that does not get as much attention is “in-
dividuals and interactions over processes and tools.” One 
reason for this is because the majority of individuals in our 
industry started out in college as computer SCIENCE or 
software ENGINEERING students. Yet individuals and 

Individuals and Interactions
xvi
interactions focus more on psychology and human behav-
ior. It is less black and white and less perfect. Arguably 
the most common and most complex issue companies and 
project teams typically face is related to human behavior 
and communication. 
In one of the first popular agile books, Agile Software 
Development, Alistair Cockburn introduced us to agile 
with an excellent discussion of the human side of develop-
ing software. He addressed culture, communication, co-
operation, and other “soft” subjects that are at the core 
of agile. Since that book was published in 2002, there has 
been sparse coverage. 
This book is not intended to take you on a philosophical 
journey. Instead, it is structured as a user’s guide. Practical 
information is presented that is relevant to the issues that 
project teams tend to encounter, with stories, tips, and best 
practices that can be put into action. In addition, facilitator 
instructions are included with valuable exercises that you 
can administer with your team or that can be combined as 
part of a comprehensive team dynamics workshop. 
How to Use This Book 
This book is written as a user’s guide to optimizing indi-
viduals and interactions on an agile project. Your use of 
this book may vary based on your role. 
If you are a manager, ScrumMaster, or product owner, 
or play some other leadership role, you may want to make 
two passes through the book: First, read the chapters to 
gain a better understanding of your team and why it be-
haves the way it does. Second, choose activities described 
in the book and facilitate exercises with your team to im-
prove.
If you are a consultant tasked with helping teams suc-
ceed, identify areas needing the most attention and select 
content and exercises that address those areas. It can be 

xvii
Preface
useful to facilitate reading groups (for example, lunch and 
learn book reviews) where the team reads and discusses 
one chapter at a time. 
Resource
When you see the book icon, look for a refer-
ence to a resource that you can dive into for 
deeper coverage of a topic being discussed. 
Rather than having to scour through a bibliography at the 
end of the book, look for sources of great material presented 
alongside the topics it supports. 
If you are a trainer, the book has been designed to pro-
vide the ingredients you need to facilitate an Agile Team 
Dynamics workshop. Instructions for conducting the 
workshop are described in Chapter 9, “Team Dynamics 
Workshop.”
Lastly, most readers of this book are members of project 
teams. Some work on agile projects, some may be consid-
ering agile, and others have not had the opportunity to 
work on agile projects. The knowledge and exercises in 
this book are not exclusive to agile project teams. Under-
standing behavior and social factors on any project team is 
the first step to building a cohesive, productive team. 
Lastly, most readers of this book are members of project 
teams. Some work on agile projects, some may be consid-
ering agile, and others have not had the opportunity to 
work on agile projects. The knowledge and exercises in 
this book are not exclusive to agile project teams. Under-
standing behavior and social factors on any project team is 
the first step to building a cohesive, productive team. 

This page intentionally left blank 

xix
Barry Rogers is President of 
Improving Enterprises, Dallas, 
Texas. He is an accomplished 
Certified ScrumMaster and 
Certified Scrum Practitioner. 
Barry supports clients in both 
a hands-on and mentorship/
coaching 
capacity, 
helping 
teams adopt agile/Scrum and 
About the Authors
Ken Howard works at Im-
proving Enterprises, where 
he specializes in helping com-
panies increase productivity 
through efficient practices and 
pragmatic organizational dy-
namics. Ken has been involved 
in most aspects of software 
development for more than 26 
years with such languages as 
diverse as COBOL, Smalltalk, and Java. Over the years 
Ken has provided consulting, training, and mentoring 
to companies in 12 countries around the world, helping 
with adoption of software development best practices. 
He eagerly embraced the opportunity to share many 
of the things he has learned with a broader audience 
through the publication of this book.
improve human dynamics. Barry is a Speaker and also 
facilitates leadership, agile, and project management 
training sessions.

This page intentionally left blank 

1
Introduction
There have been countless books on the subject of human 
behavior and communication. Psychologists, sociologists, 
organizational behavior experts, and others have conduct-
ed studies, published journal articles, taught courses, and 
granted degrees in this subject area. 
Sidebar
Throughout the book you’ll find complementary stories, tips, 
best practices, and resources. As you read through the pri-
mary content of the book, don’t forget to take a look at these 
for additional valuable information. 
So why another book on this well-covered topic? This 
book is the first of its kind—the first to address individuals 
and interactions on an agile software project. The illustra-
tions, examples, and exercises are all specifically tailored 
to address the needs of an agile team. The Agile Manifesto 
begins with valuing individuals and interactions over proc-
esses and tools. Despite that, most that has been written, 
taught, and implemented for the agile community focus-
es on processes and tools. This book offers a refreshing 
change—the entire book is dedicated to individuals and 
their interactions on an agile project. 

Introduction
2
A Brief History of Organizational 
Behavior
The sociology of a company is a fascinating thing to 
observe. Over the past 100 years, organizational behavior 
has been researched (often empirically and sometimes sci-
entifically), written about, studied, learned, transformed, 
applauded, and criticized. Courses on organizational be-
havior are required in most (if not all) college business de-
gree programs, so most college educated managers have at 
least a cursory understanding of the evolution of corporate 
societies.
It may seem odd to attach the term sociology with an 
organization, yet it’s fitting. Organizations contain soci-
etal elements such as culture, laws (policies), class (pecking 
order), structure, language, and so on. Although countless 
books have been written about this subject, there are just 
a few key notable milestones in the evolution of organi-
zational behavior. This field of study is broad and deep, 
and to better understand it, it could be sliced and diced a 
variety of ways. As you begin to explore the dynamics of 
a team through individuals and their interactions with one 
another, look at the following   four pivotal evolutionary 
stages of the maturity of organizational behavior. 
Stage 1: People Are Machines (Late 1800s–Mid 1900s) 
In the early 1900s Frederick Taylor became one of the first 
efficiency experts. He developed an approach to optimiz-
ing efficiency in organizations that was later referred to as 
Scientific Management. Taylor’s principles of management 
were based on the premise that workers can’t be trusted to 
be productive on their own. Taylor felt that workers limit 
their productivity due to the fear that if they maximize 
productivity, they will run out of work and lose their jobs. 
Taylor’s solution was to study their work methods care-

A Brief History of Organizational Behavior 
3
fully and to develop highly prescriptive optimized proc-
esses that must be followed by all workers. 
Franklin and Lillian Gilbreth were also efficiency ex-
perts whose expertise was time and motion studies of indi-
viduals. The Gilbreths would study the movements of in-
dividuals in a factory and relocate people and machines to 
strike an optimal balance between energy exerted to out-
put delivered. The Gilbreths later gained some notoriety 
when some of their children wrote two books about life at 
home. The most popular of these books was titled Cheaper
by the Dozen. The Gilbreths had twelve children, and they 
operated their household in the same efficient manner as 
the factories where they worked. 
Franklin Gilbreth put language records in the bathroom 
so that otherwise inefficient time could be spent in a pro-
ductive activity. Probably the most outrageous story re-
ferred to the time when one of the children got a case of 
tonsillitis. When consulting with the doctor and discover-
ing how much time would be required to deal with remov-
al of this one child’s tonsils, Gilbreth extrapolated how 
much time would be later required if he had to repeat this 
exercise eleven more times. Instead, he brought the doctor 
to the house and removed the tonsils from all twelve kids 
at once! 
The approach used by Taylor and the Gilbreths defined 
an era that overlooked the humanness of human beings. 
Humans were just cogs in a machine. This may have looked 
good on the balance sheet, but it was not a sustainable way 
to treat people in the workplace. 
Stage 2: People Are Emotional Beings (1940s–1970s) 
In 1955, a factory in Illinois called Hawthorne Works be-
came the location where a pivotal change was made in how 
organizational behavior was perceived. Brightness of light-
ing at the factory was adjusted upward and downward to 
determine the effect on worker productivity. The study 

Introduction
4
demonstrated that productivity increased not as a result 
of brighter or dimmer light, but as a result of change. This 
was reinforced as other superficial changes to the work-
place were made, also increasing productivity. The Haw-
thorne study showed that workers increase productivity 
when interest is shown in them. The Hawthorne study led 
to a new field   of interest in business—addressing the emo-
tional needs of workers. 
During this period, Douglas McGregor described the 
contrast between Theory X and Theory Y managers. The-
ory X managers presume that employees will not work un-
less they are motivated to work. They often believe that 
money is the only way to motivate an employee and that 
employees must be ruled with an iron fist. Theory Y man-
agers, on the other hand, believe that employees want to 
perform well at work and that in the right setting, employ-
ees will be self-motivated and productive workers. 
McGregor’s work was based on another important the-
ory introduced in the same timeframe, Maslow’s hierar-
chy of needs. Maslow explains how behavior is a function 
of our physiological needs and our need for safety, love, 
and belonging, esteem, and self-actualization. Later in this 
book, Maslow’s hierarchy of needs is offered with guid-
ance on how to address common needs conflicts that often 
arise on agile project teams. 
Another important contribution during this period was 
the psychological inventory. A popular inventory mecha-
nism was called DISC, which analyzed and described an 
individual’s behavior in a specific setting. DISC is used 
throughout the book to aid in explaining why people be-
have the way they do. 
Stage 3: Organization Is a Machine (1980s–2000s) 
In the late 1980s, many companies were inspired to raise 
their competitive edge. The expression “We must beat the 
800-pound gorilla” was used liberally, referring to the 

A Brief History of Organizational Behavior 
5
huge companies that seemed to be successful despite them-
selves. Smaller companies saw an opportunity to operate 
leaner, faster, smarter, and with more agility than the huge 
companies.
MIT computer science professor Michael Hammer in-
troduced the world to Business Process Reengineering 
(BPR) in 1990. BPR initiatives were rampant in many 
companies in the early 1990s as they strove to drive waste 
out of everything they did. Every procedure, job function, 
and task was analyzed to the nth degree to assess which 
added no value and could be removed. The BPR wave 
lost favor with many because the original intent was lost 
with the BPR process itself. BPR was properly focused on 
improvement and increased efficiency, but the way BPR 
initiatives were executed was highly inefficient and cost-
ly. These   huge analyses efforts dragged on with reams of 
published findings but little action. Many unqualified BPR 
consulting firms attached themselves to the popular label 
but failed to deliver the desired results. As a result, BPR be-
came a distasteful topic to executives at many companies. 
Another MIT professor, Peter Senge, introduced the 
concept of the learning organization during this period. 
Senge presented a framework for a company to continu-
ously improve by never resting on its laurels and to learn 
and adapt with every move it makes. Senge’s model was far 
more abstract than Hammer’s, making it more challenging 
for unqualified consulting firms to appropriately emulate. 
The learning organization required a cultural shift from 
the bottom up and from the top down. 
The work of Hammer, Senge, and many others during 
this 20–30 year period framed a significant transformation 
period for businesses. The business itself was treated as an 
organism that could sustain order of magnitude improve-
ment. Much like an overweight, out-of-shape person can 
improve health through diet and exercise, an organization 
could do the same thing. Staying with that analogy, the un-
healthy person may have gotten that way through years of 

Introduction
6
ignorance and neglect. Employing a personal trainer and 
dietician to coach and guide may be necessary for positive 
change to occur. An unhealthy company cannot tweak a 
few things here   and there and expect significant improve-
ment. The works of this period caused organizations to 
recognize this. 
Stage 4: Empowered Teams Transform the 
Organization (Current Trend) 
With a foundation of understanding that people provide 
the muscle and intelligence of an organization and that 
an organization cannot exist without people, the current 
trends in organizational behavior emphasize the power of 
the people. People are not in an organization, people are
the organization. Therefore, people ought to avoid doing 
silly, wasteful things. Taking away all constraints and re-
straints, people with the proper environment, knowledge, 
and skills will likely approach a project pragmatically and 
sensibly.
Empowering skilled people to enable their own capa-
bilities and work together productively requires an envi-
ronment of trust. This trusting environment is rare, yet it 
is a mandatory prerequisite to successful employment of 
agility. This book offers some motivation for moving to an 
agile environment, but it places far more emphasis on the 
knowledge and skills needed to employ agility with ease 
and success. 
Birds of a Feather... 
What causes a flock of birds to move in a coordinated 
orchestrated fashion? How is the leader selected, and how 
does the huge flock navigate changes in direction so swiftly 
and smoothly that it appears to happen instantaneously? 
This is one of the great mysteries of nature. 

Birds of a Feather... 
7
Depending on the circumstances, some humans are in-
clined to lead and others to follow. Some may lead in some 
situations and follow in others. Some strive to always lead, 
whereas others may strive to always follow. Through the 
years, scientists and scholars have tried to explain indi-
vidual and group behavior. Some of these theories have 
tried to explain what is, whereas others have tried to de-
fine what could be. 
Regardless of what some author chooses to write about, 
humans are what they have always been. Some will lead, 
some will follow, some will conform, and some will resist. 
The complexities of putting more than one person together 
can be the source of friction, while at the same time it can 
be the spark that inspires great advancements. This book 
explores the dynamics of the singular individual and the 
dynamics of groups of individuals. 

This page intentionally left blank 

P ART I 
Individuals and 
Interactions
Chapter 1 
Autonomous Securities, LLC 
11
Chapter 2 
Behavior and Individuals 
13
Chapter 3 
Team Dynamics 
25
Chapter 4 
Communication 
43
Chapter 5 
Collaboration 
73
Chapter 6 
Behavior and Teams 
89
Chapter 7 
Change 
97
Chapter 8 
Motivators 
115

This page intentionally left blank 

11
Chapter 1 
Autonomous Securities, 
LLC
Nathan Patterson walked out of his annual retrospective 
meeting with a great feeling. Sure, the bonus he knows he 
will see in his next paycheck is nice, especially in today’s 
economy. But what made him feel even better was the 
amazing sense of accomplishment he felt turning around 
his once underperforming organization. It was this time 
last year that his job was on the line. What had happened 
in the course of the past year that made things so drasti-
cally different? 
At last year’s retrospective, Nathan’s group had missed 
all project completion milestones at Autonomous Securi-
ties. What puzzled Nathan was that he personally hired 
the entire team and, without a doubt in his mind, knew 
that his employees were top-notch based on all the techni-
cal interviews and tests he administered. Nathan contem-
plated all the project artifacts and history of events and 
hypothesized that the workers were simply not executing 
at their full potential. So why was this amazing group of 
people that Nathan assembled not performing up to his 
expectations?
At the conclusion of last year’s meeting, at the end of his 
rope, Nathan had decided to seek outside help and hired 
Lydia Stewart, a consultant specializing in increasing team 

Chapter 1 Autonomous Securities, LLC
12
efficiency. “I do not understand why we are not meeting 
schedules. I assembled the perfect team, and I am using 
agile processes,” Nathan explained to Lydia. Lydia imme-
diately thought to herself that it was a yellow flag when 
Nathan referred to agile as a process instead of a set of 
values.
After observing Nathan’s team in action, it was evident 
to Lydia that the team was not behaving as a team but 
as a group of individuals. She explained to Nathan that 
the social factors in the workplace presented tremendous 
challenges to worker productivity—more than any other 
factor. Team dynamics, individual behavioral differences, 
motivators, leadership styles, and numerous other factors 
greatly affect productivity. 
This book tells the story of how Lydia helped Nathan 
transform his team into what it is today. The goal of this 
book is to help you, the reader, better understand how and 
why individuals behave the way they do when working on 
a team. Through this transformation there is a point where 
you may come to differentiate the importance of personal 
success versus the success of your team. This book pro-
vides specific, detailed approaches and exercises that you 
can use to help your team perform as a team. 

13
Chapter 2 
Behavior and Individuals 
During her first week, Lydia decided to sit back and sim-
ply observe communication between members of the team. 
She first attended a meeting where the team was discussing 
the design of the system. 
Lydia noticed that Sean was dominating most of the 
conversations. As a result, most of his ideas were the ones 
that defined the design. Carl and Lisa contributed to the 
discussion and seemed to be having fun. David, who was 
the most experienced developer in the group, was over-
powered by the conversations and could not seem to get a 
word in edgewise. So he did not offer too much assistance 
to the meeting. Eric seemed quite uncomfortable when 
Sean put him on the spot asking his opinion on the main-
tainability of the design. Ravi wanted to get into some of 
the details behind design decisions to feel comfortable that 
they would work, but Sean seemed to want to drive things 
fairly quickly. 
By the end of the meeting, you could sense a bit of 
tension among members of the team, and although they 
walked away with a design, Lydia could tell not everyone 
felt comfortable with the approach. The bigger issue was 
not the design, however, but that the team was not acting 
like a team. Some key opinions were never spoken. And 
individuals were getting frustrated with one another. 

Chapter 2 Behavior and Individuals
14
Lydia knew her first step to increasing the team’s per-
formance was to get the team to start understanding each 
other’s behaviors and to modify their communication 
styles to work more effectively as a team. 
Communication Framework 
If you ask people to define agile, you will probably get as 
many different answers as the number of people you ask. 
To make it simpler, what if you ask them to abstract the 
top three definitions in just one or two words? Most would 
include the words “communication” or “teamwork” in 
their definitions. 
The Agile Manifesto indicates, “Individuals and Interac-
tions over Process and Tools,” and one of the Agile prin-
ciples states, “The most efficient and effective method of 
conveying information to and within a development team 
is face-to-face conversation.” So, if agile is, to a large de-
gree, about increasing communication effectiveness and 
the way teams work together, why would anyone begin an 
agile project without first establishing a communication 
framework that fosters better communication and team-
work?
Resource
http://Agilemanifesto.org.
Have you ever heard of project teams that successfully 
start an agile endeavor with much excitement and enthu-
siasm, but over time, the project falls apart? It is similar 
to building a house on a sink hole. It appears great at the 
onset. But after a period of time and when you apply some 
pressure and stress, the house sinks. To help prevent sink 
holes on your projects, this chapter discusses a valuable 

Communication Framework 
15
framework for enabling better communication: the history, 
definition, and importance of this framework are covered. 
DISC History 
The framework discussed in this chapter is called DISC. 
You may have already heard of DISC because it has been 
around much longer than agile and even longer than Lean 
whose roots date back to the 1930s when Toyota moved 
from a spinning and weaving company to a car company. 
You could tie the history of DISC all the way back to 400 
B.C. when Hippocrates observed humans and classified 
four different behaviors. 
In 1928, Dr. William Moulton Marston published a 
book titled, The Emotions of Normal People, in which he 
described the DISC theory. Over the years, several com-
panies have provided statistical validation and continuous 
improvements to DISC. 
So DISC has been around for a while. But it is only a rela-
tively recent development that it is being applied to achieve 
greater communication on agile teams. Even though I had 
been using DISC on my software project teams for many 
years prior, I had initially heard of the association of DISC 
with enabling success on agile projects during my Certified 
ScrumMaster training by Craig Larman in 2006. 
DISC Definition 
You can think of DISC as a behavioral fingerprint. Every-
one’s behavior contains a blend of four elements, but no 
two people’s blends are exactly alike. It is this blend that 
drives how individuals behave. To begin to gain an un-
derstanding of DISC, it is easiest to simplify it in terms of 
one’s dominant behavior. That is, if someone’s dominant 
behavior is a D (with secondary I), you may simply refer 
to that person’s behavior as a DI. This dominant behavior 

Chapter 2 Behavior and Individuals
16
explains how people will behave and communicate. So 
what do these letters mean? 
The D—Dominator 
D’s have a need to accomplish. They are decisive, thrive on 
challenges, exercise authority, and hold themselves in high 
regard. D’s have a tendency to deal straightforwardly with 
people and may interrupt you in mid-sentence. They may 
be perceived by others as being arrogant, opinionated, or 
rude. The higher the D, the more intense these behaviors. 
It should come as no surprise that many CEOs of compa-
nies are D’s. 
The I—Influencer 
I’s have a need to trust and talk. They trust, accept, and 
like others. I’s enjoy talking and are animated (for exam-
ple, they tend to talk with their hands or full facial expres-
sions), persuasive, and optimistic. I’s may have a tendency 
to become emotional or excitable and may be a poor judge 
of character because they give people the benefit of the 
doubt. I’s usually see the glass as half full. I’s typically 
make the best communicators. 
The S—Supporter 
S’s have a need to support others. They are good team 
players, avoid attention, have good listening skills, and are 
deliberate or self-sacrificing. S’s typically build close rela-
tionships with a relatively small group of friends. High S’s 
may not make the smallest decisions. You might walk all 
over high S’s as long as they feel appreciated. S’s tend to 
make the best team players. 
The C—Critical Thinker 
C’s have a need for perfection and quality. They aim for 
accuracy—and have a capacity for and enjoy concentrat-
ing on details. C’s think systematically and are problem 
solvers. They are typically serious, intense, thorough, and 
cautious at decision making. C’s tend to set high standards 

So Why Is This Important? 
17
for themselves that are above the norm. They may become 
critical of others if they do not meet their high standards. 
C’s typically see the glass as half empty because they want 
things to be perfect. Our industry is dominated by high C’s 
who are computer “scientists” or software “engineers.” 
Coding, testing, designing, and capturing   requirements all 
take analytic skills and close attention to details. 
A Funny Story 
Once upon a time four coworkers, each with a different domi-
nant behavioral profile, got on an elevator. 
The D immediately kept pressing the close button, quickly 
getting annoyed that for some reason it was not closing, but 
kept pressing the button over and over and over. 
The reason the elevator was not closing was because the I 
kept inviting more people into the elevator. 
The S stood quietly in the back corner concerned that the 
elevator doors might close and hurt someone. 
The C was also in the back corner looking worried. He was 
staring at the maximum weight capacity sign in the elevator 
and calculating in his head the weight of each passenger as 
they entered. 
So Why Is This Important? 
The next few sections answer this question, including un-
derstanding and accepting others, the need to communicate 
in your own language, and the language of DISC. There is 
also a section regarding strategies for communicating with 
others depending on your behavioral profile. 
Understanding and Accepting Others 
Individuals that understand DISC can perform better on 
teams by understanding and accepting other team mem-
ber’s behaviors. 

Chapter 2 Behavior and Individuals
18
The following story is a real-world example of an event 
that occurred at a consulting company several years ago. 
Marcia, the recruiter, was a high D, and John, one of the 
principal consultants in the company, was a high C. Mar-
cia was frustrated. “I just want a simple answer whether 
we should hire a candidate that John just finished inter-
viewing, and John said he would need to think about it 
overnight and get back with me tomorrow,” she said. “I 
do not understand why I can’t get a simple answer right 
away. We are under the gun to move quickly.”   At the same 
time, John was equally annoyed at Marcia for being so 
“pushy,” wanting an immediate answer. 
The next day, John provided a long, involved, and de-
tailed write-up describing the candidate interview. John 
described the elevator simulation problem he had given the 
candidate. He went on to describe the candidate’s answers 
in great detail, including the candidate’s ability to use ab-
straction and design patterns. The detailed write-up went 
on to describe John’s analysis of these answers and depict-
ed the pros/cons of the candidate’s solution. Finally, John 
recommended hiring the candidate. Although frustrated 
that it took so long, Marcia was happy to get a bottom-
line answer. She did not actually care about the detailed 
response but   was happy to see a conclusive and positive 
answer and made an offer to the candidate. 
Several months later, both Marcia and John took the 
DISC assessments and were in a room discussing the re-
sults. Both laughed out loud as they immediately reflected 
on this event. Both Marcia and John understood why they 
behaved the way they did and realized they could better 
accept and communicate with one another now that they 
realized why. From that point forward, Marcia tried to 
be a little less pushy and give John time to do his analysis 
to make a decision. And John tried his best to provide a 
quicker answer. But most important, they understood and 
more readily   accepted one another. 

So Why Is This Important? 
19
Communicate in Your Own Language 
Another reason DISC is so important is because people 
have a need to communicate in their own language. Al-
though you cannot permanently change your behavioral 
profile, you can adapt your behavior and communication 
style to not induce stress on a person with whom you are 
communicating.
Say, for example, that you were giving a presentation to 
a leader of a company regarding how much a particular 
project will cost. How would you modify your presenta-
tion if you were presenting to a high D? To a high C? 
If you are presenting to a high D, you should give an 
executive summary first indicating the bottom line of how 
much the project will cost. Then get into the facts—and be 
open to skipping some of the details. Otherwise the person 
will flip to the end of his hardcopy version of your slides 
(if he has a hardcopy version and may become frustrated if 
he does not), wanting to know the bottom line. 
When presenting to a high C, you should do the oppo-
site. Present all the facts first, followed by the price, per-
haps with some type of a traceability matrix back to all 
the details. Otherwise, the person will feel uncomfortable 
being hit with numbers without first knowing the support-
ing data that led you to your conclusion. 
The following is another example of a real-world situ-
ation. A group had just finished DISC training and were 
checking into a hotel. There were two clerks at the hotel 
front desk. One checked in with the first clerk who smiled 
and asked, “Where are you from? How was your trip?” 
Another checked in with the second clerk who did not 
smile, got straight down to business, and asked, “What 
type of credit card will you be using?” 
To an I traveler, the first clerk would appear to be warm, 
and the second clerk would be a bit of a “jerk.” To a D 
traveler, the first clerk would be quite annoying and would 
be wasting time especially considering he is tired and just 

Chapter 2 Behavior and Individuals
20
trying to check into his room. The second clerk would be 
perceived by the D as being efficient. If the hotel owner 
knew about DISC, think about how she could potentially 
increase her guest satisfaction by teaching her clerks how 
to greet guests based on their body language and commu-
nication when walking into the   lobby? 
The Language of DISC 
The final reason that DISC is important is because it ena-
bles people to leverage “the language of DISC.” 
If everyone has been trained on DISC, it makes for a 
great and sometimes necessary ice breaker. The follow-
ing is a real-world example depicting the language of the 
DISC. This story is about a company in which the CEO 
was, you guessed it, a high D. The CEO was actually a 
high DI. When a high D is also an equally high I, that per-
son tends to be seen as charismatic. 
There would periodically be times where a group would 
get together to brainstorm ideas. The CEO would natural-
ly dominate the conversation. He was smart and had a lot 
of good ideas. But so did others. When the group could not 
get a word in edgewise, one of them could say to the CEO 
something like, “Your D is acting up right now.” He knew 
he was a high D, so he would laugh, and others would 
get a chance to talk. Without the “language of DISC,” it 
would be difficult to essentially ask him to kindly shut up. 
When using   the language of DISC, people generally laugh 
and get the point. 
The following is yet another true story. A new project 
was kicked off with about 20 people in a room—a mix of 
business stakeholders and project team members. In typi-
cal fashion, one of the lead business stakeholders was an 
extremely high D, whereas one of the senior developers 
was an extremely high C. 
The senior developer made a suggestion to which the 
main business stakeholder said, “Do you know what your 

So Why Is This Important? 
21
specific role is going to be on the project?” The senior de-
veloper did not know how to respond and simply said, 
“No not exactly.” Of course, on an agile project, there 
are only three roles (that is, Product Owner, ScrumMas-
ter, and team member), but the business stakeholder did 
not know that. The business stakeholder actually replied, 
“Then I do not want to listen to your suggestions.” It was 
an awkward moment, and the room was silent for what 
appeared to be 10   minutes. (Although it was only about 10 
seconds.) It ruined their relationship, and it was a shame 
the team was not trained in DISC prior to this initial meet-
ing. Anyone could have easily broken the ice with the lan-
guage of DISC. It would have taken care of an awkward 
moment by breaking the silence, and most likely the busi-
ness stakeholder would have apologized, salvaging that 
relationship. You can see how the cost of not executing 
a DISC group session can be costly to a project because 
relationships can be permanently severed. 
Strategies for Communicating 
Table 2.1 provides a brief overview of strategies for 
communicating with others depending on their behavioral 
profiles.
Table 2.1 Strategies for Communicating 
Behavior 
Strategies for Communicating 
D 
Get to the point; be clear; be specific; be brief; present an 
overview with facts; provide alternatives; and talk about 
results.
I 
Be friendly; talk; ask questions; stay on the topic; be 
open; talk feelings; and have fun. 
S 
Allow time to warm up; be part of a team; present new 
ideas gently; be agreeable; suggest outcomes; and draw 
out their opinions. 
C 
Be serious; be prepared; be organized; present details; 
present pros and cons; give solid evidence; allow time for 
questions; ask questions; and give options for decisions. 

Chapter 2 Behavior and Individuals
22
How Do You Take a DISC Assessment? 
One of the beauties of DISC is its simplicity. If you get 
good at it, you can often tell a person’s behavioral profile 
just by observing body language combined with the way 
the person communicates. Masters of DISC will often not 
need assessments at all. However, certain elements of a 
good DISC provider’s product are not known just by ob-
serving and communicating. 
Notice the words, “A good DISC provider’s product.” 
There are plenty of DISC providers if you Google it. How-
ever, they are not all equal. First, you should select one 
that analyzes and provides information using all behav-
ioral elements and not one that simply provides a DISC 
graph (see Figure 2.1). To interpret the graph, an indi-
vidual’s dominant behaviors are depicted by the elements 
above the bolded midline. For example, in this graph, the 
individual’s behavioral profile would be a CS. Many com-
panies provide powerful and amazingly accurate reports 
full of useful information regarding an individual’s behav-
ioral characteristics including sections describing   the per-
son, how to or not to communicate with them, and how 
they will behave under stress. 
D
I
S
C
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Figure 2.1 DISC graph

Closing 
23
Finally, it is highly recommended to choose a DISC pro-
vider that provides a “wheel,” which is discussed in Chap-
ter 6, “Behavior and Teams.” This is critical because it 
applies to the dynamics of a team and not just the behav-
iors of an individual. If you obtain a DISC report without 
getting a wheel, you are getting only partial benefit. 
The Appendix in this book contains a free DISC assess-
ment. Although the free assessment does not produce de-
tailed reports or a wheel, it can get you started by provid-
ing your DISC graphs. 
Closing
Many would agree that the greatest challenge on software 
projects is not technology, not the schedule, not require-
ments, but is people-related. The larger the team, the more 
potential for conflict. It is well worth the effort at the onset 
of every project to establish a framework for communica-
tion and to provide insight into the behavioral aspects of 
each of the team members. 
It is easy to fall into the trap of organizing a big DISC 
event where everybody takes their DISC assessment, dis-
cusses it, and then puts it on the shelf to gather dust. The 
true benefit of doing DISC individually and as a team is to 
incorporate the awareness of DISC into your daily inter-
actions. Accepting others, modifying your communication 
style, and using the language of DISC are all important. 
Because teams evolve and some individuals will adapt their 
behaviors to changing work environments, many teams 
find it helpful to periodically revisit the DISC. 

This page intentionally left blank 

25
Chapter 3 
Team Dynamics 
It was Monday morning, and Lydia was excited to observe 
the team’s sprint planning meeting. When she entered the 
room, the team was already assembled around the task 
board actively discussing the project’s user stories. Peo-
ple were smiling and listening intently. At first glance, all 
seemed good with this picture. Then as Lydia joined the 
group and watched for a while, she witnessed something 
she had never seen before on an agile team. Sean was at 
the task board assigning tasks to all members of the team. 
From Lydia’s observations of Sean last Friday (see Chapter
2, “Behavior and Individuals”),   she knew Sean’s behav-
ior was a very high D; therefore he tended to be outspo-
ken and drive things perhaps a little more than he should. 
However, this issue was much deeper than communication 
style. Lydia knew that as a ScrumMaster, Sean should be 
more of a facilitator than a dictator. He was not allowing 
the team to self-organize. 
This chapter explains what self-organization means and 
why self-organization is critical to optimize a team’s per-
formance.
An Apoplectic Dilemma 
When Apollo 13 was headed toward the Moon on April 
13, 1970, nobody had planned for how to handle the 

Chapter 3 Team Dynamics
26
explosion of an oxygen tank on board. The project to build 
the spaceship had been meticulously planned and execut-
ed. Every step, every task was carefully and thoughtfully 
carried out. There were countless people involved in the 
project, and everyone performed the role they were hired 
to do. The NASA project culture was extremely structured 
and chock-full of predictability. 
When flight controllers heard Commander Lovell say, 
“Houston, we’ve had a problem,” all prescriptive proc-
esses, defined roles, and project protocol were quickly for-
gotten. There was no time to prepare timelines and draw 
Gantt Charts. Solution proposals were not solely the re-
sponsibility of those with the proper engineering creden-
tials. Experts rallied together to perform emergency in-
novation, which resulted in a creative solution that safely 
returned the crew to Earth by converting the Lunar Mod-
ule into a space “lifeboat.” This extreme situation may not 
be indicative of a typical project setting; however, it is a 
clear illustration of a team self-organizing to   accomplish 
a goal. 
A Different Approach to Teams 
In 1986, Takeuchi and Nonaka introduced an approach 
to product development teams that was analogous to the 
sport of rugby. The emphasis was on a team as a singu-
lar, holistic unit. Citing examples of successful product 
development projects at several companies, projects were 
initiated when senior management kicked off the process 
with a stretch goal—an extreme target that would raise 
the adrenaline of the team and bind them together with a 
singular focus on achieving the goal. 

A Different Approach to Teams 
27
The stretch goal instilled a tension-filled atmosphere 
that could be a time bomb if mixed with traditional or-
ganizational structures, roles, processes, and expectations. 
Other changes were necessary. 
Self-organizing project teams operate in an entrepre-
neurial manner. Prior expectations of individuals on the 
team performing prescribed roles are abandoned. The 
problem to be solved becomes the center of the team’s at-
tention, and the urgency of solving that problem together 
causes the team to self-organize and find its optimal state. 
For self-organizing to work, three conditions must be 
present:
• Empowerment: Top management specifies the goal, 
funds the effort, sets boundaries, and is responsive to 
the team when approached for support. Otherwise, 
the team is left to operate and make decisions within 
the boundaries of the project. 
• Continuous improvement: Simply put, the team con-
tinuously raises the bar and works together to reach 
that bar. The team improves together as a holistic 
unit and shares in the satisfaction of becoming better. 
Through the process each team member’s strengths 
will be revealed, and they will reach out to one anoth-
er to leverage one another’s strengths when needed. 
The “bar” is not just related to individual skills. It 
also refers to busting through conventional business 
Resource
The New New Product Development Game,
Hirtaka 
Takeuichi 
and 
Ikujuir 
Nonaka. 
Harvard Business Review, 1986. 

Chapter 3 Team Dynamics
28
and societal expectations. Conventional wisdom can 
constrain the field of possible solutions to problems, 
and a self-transcendent team doesn’t allow those bar-
riers to limit its capabilities. 
• Multifunctional teams: Self-organizing teams require 
abandonment of the conventional “relay race” where 
one functional group completes a task and hands its 
deliverables to the next group that performs tasks re-
lated to its specialty. Instead, all specialties required 
of a project are combined into one cohesive team. 
Multifunctional teams are key to accelerating the 
progress of the project. For example, multifunctional 
teams could include experts in sales, marketing, de-
sign, engineering, and quality assurance. 
In addition to specialized skills, cross-fertilization not 
only refers to behavioral diversity, but there is also 
added value in combining team members with differ-
ent complementary behavioral profiles. See Chapter 2
for a description of behavioral profiles. 
Capitalizing on Strengths 
In his popular book Now, Discover Your Strengths, Mar-
cus Buckingham discusses a Gallup poll that found that 
only a small percentage of people surveyed believe that 
their jobs enable them to work on tasks that leverage what 
they do best. 
Resource
Now, Discover Your Strengths, Marcus Buck-
ingham and Donald O. Clifton, Simon and 
Schuster, 2001. 

Capitalizing on Strengths 
29
It may be possible to drive a screw into a piece of wood 
using a hammer, and it may be possible to use a screwdriv-
er to drive a nail. Common sense indicates that it would 
make better sense to use the hammer to drive the nail and 
use the screwdriver with the screw. But what if you have 
a screw and a nail and only a hammer? It’s common to be 
handed a problem and not have access to an optimal set of 
resources. The logical solution in this case would be to get 
your hands on a screwdriver, even   if you don’t have one in 
your toolbox. 
On projects, though, individuals are often asked to 
perform tasks that they are not qualified to do. This can 
happen when project plans are meticulously laid out that 
marry tasks with available resources. A high-performing 
team would recognize strength-task mismatches and take 
corrective action. That could include shuffling assignments 
around, or it could mean reaching outside the team to lev-
erage skills that don’t exist on the team. 
At face value, this approach could potentially discourage 
employee development and growth. When there is a goal 
to develop and expand the skills of a team member, it’s im-
portant for that goal to be stated and completely transpar-
ent. When a high-performing team adopts a shared goal to 
help Fred improve his design skills, Fred’s progress can be 
accelerated through the encouragement and support of the 
team. Recognize that when employee growth becomes part 
of a project’s charter, it can consume resources and time 
that cannot be spent on other project goals. 
So again, high-performing, self-transcendent teams are 
skillful at leveraging each individual’s seminal strengths. 
Additionally, these teams can recognize skill gaps and 
work rigorously to fill them. 

Chapter 3 Team Dynamics
30
The Anarchical Team 
When considering self-organizing teams, it’s possible that 
management may fear anarchy. In the novel Lord of the 
Flies, when a group of boys are stranded on an island with 
no adults, they are forced to self-organize to survive. In 
this situation, self-organization is not reliable on its own. 
Although some of the boys were focused on doing what 
was necessary for survival and the rescue, others were fo-
cused solely on individual needs. Eventually, individuality 
led to irrational primal and savage behavior, which over-
powered efforts by the few focused on survival. 
Resource
Lord of the Flies, William Golding, Capricorn 
Books, 1954. 
When individual needs take precedence over the needs 
of the overall group, an environment similar to anarchy 
(lack of government) can occur—a.k.a., “Every man for 
himself.” In this situation, goals in the best interest of the 
group overall are not likely to be met. But who decides 
what is in the best interest of the group overall? Should 
those values and overarching naturally reveal themselves, 
or should some representative of authority prescribe them? 
The Evolution of a Maturing Team 
When a new team is formed, a natural maturing process 
occurs. Tuckman described the evolution of a team in four 
stages:

The Evolution of a Maturing Team 
31
• Forming
• Members get to know each other. 
• Participants agree on goals and begin completing 
tasks.
• Individuals seek to understand each others’ skills 
and behavioral tendencies. 
• Emphasis of team members tends to be on individ-
ual needs. 
• Strong direct leadership is typical at this stage. 
• Storming
• Divergent ideas are raised, which can lead to con-
flict.
• Group goals from the Forming stage may be ques-
tioned.
• Individuals from some behavioral profiles suf-
fer through this stage, [whereas] others enjoy the 
drama.
• Strong leadership is necessary to pass from this 
stage to the next. 
• Norming
• Give and take occurs between team members. 
• Individuals adapt their behavior and start to focus 
on accomplishing team goals rather than individual 
goals.
• In this stage, it’s important to ensure that team 
members don’t abandon important individual val-
ues and ideas just to avoid conflict. 
• Leaders in this stage tend to operate more as facili-
tators than managers. 

Chapter 3 Team Dynamics
32
• Performing
• The team possesses all the skills and knowledge 
needed.
• Team members operate as a singular, holistic unit. 
• All team members are motivated to accomplish the 
team’s goals. 
• When conflict arises, the team knows how to work 
through it. 
• Minimal supervision is needed. 
Figure 3.1 provides a visual representation of the Tuck-
man model. 
Forming
Storming
Norming
Performing
Adjouring
Figure 3.1 Tuckman’s Stages of Team Development 
When forming a new team for an agile project, it’s nat-
ural to assume that armed with the right processes and 
tools, the team will jump to Norming or even Performing, 

Conﬂict 
33
but this is not usually the case. Strong leadership is needed 
to swiftly coach the team through the early stages of the 
team’s maturity. This is why there is great value in keeping 
teams together that have worked well together in the past. 
Resource
“Developmental sequence in small groups,” 
Bruce Tuckman, Psychological Bulletin  Volume 
63, 1965. 
Conflict
When teams work together to create or fix something, it’s 
rare that everyone will agree on everything. Interacting 
and coming to consensus on project decisions can be fun 
for some and a real pain for others. Often teams don’t 
always understand why some decisions are easier to make 
than others. Ralph Stacey described recommended strate-
gies for group decision making based on agreement of the 
group and the level of uncertainty about the consequences 
of a decision (see Figure 3.2).
Close to
Agreement
Far from
Agreement
Close to
Certainty
Far from
Certainty
1
3
2
4
5
Figure 3.2 Stacey’s Zone of Complexity 

Chapter 3 Team Dynamics
34
In Stacey’s model, agreement refers to the degree to 
which members of the team concur about a proposed so-
lution to a problem, design choice, importance of a task, 
or some other item that could potentially yield differing 
opinions. When the group is “close to agreement,” most if 
not all members of the team are on the same page. When 
the group is “far from agreement,” there could be multiple 
opinions, or there could be just a couple strong dissenting 
opinions.
Resource
Strategic Management and Organisational 
Dynamics, Second Edition, Ralph Stacey, 
Pitman, 1996. 
Certainty refers to the access to information about past 
results based on similar decisions. If others made this same 
decision in the past, what were the results? What were the 
consequences? Although past results are no guarantee of 
future performance, they can be less risky than making de-
cisions in a vacuum. 
Based on the characteristics of each of Stacey’s five 
zones, a team can employ strategies to optimize the deci-
sion-making process. 
Close to
Agreement
Close to
Certainty
1
Figure 3.3 Zone 1—high agreement, high certainty 

Conﬂict 
35
In zone 1 (see Figure 3.3), there is sufficient access to 
reliable data from the past related to the decision being 
made. Decision making is deterministic because a cause-
and-effect relationship between a decision and its results/
consequences can be drawn. 
For example, if a team tries to determine how to design 
a user interface for a user to retrieve a forgotten password, 
numerous examples of previous designs for this problem 
exist. Each previous implementation has determinable 
characteristics related to security, user friendliness, and 
compatibility with the target implementation environ-
ment. The target solution can easily be designed based on 
other implementations that satisfy decision-making crite-
ria specified by the team. 
The safest strategy for this type of decision is to repeat 
what has been shown to work in the past. Tasks associated 
with these decisions tend to include research, data gather-
ing—generally harvesting content and solutions that have 
worked in the past. 
In this zone, there is virtually no negative impact to team 
dynamics, so no best practices are needed to maintain the 
unity of the team. 
Far from
Agreement
Close to
Certainty
2
Figure 3.4 Zone 2—low agreement, high certainty 
In zone 2 (see Figure 3.4) , there is also sufficient his-
torical information to offer predictability of future results. 

Chapter 3 Team Dynamics
36
However, there is still disagreement on the team. More 
often than not, disagreement has to do with different crea-
tive choices regarding aesthetics or usability. 
The forgotten password example could fall into this 
zone if team members have different opinions about the 
look and feel of the user interface and/or the number of 
steps required to reset a password. Some solutions may be 
high in user friendliness but may expose security issues. In 
this example, team members may fall into different camps: 
Those championing user friendliness and those champion-
ing tight security. 
In this zone, politics often come into play—idea sell-
ing, negotiation, and compromise. Critical thinkers on the 
team may develop matrices or decision trees to justify a 
choice. These could be met with resistance by those on the 
team who are not easily impressed with algorithms and 
models. It could also be met with resistance by other criti-
cal thinkers who would have chosen different decision-
making criteria. 
When decisions are made in this zone, shared team goals 
can be disrupted by these tactical choices. If a team had 
reached the performing stage, it could drift back a stage or 
two, although this is usually a temporary setback. When 
emotional moments caused by disagreement occur, it’s im-
portant for team members to avoid taking criticism per-
sonally. This will be easier for some than others based on 
their behavioral profiles. 
Close to
Agreement
Far from
Certainty
3
Figure 3.5 Zone 3—high agreement, low certainty 

Conﬂict 
37
In zone 3 (see Figure 3.5), a cause-effect relationship be-
tween decisions and their consequences is indeterminable 
based on prior work. In this zone there may not be a ra-
tional explanation for general agreement on the team. 
Resource
“Groupthink,” William Whyte, Jr., Fortune
Magazine, March 1952. 
Although things may seem hunky-dory when in this 
zone, there is a danger in not paying attention to risks 
associated with uncertainty. It’s not uncommon for a co-
hesive group in the performing stage to fall into the trap 
of groupthink. Groupthink happens when team members 
value a nonconfrontational work environment, and no-
body on the team wants to do anything to stir things up. 
In this zone, it’s important to ensure that the team’s con-
sensus is not based on gut instinct or convenience. Instead, 
the team may need a reminder that decisions should be 
made based on the vision and goals of those funding the 
project. It may be useful to pay added attention to testing 
assumptions that are made and soliciting input from cus-
tomers and others outside the team to reduce the risk of 
making poor decisions. 
There’s an inherent fallacy that to be a high-performing 
team, there should be little conflict. Actually, there can be 
great value in dissenting opinions if managed properly. See 
Chapter 5, “Collaboration,” for more on how to capitalize 
on collaboration. 

Chapter 3 Team Dynamics
38
Far from
Agreement
Far from
Certainty
4
Figure 3.6 Zone 4—zone of chaos: low agreement, low certainty 
When there is a high level of uncertainty about the out-
come of a decision and a high degree of disagreement on 
the team, the environment can be chaotic and even hostile. 
When a team enters zone 4, the zone of chaos (see Fig-
ure 3.6), there is a tendency to avoid decision making, 
especially by those who are averse to conflict. The churn 
caused by avoiding decisions of high importance can cause 
project delays and ultimately negatively affect the success 
of the project. 
This zone tends to cultivate anarchy, so more rigid lead-
ership may be needed to keep the team from regressing too 
far back into the “storming” stage. The team dynamics in 
this zone can be complex, and it’s not realistic for man-
agement to prescribe a straightforward solution because a 
manager’s guess about the appropriate course of action is 
as good (or as bad) as anyone else’s. 
A rational exit strategy from this zone is to either re-
duce uncertainty or increase agreement. Of the two fac-
tors, uncertainty may be the easiest variable to change. On 
a software project, uncertainty can be reduced with tactics 
such as prototyping, researching, and focus-group testing. 
Armed with more information, the team can drift back to 
zone 2 or zone 3 and employ the strategies for those zones. 

Conﬂict 
39
Close to
Agreement
Far from
Agreement
Far from
Certainty
Close to
Certainty
5
Figure 3.7 Zone 5—the zone of complexity 
Not to be ignored, the area between the zone of chaos 
and the zones of rational, methodical decision making can 
be the most interesting (see Figure 3.7). When there are 
slight levels of agreement and the presence of some data to 
base decisions on, the team could drift toward zone 4 or 
back toward zones 1–3. 
The environment in this zone tends to be entrepreneur-
ial. This has the potential to cultivate creativity and the 
discovery of new ideas that could be innovative and profit-
able. This is the zone in which teams developing new prod-
ucts spend much of their time. This zone will be stimulat-
ing and enriching for some and exhausting and frustrating 
for others. The behavioral profile of team members can 
offer some predictability of how they will behave in the 
zone of complexity (see Chapter 2).
An example of a scenario that could occur in this zone 
is a team member who draws conclusions about the con-
sequences of a decision based on collected data. Others 
on the team may question the validity of the data (and/or 
the assumptions that were made). When this happens, the 
scenario can play out differently based on the behavioral 
profile of the team members: 

Chapter 3 Team Dynamics
40
• A high D (dominator) may demand that others accept 
(or ignore) the data. 
• A high I (influencer) may sell his/her opinion of the 
data.
• A high S (supporter) may feel uneasy with the disa-
greement that exists and try to encourage others to 
come to some level of agreement. 
• A high C (critical thinker) may pour through Wiki-
pedia, books, and documentation to find additional 
data to support the decision. 
The primary goal of the team in this zone is to allow 
creativity and innovation to occur without drifting into the 
chaotic zone 4. Some may want to simplify the problem 
being solved so that a simpler decision-making processes 
in zones 1–3 could be employed. However, this could ig-
nore complexity that can potentially lead to innovation 
and creativity and even in breakthrough results. 
The identity and true mission of a project team will re-
veal itself in the zone of complexity, zone 5. If a team’s 
primary motivator is to all get along while getting a project 
done, the net result may be tactical success (project is com-
pleted on time and under budget), yet they may not have 
experienced breakthrough results. This may be sufficient 
for some projects and insufficient for others. 
Now What? 
All these studies, theories, and stories might be interesting, 
but how can this information help your team? 
When the topic of self-organizing arises, some people 
fear impending chaos, disorder, dysfunction, or worse. 
Putting it in civics terms, some think of anarchy. With no 

Now What? 
41
formal designated leadership, a team will eventually align 
or disband. When alignment happens, the direction it 
takes is completely directed by its membership. When self-
organizing teams are employed on an agile project, it’s im-
perative that the team includes representation of the goals 
of the business. 
A key to getting value from the content of this book is 
to understand team dynamics and to learn how to adapt 
to the various situations a team finds itself in. It would be 
a fruitless endeavor to create a prescriptive decision-mak-
ing model for teams. For example, not all decisions can 
be clearly articulated as a series of nonambiguous steps as 
could be depicted in a decision tree. Subjectivity is often 
present throughout projects, and subjectivity can trigger 
behavioral responses that must be dealt with. 
Not all projects are created equal, and not all decisions 
made on a project are created equal. Team dynamics play 
a significant role in how a team handles unknowns and 
uncertainty, which are inevitable on most projects. Under-
standing those dynamics and why individuals behave the 
way they do in a situation can help a team focus and drive 
to resolution. 
Human behavior is complex, and combining human be-
ings to work together to solve problems and create things 
is exponentially more complex. There are numerous sci-
entific studies and theories about individual behavior and 
team behavior that offer insight into the workings of a 
team. Access to the information in this chapter may offer 
some understanding of why teams behave the way they do 
and enable team members to behave with a more informed 
understanding of one another. 

Chapter 3 Team Dynamics
42
Closing
Armed with knowledge of the behavior of your team and 
why it behaves the way it does can be helpful to expose 
individual behaviors and team dynamics in a controlled 
setting. The Bridge exercise was designed to help a team 
capitalize on each other’s strengths and optimize team dy-
namics in a high-pressure project situation. 
Instructions for facilitating the Bridge Building exercise 
are found in Chapter 11, “Bridge Building.” 

43
Chapter 4 
Communication
After focusing on team dynamics, the team was behaving a 
little bit more like an agile team. They were self-managing 
and respectful of one another’s behavioral styles. Lydia 
noticed, however, that some of the individuals were bet-
ter at communicating than others. For example, she no-
ticed that whenever a new idea was brought to Sean, he 
always initially responded with the words, “Yes, but...” 
This promoted a negative atmosphere. So Lydia decided 
to take a step back and discuss some general communica-
tion protocols with the team to foster a more productive 
environment.
Imagine a world without communication. On a typical 
day, consider how much communication is involved. In 
just the first few hours of a typical day, think about how 
many times you either send or receive some form of com-
munication. Did you say “Good morning!” to the people 
you live with? Did you turn on the TV, open junk mail, 
read the newspaper, or send an email? We participate in 
most forms of communication without conscious aware-
ness that we are communicating. 
Figure 4.1 depicts Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs. Ac-
cording to Maslow, when core physiological needs in the 
base level are met (food, water, sleep, and so on), most 
of the remaining needs are fulfilled through some interac-
tion with other people. In other words, communication is 

Chapter 4 Communication
44
a seminal human need. Recall in the fictional movie Casta-
way, Tom Hank’s character used a volleyball to create an 
artificial companion to fulfill his insatiable need to com-
municate.
Self-
Actualization
Morality, creativity,
problem solving,
acceptance, spontaneity
Esteem
Confidence, achievement, respect
Love/Belonging
Friendship, family intimacy
Safety
Of body, employment, family, health, property
Physiological
Breathing, food, water, sex, sleep, essential bodily functions
Figure 4.1 Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs 
Because communication is a core need of healthy peo-
ple, you’d expect most people to work hard at becoming 
skillful communicators. In actuality, most people’s com-
munication skills could use significant improvement. 
While reading this chapter, keep a conscious eye on 
your own communication skills and seek out areas for im-
provement. Adopting just a few of the tips here may help 
you significantly enhance the interactions you engage in on 
your project. 

Lingo 
45
Lingo
When speaking or writing, you have many choices regard-
ing language. Consider the following variations of the 
same statement: 
• I want to talk to you about your business require-
ments.
• I need to talk to you about your business require-
ments.
• I’d like to talk to you about your business require-
ments.
• Let’s talk about your business requirements. 
• Let’s talk about the business requirements. 
• Can I talk to you about your business requirements? 
• May I talk to you about your business requirements? 
• We need to talk about your business requirements. 
• You need to tell me about your business requirements. 
Each of these nine statements seeks the same thing, but 
notice how each makes you feel as you read it. As you read 
them, imagine yourself as the speaker and then as the lis-
tener. Consider which of these puts you more at ease from 
both sides of the conversation. 
As the old adage goes, “It’s not necessarily what you say, 
but how you say it.” Refined communication skills are the 
best tools you can have in your tool chest. There are many, 
many resources on effective communication skills. Most 
probably offer useful advice, and this book won’t attempt 
to cover all the best practices of effective communication. 
Instead, we cover a collection of heavy hitters—those com-
munication practices that tend to be redundantly empha-
sized in the pop psychology texts. 

Chapter 4 Communication
46
Whenever an adjective is clunked in front of the word 
communication, such as good, effective, high impact, and 
so on, the descriptor is always subjective. The polished 
presentation by the Cutko knife salesperson to a married 
couple may dazzle one member of the couple, yet annoy 
the other. 
Therefore, when trying out the communication tips 
offered in this chapter, try experiencing them from both 
sides of the table. For example, as with the variations on a 
theme on the previous page, imagine yourself as the sender 
and as the receiver of each statement. 
Empathy
In the spirit of seeing things from both sides, start with em-
pathy. Empathy is identifying with another’s perspective. 
Empathy is NOT, however, sympathy. 
In the following scenario, Jane, an accountant, is dis-
cussing her job with Ron from the software development 
team:
Jane: My job is stressful at the end of each month. I 
am required to put in a lot of overtime to close the 
books. My boss is high strung and is all over me to 
get my work done. It is annoying—I hate the last 
week of every month! 
Sympathetic Ron: I’m so sorry to hear that. I hate 
bosses like that—some bosses can be real jerks! 
What can I do to help reduce your workload and 
get your boss off your back? 
versus
Empathetic Ron: I can imagine what it would be 
like to work under that type of pressure. A few 
years ago I had a job with similar circumstances, 
and I remember what it felt like. 

Empathy 
47
Notice that sympathetic Ron is problem-solving Ron—
the fixer. He is like the Mom kissing the child’s boo-boo to 
make the pain go away. 
Empathetic Ron is also understanding and may commu-
nicate that he “gets it.” However, he may actually choose 
not to take sides. He expresses that he can see Jane’s per-
spective but doesn’t immediately pounce on the problem 
to fix it, sugar coat it, or pretend it isn’t there. 
On a project team, empathy can be a powerful tool. 
When empathy is genuine, a connection can exist between 
individuals that enhance their communication with each 
other. The wall that can exist between people often breaks 
away when an empathetic connection is made. 
During requirements sessions on software projects, there 
is often an elephant in the room that nobody will discuss: 
We cannot build everything you have asked us to build. 
Some of the best-written user stories may never become 
software because they will be continuously overlooked 
during sprint planning meetings. 
When a feature desired by one or a few is pushed down 
the priority list, emotions may enter the scene. At times 
like this, it’s important not to back down and allow emo-
tions to cause low-priority requirements to bloat the scope 
of a project. At the same time, understanding the perspec-
tive of the requirements’ owner can help avoid the loss of 
commitment from those whose requirements were elimi-
nated. An empathetic viewpoint can do two things: 
• It can help validate that the decision to lower the pri-
ority of the feature was prudent. 
• It can avoid sending mixed signals to those who are 
disappointed that they won’t get their desired fea-
tures.

Chapter 4 Communication
48
Eye Contact 
Many books have been written on body language, and in 
particular, eye contact. Generally in the Americas and in 
much of Europe, making eye contact with another indi-
cates that you are listening and interested in what the other 
person has to say. When you look away, it implies that you 
are not paying attention, are uninterested, or disagree with 
what the other person has to say. 
Your DISC tendencies may play a role in how you use 
eye contact. When a disagreeable comment is made to a D 
(dominator), the D may look at the speaker with a stern, 
forceful look. The look says, “I hear you, and I do not 
agree with what you are saying.” 
When a C (critical thinker) hears a disagreeable com-
ment, the C may tend to look down or away from the 
speaker, hoping it will cause the speaker to stop talking. 
In the same scenario with an S (supporter), the S is likely 
to make eye contact with raised eyebrows, exposing nega-
tive feelings regarding the comment. 
Although those who have a high degree of I (influencer) 
tend to use eye contact a lot, when listening to another 
person speak, the I is most likely thinking, “Why is this 
person speaking? I want to be speaking. How can I capture 
control of this conversation?” 
A lot can be stated nonverbally through effective use 
of eye contact. A person who maintains eye contact can 
maintain control of an interaction, especially when the 
other person looks away. 
Overuse or abuse of eye contact could make others 
uncomfortable, especially if there are possible relation-
ship implications. In some Muslim cultures, for example, 
eye contact between males and females is frowned upon. 
In any culture, there is a tipping point between a gaze 
that indicates sincere interest and a gaze that indicates, 
“I’m feigning interest.” Eye contact when combined with 

Ambiguity 
49
variations of other facial expressions—raised eyebrows, 
smile/frown, and so on can take on completely different 
meanings.
Ambiguity
Ambiguous communication tends to waste enormous 
amounts of time on a project. When information is ex-
pressed accurately, clearly, and without a trace of ambi-
guity, individuals are best served to interact and solve a 
problem or make a decision. 
When ambiguity is introduced, however, misinterpreta-
tions and assumptions are often made, which slow down 
the productivity of the interaction. 
A group of individuals in a meeting room were present-
ed with the following instructions: “Draw a pizza that has 
eight slices with three lines.” Pen and paper in hand, many 
of the participants looked puzzled. A couple of folks with 
inquisitive expressions raised their hands, which caused 
the facilitator to say, “Let’s see who can solve the puzzle 
the fastest; then I’ll address your questions.” 
This simple puzzle becomes impossible to many who try 
to solve it because they impose constraints that just aren’t 
there.
Many will complain that the possible solutions depicted 
in Figure 4.2 violate the instructions: 
A
B
C
Figure 4.2 Pizza Puzzle solutions 

Chapter 4 Communication
50
Solution A may be disputed by those who imposed an 
unstated constraint that the pizza can only have three lines. 
Solution B may be disputed by those required themselves 
to use only straight lines. In Solution C, each slice has three 
lines. Most listeners probably inferred that the pizza must 
have three lines, but the statement could be interpreted as 
each slice has three lines. 
The point of this tricky little exercise isn’t about fool-
ing people; it’s about how even the most straightforward 
sounding instruction could be interpreted differently by 
members of a group. When people assume the message 
was clear, and they impose their own constraints, waste 
and mistakes can happen. 
Body Language 
A lot has also been written about body language. Without 
saying a word, your stance alone can speak volumes. Of-
ten, it’s likely that you are not thinking about or feeling 
what your body is saying that causes others to misread 
you.
In Shakespeare’s Othello, Othello sensed an uneasiness 
in the demeanor of his wife Desdemona, which he inter-
preted as evidence that she had been unfaithful to him. 
In actuality, Desdemona had been faithful to Othello, and 
her uneasiness was due to fear that Othello wouldn’t be-
lieve her. Othello’s misinterpretation of Desdemona’s non-
verbal cues lead to his murdering her. 
There is a lot of popular interest in interpretation of 
nonverbal communication. Television shows such as “Lie 
to Me” and “Psych” depict characters with acute aware-
ness of nonverbal clues that most people overlook. 
Dr. Maureen Sullivan from the University of San Fran-
cisco tested 13,000 individuals to assess their ability to de-
tect deception by others. Of the 13,000 people, only 31 
could consistently detect deception by others. 

Body Language 
51
Although accurate reading of nonverbal clues is not 
something everyone can do, most people do tend to inter-
pret nonverbal communication by others, whether it is an 
accurate interpretation or not. This leads to perceptions 
that could be wrong. 
The focus of this section of the book is therefore not 
about how to interpret others’ nonverbal cues. Rather, it 
is how to better manage your own body language to avoid 
misinterpretation by others. This is called body language 
self-awareness.
The definitive body language signal is folded arms (as 
shown in Figure 4.3). When talking to someone whose 
arms are folded, the popular interpretation is that the arm 
folder is rejecting or disagreeing with what is being said. 
In reality, the person could be cold. Perhaps the person 
is more comfortable with folded arms. It’s not necessarily 
an indicator of rejection. Unfortunately, actual intent is 
irrelevant.
Figure 4.3 Body language self-awareness 
When Fred is talking to Mary, and Mary’s arms are 
folded, it’s possible (and even highly probable) that Fred 
will interpret Mary’s folded arms as rejection of his ide-
as. The typical observer will look at this situation from 
Fred’s point of view: “What is Mary telling me?” Let’s try 

Chapter 4 Communication
52
looking at it from the other direction—Mary’s point of 
view: “Fred is talking to me. I want to fold my arms, but 
if I do, Fred may think I’m disagreeing with him. It would 
really be so much more comfortable to fold my arms, but 
I’m just not going to.” 
Mary’s self-awareness of her body language demon-
strated empathy toward Fred. Whether or not Mary agreed 
with what Fred was saying, her conscientious decision to 
avoid telegraphing negativity offered Fred more freedom 
to express his thoughts. 
The key message here is not that Mary has to agree with 
Fred. Rather, Mary is empathetic to Fred’s desire to ex-
press his ideas freely. The empathetic Mary is more like-
able than the (presumed) rejecting Mary, which offers an 
opportunity for Mary and Fred to have a richer, more en-
gaging interaction on the subject they’re discussing. 
Your nonverbal cues may be unconsciously sending a 
message to others. The characters in Figure 4.4 show an 
exaggerated expression of nonverbal “shouting.” Without 
uttering a word, these characters (from left to right) clearly 
depict arrogance, confidence, and disapproval. See Figure
4.5 for common interpretations of body language. 
Figure 4.4 Nonverbal cues 

Cultural Awareness 
53
Chin
Horizontal: Engaged
Tilted downware: Disinterested,
Dejected
Titled Upward: Pensive, thinking
about something (else)
Head
Nodding slowly: Agreement, patience, interest
Nodding fast: Impatience, “Get on with it!”
Titled (slightly): Interest, friendliness
Arms/Hands
Crossed: Defensive, disagreement
Open arms/hands: Agreeable
Hands in pockets: Hiding a secret
Legs
Crossed: Defensive, obstinate
Uncrossed: Engaged
Shaking: Impatient, uneasy
Posture
Slumped: Sad, depressed, tired
Erect: Engaged, interested
Figure 4.5 Common interpretations of body language 
Cultural Awareness 
Nonverbal communication is not necessarily a universal 
language. The thumbs-up gesture is often used in the Unit-
ed States to indicate agreement and affirmation. The same 
gesture in Italy means the number one, yet in American 
Sign Language it means the number 10; and thumbs up in 
many Middle Eastern countries is considered an obscene, 
insulting gesture. 
Thumbs up is a fairly overt gesture. More subtle is a 
gentle rocking of the head from side to side, which in many 
cultures means disagreement. However, the side-to-side 
gesture in India is seen as a sign of agreement. Misinter-
preting this nonverbal cue can often confuse westerners 
visiting India. 

Chapter 4 Communication
54
Reflecting Body Language 
Echoing the body language of a person you interact with 
can be interpreted as empathetic. For example, if you talk 
to someone who leans forward with uncrossed legs and 
open arms, if you reflect the same pose, you are sending 
the message: “I am engaged in this interaction, and you 
have my attention.” 
Be prudent when reflecting, though. It could backfire 
and be interpreted as mocking. It’s also not helpful to re-
flect a pose that has negative elements. For example, when 
talking to someone who leans back with arms crossed be-
hind the head, it would be counterproductive to reflect the 
same negative pose. Instead, you might succeed in drawing 
the other person more fully into the conversation by lean-
ing forward and engaging eye contact. 
Small Talk 
Conversations often stray from project-related topics. This 
is inevitable with even the most focused, driven members 
of a project team. Discussing the weather, yesterday’s foot-
ball game, or the price of tea in China may seem to be 
a waste of time at work. However, this “small talk” can 
contribute to the communication dynamics of members of 
the project team. 
In the 2009 movie “The Invention of Lying,” characters 
live in a world in which all thoughts are freely expressed 
with complete openness and honesty. Nobody tells lies, 
and nobody withholds information. This leads to unex-
pected conversations with everyone blurting out what they 
actually think. These conversations are unlikely in real life, 
not because all people are liars, but rather because most 
people tend to withhold thoughts or disguise sensitive and 
personal interactions with those that are nondescript. This 

Small Talk 
55
“language” of topics that are mundane and noncontrover-
sial is referred to as small talk. 
Most people have a love/hate relationship with small 
talk. Consider the following interaction. Dave Developer 
is reluctantly attending the mandatory project kick-off 
event in the company cafeteria. All members of the project 
team will be there, along with business executives who will 
be funding the project (and beneficiaries of the software 
created by the project). 
Barbara Business-Stakeholder had been looking for-
ward to the get-together all week. She was excited about 
meeting and chatting with all members of the project team. 
Barbara enjoys things like this—Barbara’s favorite part of 
her job is talking with people. 
Dave, on the other hand, was stressed about the whole 
thing. What was the point of the social event anyway? A 
bunch of people standing around jibber-jabbering about 
meaningless dribble. Dave would go because it was expect-
ed, but he was not happy about wasting time talking about 
things that will not advance the progress of the project. 
Table 4.1 presents a snippet of a conversation between 
Dave and Barbara as they meet. The first column indicates 
what was said (the small talk), and the second column 
shows what the speaker actually meant (a literal transla-
tion of the small talk). 

Chapter 4 Communication
56
Table 4.1 What Was Said and What Was Meant 
What Was Said 
What Was Meant 
Barbara Hello Dave. 
His nametag says “Dave.” I 
don’t know him, and he’s not 
talking to anyone, so I’ll go 
ahead and break the ice. 
Dave 
Hi Barbara. 
Okay, here it comes... 
Barbara What is your role on the 
project?
 So let’s see if we have anything 
to talk about. 
Dave 
I’m a software developer. 
Asked and answered. 
Barbara Sure has been hot outside 
this week! 
I know nothing about software 
development, so let’s shift to 
something I do know about. 
I’ll pick something safe...
noncontroversial...something
that he’s certain to respond to. 
After all, there’s nothing worse 
than hitting a dead end in a 
conversation.
Dave 
Yup, sure has been hot. 
What a lame topic. There’s 
nothing more boring than 
talking about the weather. See, 
I knew this thing was going to 
be a waste of my time. 
Barbara Are you excited about the 
project?
Okay, he hasn’t abandoned the 
conversation, so let’s dive into 
something more relevant. 
Dave 
I don’t know that much 
about the project yet. What 
do you know about it? 
Hmmm...maybe this lady does 
have something real to talk 
about.
Barbara
Well, I am head of one of 
the departments that will 
be the primary users of the 
new system. We are excited 
about getting this new sys-
tem built. 
You may not be interested in 
talking to me, but I want you 
to know that I am someone 
important who you will want 
to get along with. 
Dave 
Oh, I look forward to get-
ting to know more about 
what your expectations are 
for the new system. 
This is someone who will likely 
determine the success or failure 
of the work we do, so I’ll want 
to get along with her! 

Collaborative Conversations 
57
Clearly, what had started as a dry small talk session 
turned into an important meeting for both Dave and Bar-
bara. Agile projects can succeed or fail based on the qual-
ity of the communication on the team. 
For communication to occur between individuals, some 
form of a relationship must be formed. If Barbara were to 
discuss the weather with Frank, the cashier at the grocery 
store, that relationship may be fleeting. Barbara might have 
never met Frank before, and she may never see him again. 
The small talk she strikes up with Frank has no long-term 
purpose. She is just being friendly in this case. 
The small talk that Barbara uses to launch a conversa-
tion with Dave Developer, on the other hand, has a more 
lasting purpose. She is breaking the ice with someone with 
whom she’ll be working on an important project. It would 
seem odd to dive directly into rich, intense subject matter. 
The small talk serves as a warm up that allows a produc-
tive working relationship to begin to form. 
Collaborative Conversations 
If a tree falls in a forest does it make a sound? If something 
is communicated and nobody hears it or reads it, was it 
actually communicated? Philosophy aside, from this point 
forward, assume that at least two parties are required for 
any form of communication to exist. 
The next chapter delves more deeply into collaboration. 
For now, however, the focus is on collaboration that oc-
curs during a conversation. In oral communication, when 
speakers and listeners come together, there are increas-
ingly rich levels of collaboration. 
When speakers and listeners are brought together, there 
must be a match between speaking strategy and listening 
strategy for a productive interaction to occur. When a mis-
match occurs between the level of collaboration desired 

Chapter 4 Communication
58
by speaker and listeners, speakers and listeners tend to get 
frustrated.
Collaborative Communication Levels
Speaker
Listener
Passive
Listening
Leading 
Listener
Mismatch
Zone
Speaker
Mismatch
Zone
Facilitating
Motivating
Preaching
Active
Listening
Interactive
Listening
Engaged
Participation
Speech
1
Facilitated
Discussion
2
Conversation
3
Collaborative
Interaction
4
Figure 4.6 Collaborative communication levels 
 
In any given combination of speaker/listeners, the matu-
rity of collaborative communication often aligns with one 
of the four levels depicted in Figure 4.6:
• Level 1: Speech:  A speaker is preaching and/or moti-
vating the listeners, who are often a mixture of pas-
sive and active listeners. 
• Level 2: Facilitated Discussion:  The speaker takes on 
more of a facilitation role, engaging listeners to con-
tribute to the topic being discussed. 
• Level 3: Conversation: At this level, the speaker and 
listeners engage in a dialogue, where speaker/lis-
tener roles are swapped continuously. The originat-
ing speaker role may set the tone and direction, after 
which others involved in the conversation steer its 
direction.

Collaborative Conversations 
59
• Level 4: Collaborative Interaction:  At level 4, com-
plete collaboration occurs between members of the 
group. The speaker/listener roles swap out frequently 
and swiftly. Members of the group work together to-
ward a common goal (solving a problem, discussing 
an issue, resolving a need, and so on). At this level, the 
group takes on its own identity. 
Collaborative interaction is a desirable place for a 
project team to get to and remain at. When a project team 
reaches this level, members tend to work together to fulfill 
each other’s communication needs. At this level, commu-
nication is leveraged as a tool to advance the progress of 
a project. When a communication block is reached, other 
members of the team may step in to ensure that progress 
is continued. 
In improvisational theater, a group of performers work 
together to create a cohesive (and usually humorous) en-
tertainment piece without a script. Television shows such 
as Whose Line Is It Anyway? and Curb Your Enthusiasm
have showcased improvisational performers. On Curb
Your Enthusiasm, a rough sketch of a story idea is pre-
sented to the actors, who create the story together in front 
of rolling cameras rather than reading lines from a script. 
The pressure of this real-time collaboration draws the best 
possible work out of each contributor. On Whose Line 
Is It Anyway? the performers have the added pressure of 
creating entertaining content in front of a live audience. 
One of the greatest challenges of “improv” (as this is 
commonly called), is the live collaboration that occurs 
between multiple performers. All members of an improv 
team know how to capitalize on each other’s strengths and 
overcome each other’s weaknesses. A goal of an improv 
troupe is to keep communication flowing with no dead air. 

Chapter 4 Communication
60
Popular “improv” practices can help foster better com-
munication on teams, such as the following: 
• Keep it flowing:  Improv masters are skillful at keep-
ing communication flowing, and team members all 
work together to make the “scene” a success. If one 
person dominates at the expense of others, the group 
fails. If one person falters, others will jump in to keep 
things going. 
• Say “Yes, and...”:  By responding to a teammate’s 
contribution with “Yes, and...” you are make a com-
mitment to adding to what has already been offered. 
This approach maintains cohesion by committing to 
build upon what was started. It also shifts the burden 
of enhancing the overall contribution. 
Mary 
I believe customers will want a user inter-
face that is attractive and is easy to use. 
Fred 
Yes, and... 
After the “and,” Fred adds new information. The per-
son who says, “Yes, and...” is expected to contribute 
new content, not just restate or transform what was 
already said. 
Fred 
Yes, and the screen should be clean with few 
widgets, options, and displayed content. 
Jane 
Yes, and the system should be fast, too. 
New windows should pop up within just 
a second or two from the time they are re-
quested.
David 
Yes, and... [Continues until the group runs 
out of steam.] 
• Avoid blocking:  Blocking is the opposite of “Yes, 
and...” Expressing a negative reaction to the previous 
contribution can stop the conversation flow dead in 

Collaborative Conversations 
61
its tracks. It may be simply saying, “No,” or it could 
be ignoring the conversation and shifting to a com-
pletely different subject. A high D (dominator) is like-
ly to block when in disagreement with an idea that is 
being cultivated. 
Mary 
I believe customers will want a user inter-
face that is attractive and easy to use. 
Pat 
No, actually customers will want a feature-
rich application with a lot of information 
and user-configurable capabilities. 
OR
Pat 
I’m not that concerned about the user inter-
face; it’s the speed of the application that 
I’m worried about. 
 
• Avoid questions: Asking questions could be perceived 
as a “punt,” which shifts the burden to someone else. 
This is a common tactic of a high C (critical thinker), 
who may believe that critical questions are contrib-
uting to the team. Rather, they demonstrate that the 
questioner doesn’t want to play the game and is quick 
to shift the “hot potato” to someone else. 
Mary 
I believe customers will want a user inter-
face that is attractive and is easy to use. 
Derek
Are you familiar with the corporate user in-
terface style guide and the standard UI tem-
plates?
OR
Derek 
How do you define “easy to use?” 
Notice how Derek’s questions push the burden im-
mediately back to Mary. This places responsibility on 
Mary to keep the conversation flowing, and Derek 

 
Chapter 4 Communication
62
plays a minor role in the overall results of the group, 
even though Derek probably feels that his inquisitive 
style is helping. 
• Include other team members: Help draw in other 
team members who are not contributing by provid-
ing information they can build on. This requires an 
awareness of skills and interests of those team mem-
bers. Notice the collaborative helpful tone of Mary 
and David’s exchange: 
Mary 
I believe customers will want a user inter-
face that is attractive and is easy to use. 
David, I remember that the user interfaces 
you developed on other projects were well 
accepted by your users. How can we achieve 
the same success on this project? 
 
David
Well, I should conduct a focus group with 
key target users. Also Derek is a pro at 
screen layouts. We’ll want to get him in-
volved.
• Be Socratic: The great teacher and philosopher Socra-
tes devised a teaching technique that broke from the 
conventions of his time. Rather than blurt knowledge, 
he posed a series of questions to his students. This 
allowed the students to navigate their own path of 
understanding and learning. These questions allow a 
speaker to clarify and qualify what is being said. 
Warning
There’s a fine line between being a Socratic 
questioner and being annoying. 

Collaborative Conversations 
63
Note that asking questions is a “no no” in the improv 
world because it is seen as deflecting involvement. A 
Socratic series of questions, however, encourages ac-
tive involvement by the questioner. As a facilitation 
technique, it can keep people on task and help them 
avoid getting off track from the goals of the commu-
nication session. With this technique, the facilitator is 
not questioning what is being said. Rather, the facili-
tator is asking questions to encourage the speaker to 
elaborate, enhance, and clarify what is being said. 
Examples of helpful Socratic questions: 
• What makes you say that?
• Can you describe an example of what you’re 
talking about?
• How does this align with what others have been 
saying?
• How does this differ from what others have 
been saying?
• Are there other ways to ask what you are ask-
ing?
And a few metaquestions (questions about the ques-
tion itself): 
• Did the way you worded the question get the 
response you expected?
• Is that a good question to be asking?
• Why is what you are saying important to the 
project?
• Be even more Socratic:  Another technique often 
attributed to Socrates is to feign ignorance—to pre-
tend to have no knowledge of something you are ful-
ly knowledgeable about. Listen in on the following 
conversation:

Chapter 4 Communication
64
Fred 
Would you like me to explain the steps in-
volved in underwriting an insurance policy? 
Jane 
[Having spent the past 20 years as an insur-
ance underwriter and holding various certi-
fications as a certified underwriter, bites her 
tongue, feigns curiosity and interest, and 
says...] Yes, please tell us about it. 
Feigning ignorance can be difficult for those who are 
knowledgeable on a subject. Their egos entice them to let 
everyone know how smart they are. By swallowing pride 
and feigning ignorance, though, there is a great opportuni-
ty to augment their knowledge with another’s perspective. 
In the preceding scenario, if Jane had not allowed Fred 
to continue, she might have lost the opportunity to either 
validate what she knows or add to her knowledge of the 
subject.
The Power of Shutting Up 
When used properly, silence can be a powerful commu-
nication tool. Proper use of silence includes appropriate 
choice of supporting eye contact and other body language. 
In this scenario, Fred is undecided about whether to 
include a certain feature in the scope of the system. Jane 
(who is likely a high D and/or a high I) feels that it’s neces-
sary to say something: 
Fred 
I can’t quite decide whether that feature is 
important and should be included in the 
scope of the system. 
Jane 
I think it’s quite important. I’d include it if 
I were you. 
OR
Okay, what can I do to help you decide? 

Collaborative Conversations 
65
OR
When will you decide? 
If instead Jane had said nothing, she could have urged 
Fred to come to a decision. If Jane looked Fred in the eyes 
and leaned forward, she would silently be saying, “Take 
your time, Fred, I’ll wait for you to think about it and 
come to a decision.” 
If Fred happens to be a high C, he is unlikely to make 
a snap decision and will want time to think about the im-
plications of his decision before announcing it. By exer-
cising restraint and using silence with appropriate body 
language, Jane allowed Fred to make a more informed, 
well-thought-out decision. 
Using silence as a tool can be difficult for high D’s and 
high I’s. Silence can drive these people nutty, and they’ll 
likely try to fill it with sound. 
Communication Latency 
In 1860, a message crossed the United States from coast to 
coast in ten days via Pony Express. Today, it’s possible for 
an email message to make the same journey in less than a 
second.
This doesn’t mean, however, that email is the definitive 
communication speed test benchmark. Email has its place 
but does not guarantee efficiency or speed. You probably 
have messages in your email inbox from more than ten 
days ago that were overlooked or not read. If, however, 
someone rode up alongside you on a horse and handed 
you a letter that had been in transit for the past ten days, 
there’s a good chance that you’d drop whatever you’re do-
ing to read it. 
Communication latency refers to the delay that occurs 
from the time something is communicated until the time 
it is received and processed. A common goal of an agile 

Chapter 4 Communication
66
project is to reduce communication latency. Real-time in-
teractions can keep a project moving forward, whereas de-
lays can have a compounding detrimental impact to the 
project. Figure 4.7 depicts commonly used communication 
tactics, shown with increasing amounts of latency (or de-
lay) from when the sender sends the message and the re-
cipient receives the message. 
As an example, receiving the message does not mean 
that it arrived in the recipient’s inbox. The communica-
tion transaction is complete when the recipient reads and 
understands what was communicated. It’s ironic that some 
of the more popular modern tactics actually introduce the 
most latency. 
Increasing Communication Latency
Spoken
• Face to Face
• In Person
• (one to one)
Spoken
• Telephone
Instant
Messenger
Spoken
• Face to Faces
• (one to many)
Written
Document/
Email
• To Shelf/File
Written
Document/
Email
• To Person
Written
Document/
Email
• To Group
Figure 4.7 Increasing communication latency 
The more time that passes from the sending of informa-
tion and the processing of that information, the greater 
the risk the information will be misunderstood, ignored, or 
misused. Notably, the context that was in existence at the 
time something is communicated will likely have changed 
as more time passes. This causes information to be proc-
essed out of context, which can lead to misinterpretation. 
Ideally, all project communication would occur live and 
in real time. Behaviorally, real-time conversations are fun 
and desirable for a high I (influencer); at the same time 
they can be exhausting and undesirable to a high C (criti-
cal thinker). When Mary asks Derek to do some research 
on a certain business requirement and to let her know 

Collaborative Conversations 
67
what he finds out, his follow-up actions will depend on his 
behavioral tendencies. 
Because Derek is a high DI, he may likely do a cursory 
job of researching (or try to delegate it) and will report 
what he learns back to Mary in person. Derek is likely to 
report back to Mary within hours so he can get the to-do 
item off his list. 
When Derek tells Mary what he has learned, he will 
consider his task complete. If Mary were to ask Derek to 
write up what he discussed, Derek is likely to be frustrated 
or annoyed. 
If Mary had asked Carl instead, she would have experi-
enced a different response because Carl is a high C. Carl is 
likely to take his time doing a thorough job of researching 
the problem. When he has researched to his satisfaction, 
he will likely write up the information and send it to Mary 
in an email message. It’s highly unlikely that Carl will call 
Mary or see her in person to discuss what he learned. Af-
ter Carl clicked “send” he considered his task complete. If 
the email server crashed and the message never made it to 
Mary, Carl would likely   have never pursued making sure 
Mary received and understood the information. 
The contrast between Derek’s and Carl’s behavior is im-
portant. Carl probably did a much more thorough and ac-
curate job of addressing Mary’s needs. However, the delay 
in getting the information to Mary could have potentially 
caused other delays. Additionally, if Mary never received 
(or noticed) the reply, Carl’s work was pointless. 
On the other hand, Derek handled the request in a time-
ly manner, but the quality of his research was probably 
much poorer than what Carl produced. 
In either case, it’s productive for all team members to 
maintain awareness of communication latency and to 
work to minimize delays in communication threads. 

Chapter 4 Communication
68
We the People... 
Here’s a quick grammar lesson: 
• First-person singular: “I...” 
• Second-person singular: “You...” Third-person singu-
lar: “He/she...” 
• First-person plural: “We...” Second-person plural: 
“You...”
• Third-person plural: “They...” 
Regardless of your intent, when you choose to speak 
in first-person versus third-person, and singular versus 
plural, others’ perception of you will likely be affected by 
what they hear. Generally: 
• Those who use first-person singular can be perceived 
as arrogant and boring. Others’ eyes may glaze over 
as you continually say, “I this,” and “I that.” That 
doesn’t mean you mustn’t ever talk about yourself. 
However, it’s a good idea to monitor your “me” 
speak and be cognoscente of a lack of empathy for 
your listeners. 
• Those who use second-person can be perceived as 
nagging or preaching. Listeners tend to get defensive 
and raise their guard when they hear, “You this,” and 
“You that.” The “You” speaker may also be seen as 
arrogant, which is often a turn off to listeners. 
• Those who frequently speak in the third-person may 
be viewed as gossips. When you choose to talk about 
others, be aware that any hint of judgment or criti-
cism could cause you to be labeled as a critic and a 
gossip. People may be less inclined to be open with 
you to avoid being judged or criticized by you. 

Closing 
69
• The use of first-person plural is a great way to get 
collective buy-in for whatever you have to say. When 
you say “we,” others see you as part of the team, a 
member of the family, someone who has the same 
skin in the game that they do. Not only can this tactic 
help you avoid alienation, it can encourage others to 
be more open with you. 
Closing
The following tables summarize key contents of this chap-
ter from the DISC behavioral perspective: 
Table 4.2 A High D (Dominator) Likely Exhibits These Tendencies 
Behavior Area 
Tendency
Eye contact 
Looks you straight in the eye. 
Body language 
Exhibits confidence. Walks quickly. 
Speaks loudly. May look at watch 
frequently.
Collaborative conversations
May monopolize conversations. May 
not allow others who are not high D’s 
to easily contribute their own ideas. 
Socratic questioning 
May not question because they assume 
their own views and ideas are the cor-
rect ones. 
Feigning ignorance 
Likely not to feign ignorance because 
that may show lack of confidence. 
Grammar: First versus second 
versus third 
Likely to use first-person more than 
most. It is about me. Will also use 
second-person to get someone to do 
something.

Chapter 4 Communication
70
Table 4.3 A High I(Influencer) Likely Exhibits These Tendencies 
Behavior Area 
Tendency
Body language 
Very expressive. Wears their emotions 
on their sleeves. 
Collaborative conversations
May monopolize conversation but will 
want to hear what others have to say. 
May stray off topic. 
Socratic questioning 
Will be the most likely to do this. Will 
want to draw out what others have to 
say.
Feigning ignorance 
Although confident, will do this if it is 
a way to get others to speak up. 
Grammar: first versus second 
versus third 
Likely to use first-person plural and 
third-person plural the most. It is 
about the team, and gossip is OK. 
Table 4.4 A High S (Supporter) Likely Exhibits These Tendencies 
Behavior area 
Tendency
Eye contact 
May not make good eye contact. 
Body language 
Reserved.
Collaborative conversations 
Will contribute and want to make 
sure that everyone on the team gets 
to contribute. If too many D’s or I’s 
are in the discussion, may not get a 
word in edgewise. 
Socratic questioning 
Will want to do this. Will care what 
others feel or believe. 
Feigning ignorance 
Will be the most likely to do this to 
get others to share their feelings and 
ideas.
Grammar: first versus second 
versus third 
Likely to use first-person plural the 
most. It is all about the team. 

Closing 
71
Table 4.5 A High C (Critical Thinker) Likely Exhibits These 
Tendencies
Behavior area 
Tendency
Eye contact 
Often looks away. 
Body language 
Reserved. Chin down. Methodical. 
Collaborative conversations 
Will contribute after they hear the 
facts and/or when asked for an 
opinion. If too many D’s or I’s in 
the discussion, may not speak up 
even if they have the best solution. 
Socratic questioning 
May do this in search of the correct 
resolution.
Feigning ignorance 
Will likely not do this. 
Grammar: first versus second 
versus third 
Likely to use first-person or third-
person plural the most. 

This page intentionally left blank 

73
Chapter 5 
Collaboration
Now that the team members were all communicating ef-
fectively, it was time to start garnering the strength of the 
team as a whole. Each individual on the team was extreme-
ly bright, but Lydia knew that if the team understood and 
applied the “Wisdom of Crowds,” it would make the team 
even more effective. 
Moreover, Lydia witnessed some of the natural con-
flicts that often arise between traditional roles on software 
project teams. For example, there seemed to be a constant 
tension between Lisa (who was a tester) and Eric (a de-
veloper). This is what Lydia referred to as the yin-yang 
on software projects. This is one of the reasons why ag-
ile teams contain fewer separations of roles and all team 
members are expected to do whatever is necessary (within 
their capabilities) for the team to succeed. 
Working as a Team 
Recall back in school when the teacher announced the re-
quirements for a project, including that the assignment is 
to be completed in teams of four. Although an occasional 
student may cherish the opportunity to share the work-
load, many may likely dread the hassles of working as a 
group.

Chapter 5 Collaboration
74
Attitudes about collaboration tend to align closely with 
DISC tendencies. A high D (dominator) doesn’t mind 
collaborating, as long as everyone else agrees with what 
he says. A high I (influencer) enjoys the social aspects of 
collaboration—a captive audience. A high S (supporter) 
is okay with collaboration as long as everyone is getting 
along okay, and a high C (critical thinker) tends to see col-
laboration as interference with getting work done. 
Teamwork tends to be work in and of itself. Coordi-
nating times to meet, determining who is best qualified to 
complete each of the tasks, and ensuring that everyone is 
contributing their fair share of the workload—these are all 
givens when working as a team. The most annoying com-
ponent of teamwork, though, is that others may disagree 
with you. 
Debates, arguments, selling ideas, these are the stuff of 
teamwork. They can be arduous, time-consuming, and the 
source of tremendous frustration. Given all these “costs” 
of teamwork, is it worth it? 
Vox Populi 
In an article published in the prestigious scientific journal 
Nature in March 1907, statistician Francis Galton report-
ed the results of a study he performed on data collected 
at a stock and poultry exhibition in Plymouth, England. 
Galton titled the article, “Vox Populi,” a Latin expression 
that means “the voice of the people,” or the opinion of the 
general public. 
As the 800 ticket holders entered the exhibition, they 
were offered the opportunity to guess the weight of an ox 
after it had been slaughtered and dressed. A prize was of-
fered to the person with the closest estimate, so ticket hold-
ers put some diligence in their guessing. All ticket holders 
wrote their estimates on the backs of their entry tickets, 
along with their names and addresses so that they could be 
contacted if they won. 

Working as a Team 
75
The stock and poultry exhibition attracted a variety of 
visitors. Some were butchers or farmers, who may have 
had expertise in estimating the weight of cattle, whereas 
others might not have known the difference between an 
ox and a cow. A scientific approach to ascertaining the 
weight of the ox based on the estimates might have placed 
more weight (no pun intended) on the expert’s estimates. 
However, Galton had a hypothesis that in a heterogeneous 
group of people, the best estimate would be found smack 
dab in the middle. 
In a previous article titled “One Vote, One Value,” Gal-
ton contended that in any group that must ascertain an 
ordinal value, each participant should be given one vote 
and that all votes carry equal weight. The optimal number 
can then be found in the middle. Galton contended that 
the middle is key—the median, not the mean, should be 
used. This prevents what he referred to as “cranks” from 
overly influencing the results. 
Resources
“One Vote, One Value,” Francis Galton, 
Nature 75, 1907. 
As an illustration, when a jury awards a financial set-
tlement, using the mean (or straight average) can lead to 
skewed results. In a civil case in which the jury determines 
how much to award the plaintiff, it’s possible for the set-
tlement amount to be heavily biased by a single juror. For 
example, consider the following civil case in which a six-
person jury is charged with determining the amount to be 
awarded:
Juror 1 
$100,000
Juror 2 
$ 90,000 
Juror 3 
$ 80,000 

Chapter 5 Collaboration
76
Juror 4 
$110,000
Juror 5 
$120,000
Juror 6 
$ 85,000 
Using a straight average, the award amount is $97,500. 
Using the median, the award amount is $95,000. Often, 
the mean and median are close. 
However, if Juror 1 chose to influence the award 
amount upward by choosing a settlement amount of 
two million dollars, the average jumps to approximately 
$414,000. The median value, however, would rise slightly 
to $100,000. Therefore, use of median offers a less-biased 
representation of the desires of the group. 
So back to the livestock exhibition: The exhibitioners 
loaned the box of entry tickets to Galton, who analyzed 
the estimates of the weight of the ox. After discarding 13 
illegible entries, Galton calculated the median as 1,207 
pounds, which was within 0.8% of the actual weight of 
1,198 pounds. In plotting the estimates, there was no 
symmetry—the estimates ranged widely. However, the 
middle proved to be extremely close to the correct value. 
Jack Treynor wrote an article in the Financial Analysts 
Journal about a jellybean experiment he conducted with 
students in a Finance class he was teaching at the Univer-
sity of Southern California. 
Resources
“Market Efficiency and the Bean Jar Exper-
iment,” Jack Treynor, Financial Analysts 
Journal 43, 1987. 
Professor Treynor put jellybeans in a jar and had 56 
students guess how many there were. The average of the 
group was 871, which was closer to the actual number 
(850) than all but one of the students. 

Working as a Team 
77
James Surowiecki discusses this concept in his popular 
book The Wisdom of Crowds, and he has conducted the 
jelly-bean counting experiment with his audiences during 
speaking engagements. The average of all the guesses in 
the room is usually within 3% to 5% of the actual number 
of jellybeans, and the average is usually closer to the actual 
number than more than 95% of the guesses. 
Although Treynor and Surowiecki chose to use mean 
(average) instead of median, as Galton had done, the sam-
ple size was most likely large enough to dilute the impact 
of bias imposed by a few participants. 
Sean, a colleague at Improving Enterprises, tried this 
out at a wedding he attended. As individuals signed the 
guestbook when they got to the reception, they were asked 
to jot down a guess for the number of jellybeans in a jar. 
Sean glanced down the list of guesses that had been writ-
ten down so far, calculated a quick average, and submitted 
that as his guess. Sean’s guess was closest to the mark, and 
he won a prize—the jar of jellybeans! 
Group Survival 
Years ago, the U.S. and U.K. militaries developed team 
building exercises that helped participants understand 
the power of many. The power of many is a label used 
to describe how a group in and of itself has greater wis-
dom than that of any individual within that group. NASA 
later developed its own version for training astronauts, 
and it now offers this exercise for the general public’s use. 
Resources
The Wisdom of Crowds, Why the Many Are 
Smarter than the Few and How Collective 
Wisdom Shapes Business, Economies, Socie-
ties, and Nations, James Surowiecki, 2004. 

Chapter 5 Collaboration
78
Instructions and materials for the NASA Moon Survival 
exercise can be found in Chapter 12, “Moon Survival.” 
Everything needed to conduct this exercise with a group 
is included. It’s suggested that the facilitator read   through 
all the material to become familiar with it, and that the 
participants not read about it so that they can participate 
more fully in the exercise. 
Moon Survival and other similar exercises provide par-
ticipants with experiential understanding of the benefits 
of group interaction. This is particularly useful with high 
C team members, who often get frustrated by the effort 
required and time spent when participating in group inter-
actions.
Problem-Solving Versus Decision Making 
In a typical project setting, many decisions are made. In-
dividuals make some decisions, whereas other decisions 
are made by groups of people. There are not necessarily 
any official definitions for the terms decision making and 
problem solving, so any interpretation is valid. For the pur-
poses of this book, the following distinction will be used: 
• Problem solving: A series of tasks focused on deter-
mining, testing, and implementing solutions to a giv-
en problem. 
• Decision making: The process of making a choice for 
each step of a problem-solving process. 
Hence, problem solving can involve a lot of decision 
making, and the purpose of most decisions is usually to 
support a larger problem-solving effort. 
The value in distinguishing between problem solving 
and decision making is to better understand the motiva-
tions and dynamics of each. 

Problem-Solving Versus Decision Making 
79
Individuals and Decisions 
The DISC tendencies of an individual can influence how 
decisions are made and how problems are solved. Bearing 
in mind that problem solving is heavily dependent on deci-
sion making, the efficiency and quality of decision making 
can influence the productivity of an individual. 
A team member who is a high D will usually make deci-
sions with little hesitation and often with little interaction. 
A team member who is a high I is comfortable making 
decisions quickly and without proof of all the facts. He 
will tend to trust team member’s opinions and will take 
an optimistic point of view. A team member who is a high 
S is likely to make slower decisions and will want to hear 
all the inputs of the team. A team member who is a high 
C will usually not feel comfortable making a decision un-
less she knows   all the facts and has time to analyze and 
contemplate them. 
Groups and Decisions 
In addition to individual behavioral tendencies, it’s also 
important to recognize that the DISC makeup of a group 
of people can greatly influence the approach the group will 
use to make decisions. It can also affect the quality of de-
cisions; therefore, it’s helpful to recognize how a team’s 
DISC mix is affecting its decision-making behavior. 
A DISC-homogeneous group is one that is made up of 
individuals with predominant membership from one of the 
four DISC profiles. Recall that most everyone has some 
D, I, S, and C but that usually one or two of these are the 
dominant in an individual’s behavioral tendencies. 
DISC-homogeneous groups are not unusual, especially 
on teams made up of people with similar backgrounds, 
skills, and roles. A team of computer programmers could 
have a predominance of high C members, whereas a team 
of marketing people may be made up of mostly high I 

Chapter 5 Collaboration
80
members. In a congressional committee meeting, it’s likely 
that most members of the committee are high D’s. 
Group Influence 
A typical individual within a given group often conforms 
to the will of the group. In the jellybean exercise described 
earlier in this chapter, the guesses were blind; each guesser 
does not have access to the rest of the group’s guesses (with 
the exception of Sean at the wedding reception.) 
Because free will is always at play, not all groups will 
necessarily demonstrate conformance behavior. It’s useful 
to have awareness of the behavioral tendencies of a team 
you are working on. It is often worth investing some time 
assessing whether a team demonstrates more conformant 
behavior or more discordant behavior. Conformant versus 
discordant isn’t an either/or condition. Teams tend to have 
varying degrees of conformity. The graph in Figure 5.1 is a 
conceptual depiction of this scale. In decision-making situ-
ations, teams that center on one or just a couple closely re-
lated decision points is considered highly conformant. On 
the other end   of the scale are teams with widely varying 
opinions. These teams are considered highly discordant. 
On highly discordant teams, making a decision isn’t 
likely as simple as finding the median point among the 
opinions of all team members. This isn’t usually practical, 
and for subjective decisions that have no concretely meas-
urable value, this isn’t even possible. Awareness of the 
team’s adaptability to the wisdom of the overall group can 
help leaders be more productive when facilitating group 
decisions.

Problem-Solving Versus Decision Making 
81
Conformant versus 
Discordant Group Behavior
Level of Conformance
Individual Decision Points
Highly
Conformant
Highly
Discordant
Figure 5.1 Assessing the group influence of a team 
As a ScrumMaster assigned to a new team, John wanted 
to determine how conformant or discordant the team was 
going to be. John got the team together and asked them 
to each guess how much he weighed, writing down their 
guesses on a piece of paper. 
John gathered up the guesses without making any note 
of who made which guess and plotted them on a chart. 
John noticed that the estimates ranged from 155 pounds 
to 220 pounds, with various guesses at points in between 
those numbers. 
Next, John showed the chart to everyone on the team 
and asked each person to review the chart and make an-
other private guess at his weight. Again, John gathered up 
the guesses, plotted them, and showed the plotted data to 
everyone. After one more round of guesses, John made a 
final plot (see Figure 5.2).
After three rounds, John learned a few things about the 
team. Notice how the data clusters closer together during 
the second round and even closer during the third round. 
This is an indicator to John that the team exhibits conform-
ant behavior. This helps raise John’s awareness of how the 
team is likely to behave in collaborative situations. 

Chapter 5 Collaboration
82
240
220
200
180
160
140
120
1 
2 
3
Rounds
Pounds
Figure 5.2 Assessing the group influence of a team: Group A 
It would be naïve for John to assume that this is a dem-
onstration of desirable behavior. It is possible that the 
“center” is not the optimal place to be in all decision mak-
ing. The jelly-bean counting and ox weight examples may 
cause us to assume that the center is always accurate; how-
ever, many other factors can influence the group consen-
sus.
The plot depicting the behavior of Group B (see Figure
5.3) demonstrates a different outcome. Most members of 
the group are stubbornly sticking with their original guess-
es. It’s possible that some members of the group won’t 
allow themselves to be influenced and drawn away from 
their own opinions. If John were leading a group like this, 
he should plan on spending much more time monitoring 
decision making. It’s probable with a group like this that 
there can be a lot of arguments and debates about even the 
most trivial decisions. Because the members of this group 

Six Degrees of the Perfect Ice Cream Sundae 
83
demonstrated that they are   unyielding on something as 
unimportant as guessing weight, they are likely to drag 
out conversations about more important project-related 
topics.
240
220
200
180
160
140
120
1 
2 
3
Rounds
Pounds
Figure 5.3 A different outcome: Group B 
Six Degrees of the Perfect 
Ice Cream Sundae 
Late one Saturday night while watching a movie with 
Mary, John developed a craving for an ice cream sundae. 
After John clicked pause and announced his craving, Mary 
offered to build sundaes for both of them. Mary asked 
John what he wanted on his sundae. John was very par-
ticular about his ice cream sundaes, and he took pause be-
fore acknowledging Mary’s offer. Mary had never made a 

Chapter 5 Collaboration
84
sundae for John before, and even if he provided a list of 
the ingredients he wanted, there was no way that Mary 
would know John’s preferences for quantities and layering 
of those ingredients. 
Although John didn’t want to scoff at Mary’s kind offer 
to make a sundae for him, he realized that it would be so 
much easier to go to the kitchen and make it himself. Imag-
ine the same scenario with one added degree of communi-
cation: John provided his requirements to Mary, who then 
went to the ice cream shop. At the ice cream shop, Mary 
gave John’s requirements to the teenager behind the coun-
ter. Imagine if the clerk behind the counter wrote down the 
ice cream sundae instructions and handed it to yet another 
person to create the sundae. Each additional   participant in 
the sundae-making process introduces additional opportu-
nities for John’s requirements to be misapplied. 
Software projects are usually far too complex to be ac-
complished by one individual. To add to this complexity, 
it’s one thing for John to create the perfect ice cream sun-
dae for himself, and it is yet another thing altogether to 
create the perfect ice cream sundae to satisfy the require-
ments of a large group of people. Specialized skills and the 
quantity of work favor the need for multiple participants 
in the process. As the number of participants increases, 
there is an increased likelihood of differences of opinion 
on the team. 
What should John have done? The only way John can 
truly get the sundae he wanted was to participate directly 
in the process of sundae building. Anything else introduces 
risk that he will not get what he wants. The same holds 
true on agile project teams. This illustrates why stakehold-
er involvement is key to the success of projects. 

Diametrically Opposing Forces 
85
Diametrically Opposing Forces 
In Taoist philosophy, the concept of yin and yang describes 
two diametrically opposing forces. Each of the forces ex-
ists independently while at the same time are in opposition 
to one another. For example, light and dark are opposites. 
The concept of light would make no sense if it weren’t 
for dark. Thus, dark defines light, and light defines dark. 
Together, dark and light oppose one another and form a 
more profound thing that is both dark and light. The sym-
bol for yin and yang is shown in Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4 Yin and yang 
Understanding yin yang and its surrounding philoso-
phies can be complex. For the purposes of this book, suf-
fice it to say that yin and yang are opposing, rooted to-
gether, transforming each other, and are balanced. 
On typical project teams, traditionally there are certain 
roles played by individuals that have inherent opposition 
to other roles. Let’s call the person funding a project the 
“product owner,” and let’s call the person managing the 
project the “project manager.” The product owner seems 
to be continuously concerned with staying on budget and 
meeting deadlines, whereas the project manager seems to 
be concerned with excessive requirements changes and 
complaints about the productivity of the project team. 
This conflict can cause frustration and tension between 

Chapter 5 Collaboration
86
these individuals. At the same time, the conflict cultivates 
interactions that positively contribute to the success of the 
project.
It’s natural for many individuals to avoid conflict as 
much as possible. However, certain project role pairings 
have built-in conflict that play an important part in the 
dynamics of a high-functioning project team, including the 
following:
• Business analysis versus business domain experts 
• Development versus systems analysis 
• Quality assurance versus development 
• Project management versus business management 
Figure 5.5 further summarizes these relationships. 
Analysis 
Business
Development 
Analysis
Quality Assurance 
Development
Project Management 
Business Management
Natural Tendency: Avoid conflict, hide, ignore it.
Better Approach: Confront conflict and cultivate its yield
Figure 5.5 Yin and yang of roles 

Diametrically Opposing Forces 
87
In many organizations, the business analyst (BA) role 
was born out of a business role. Sometimes a BA role begins 
as a temporary assignment for a major project and evolves 
into a full-time position in the software development or-
ganization. Regardless of where the BA role is found in 
an organization, the BA is a proxy representative of the 
business. Over time, however, the authority of the BA can 
diminish, and the power to make business decisions can 
be taken away. When this happens, the BA becomes an 
arbiter of opinions between the project organization and 
the business domain experts (and   the actual business deci-
sion makers). 
Without the tension normally present when BAs col-
laborate with business domain experts, the best and most 
important requirements are unlikely to surface. When BAs 
and business experts interact, each individual has a differ-
ent context: background, experiences, opinions, and dog-
mas. At the intersection of these items for multiple people, 
both agreement and conflict occur. Through the hassles 
of arguing, debating, agreeing, and disagreeing, the most 
important priority requirements are often revealed. 
Similarly, developers may clash with domain experts 
when determining how to implement a solution to a busi-
ness problem. Developers also tend to have a lot of conflict 
with those in quality assurance roles. When one of the au-
thors was managing a QA group for a large company, the 
developers fumed when the daily “Bug Report” was pub-
lished. After a bit of diplomacy, a compromise was reached, 
and from that point forward the daily report was renamed 
the “Findings Report.” Regardless of the name, the conflict 
between the QA and developer roles is engineered to in-
crease the quality of the software being   built. 
Without all the conflict that occurs when these roles are 
brought together, quality and productivity would suffer. 
Some may see the existence of conflict as harming pro-
ductivity because it takes time away from “production.” 

Chapter 5 Collaboration
88
However, if conflict were avoided, quality is likely to suf-
fer. Building the wrong thing or building the thing the 
wrong way is often the result of conflict avoidance. 
Closing
Collaboration is costly and time-consuming. It requires 
much less energy to solve a problem individually than with 
a group. However, the quality of group performance has 
been demonstrated time and time again to far exceed indi-
vidual performance. 
When collaborating, it’s natural to want to avoid con-
flict. However, allowing conflict to happen and leveraging 
the wisdom of the group is likely to lead to higher quality 
results. The process may take longer, but the savings of de-
livering the right thing now far exceeds the cost of building 
the wrong thing with poor quality. 

89
Chapter 6 
Behavior and Teams 
Now that Lydia got the team to start understanding each 
other’s behaviors and to modify communication styles to 
work more effectively as a team, the group needed a tool 
to easily visualize and understand the team dynamics as a 
whole. The team was ready to learn about and apply les-
sons learned from “the wheel.” 
Harmony/Conflict
Chapter 2, “Behavior and Individuals,” discussed DISC to 
understand and accept individuals and to achieve greater 
communication on a one-on-one basis. This chapter builds 
on this core understanding and expands it to a team level. 
The “wheel” plots an entire team on a spatially accurate 
circle. Although several wheels exist, Figure 6.1 shows an 
example of a wheel provided by The Abelson Group. 

Chapter 6 Behavior and Teams
90
TT : Tom Tester
PP : Paul ProductOwner
BB : Bob BusinessAnalyst
AA : Anne Analyst
SS : Sean ScrumMaster
JD : Joe Developer
SD : Stressed Developer
DD : Doug Developer
Natural Behavior
Adaptive (work) Behavior
TA
SK
OR
IE
NT
ED
pr
od
uc
t o
rie
nte
d
sy
ste
ma
tic
de
tai
l a
nd
qu
ali
ty
ori
en
te
d
co
mp
eti
tiv
e d
ire
ct
cr
ea
tiv
e
co
nfr
on
tat
io
na
l
ch
an
ge
ag
en
t
in
de
pe
nd
en
t
pr
oc
es
s o
rie
nt
ed
lis
te
ne
r
in
dir
ec
t
sta
ble
em
pa
th
eti
c
te
am
pla
ye
r
pe
rs
on
ab
le
tru
sti
ng
int
er
ac
tiv
e
ac
co
m
mo
da
tin
g
pa
tie
nt
pe
rs
is
te
nt
tr
us
tin
g
co
nv
in
ci
ng
no
t i
nt
o
de
ta
ils
pe
ss
im
is
tic
fo
llo
we
r
ca
uti
ou
s
ac
cu
ra
te
ex
ac
tin
g
se
ns
e
of
ur
ge
nc
y
de
ma
nd
in
g r
is
k t
ak
er
pe
rs
ua
si
ve
op
ti
mi
sti
c
lik
es
st
ru
ct
ur
e
ta
sk
fo
cu
se
d
pe
ss
im
is
tic
sl
ow
st
ar
t
fa
st
fin
is
h
dr
iv
in
g
re
su
lts
or
ie
nt
ed
qu
ic
k t
o
ch
an
ge
in
sp
iri
ng
sl
ow
to
ch
an
ge
pr
ed
ic
ta
bl
e
wa
rm
co
op
er
ati
ve
op
ti
mi
sti
c
im
pu
ls
iv
e
C
O
O
R
DI
N
AT
O
R
A
N
AL
YZ
E
R
IM
PL
EM
E
NT
O
R
C
O
N
D
U
CT
O
R
PE
R
SU
A
D
E
R
S
U
P
P
O
R
TE
R
R
EL
AT
E
R
P
R
O
M
O
TE
R
IN
TE
RN
AL
FO
CU
S
EX
TE
RN
AL
FO
CU
S
PE
OP
LE
OR
IE
NT
ED
C
COMPLIANCE
D
DOMINANCE
INFLUENCER
I
STEADINESS
S
JD
TT
PP
BB
SS
SD
ss
pp
sd
jd
DD
DD
AA
aa
tt
dd
dd
8
24
9
25
40
56
41
26
10
55
54
53 
60
57
59
58
52
36
20
35
19
18
34
50
17
16
15
32
30
29 
13
12
28
44
43
42
51
7
6
5 
4
3
2
1
bb
Figure 6.1 Team Wheel   (The Abelson DISC Behaviors Wheel is an 
adaptation of the Target Training International, LTD. Wheel and is a 
trademark of The Abelson Group TM)
The wheel is a simple, yet extremely powerful tool ap-
plicable to any agile team. The wheel is a true geometric 
figure; the closer team members are located to each other 
spatially, the closer their behaviors. The team can visually 
see how well team members will get along and where to be 
prepared for natural conflict. Conflict is magnified if some 
team members have not been trained in DISC. 

Harmony/Conﬂict 
91
Based on the location of Joe Developer and Doug Devel-
oper in the wheel depicted in Figure 6.1, they should get 
along extremely well like two peas in a pod. Paul Product 
Owner and Joe Developer, however, will have a tendency 
to conflict. 
An exercise that could be conducted in a training class is 
to have students write down the names of three individuals 
with whom they enjoy their company. Then list three per-
sons that they might detest or not want to hang out with. 
The three enjoyable individuals typically have similar DISC 
profiles, and the three detested ones typically have polar 
opposite profiles (that is, are furthest away from them in 
the wheel). Many believe this is because people tend to like 
people who are like themselves. Two I’s (influencers) will 
have lots of conversation; two S’s (supporters) may be best 
friends; two C’s (critical thinkers) will thrive on details 
within the team; but what about two D’s (dominators)? 
The following is another true story regarding a leader 
of a consulting company in Dallas. The company wanted 
someone to move out to Denver to help start a new of-
fice. Denver, the mountains, skiing, cooler weather...how 
could anyone pass that up? It was almost a dream come 
true when three Principal Consultants volunteered to join 
the leader and move to Denver to help the start-up of-
fice. Principal-level consultants were few and far between 
because they had a unique combination of the strongest 
technical skills combined with outstanding communica-
tion ability and business acumen to lead teams and help 
land new business.   This supposed dream turned out to be 
a nightmare. 
As you probably expected, these three Principal Con-
sultants were extremely high D’s. Because high D’s are tre-
mendously competitive, they all strived to be the top dog 
and the “right-hand man” of the leader of this small, new 
office. The leader wound up literally facilitating a discus-
sion to help them try to understand and accept each other. 
He discussed how each was more than capable and had 

Chapter 6 Behavior and Teams
92
their unique strengths and weaknesses. And he then went 
on to explain that none of them had to be the top dog 
because they were a team. Although he never completely 
solved the problem,   the discussion avoided what would 
have probably resulted in fist fights. 
Why Not Hire a Team with Members 
That Will All Naturally Get Along? 
Wouldn’t it be best to just hire a team of all C’s, all S’s or 
all I’s so that everyone would just get along. Unfortunate-
ly, that seemingly simple solution simply will not work. 
What would happen if you hired a team of all C’s? On 
the positive side, all work would be done with high qual-
ity and perfection. On the negative side, however, things 
would tend to take longer. No one would be naturally 
driving the project to completion. You may have achieved 
the prefect product if the project did not get canceled by 
stakeholders concerned that it was taking too long and 
costing too much money. 
“The Dream Team” 
Staffing a team with individual superstars does not always 
lead to success. The team must work together as a team. Re-
call the 2002 U.S. national basketball team that finished sixth 
in the World Championships. After going 58–0 over a period 
of 10 years with NBA players, this team lost three games and 
went from being the dream team to a nightmare. A former 
dream team member, Bill Walton, expressed that there was no 
dynamic on the court. 
So the best teams comprise a blend of behavioral pro-
files. You want team members to consist of a combination 
of D’s who will make quicker decisions and help drive the 

Why Not Hire a Team with Members That Will All Naturally Get Along? 
93
project; C’s who will focus on the details as they analyze 
requirements, test, and write code; S’s who will bring har-
mony to the team; and I’s who will keep the communica-
tion going, optimism high, and energy flowing. It is healthy 
to have some team members optimistically viewing the 
project in a “glass is half full” perspective while others are 
continually concerned about the project’s status or level of 
quality. Therefore   the best teams have a mix of behavioral 
profiles that in turn tends to also result in natural conflict. 
Be Prepared for Conflict 
The beauty of the wheel is that it immediately visually 
shows team members where this natural conflict will oc-
cur. This is especially important with new teams who have 
not yet gotten to know one another and who have not gone 
through the forming, storming, norming, and performing 
stages as described in Chapter 3, “Team Dynamics.” 
The more individuals’ locations on the wheel is to the 
outside of the wheel, the more intense their behaviors. So 
a D on the outskirts of the wheel will tend to be extremely 
outspoken and driven. She could likely appear to someone 
who is on the opposite side of the wheel as being arrogant, 
opinionated, or even rude. A D who is closer to the middle 
of the wheel will have tendencies to speak up and drive the 
project, but these behaviors will not appear as intense to 
others.
Team members can understand and accept one another 
and know how to best communicate with one another by 
looking at the wheel. Similarly, they can be prepared for 
conflict. For example, an I and a C will naturally conflict 
or at a minimum will naturally annoy one another. The C 
will want data, whereas the I says “trust me.” Similarly, a 
D will want quick answers, whereas a C will tend to over-
analyze (to the D’s perspective anyway). 

Chapter 6 Behavior and Teams
94
Stressed Out 
Will individuals behave differently under stress? That de-
pends. The wheel shows each individual’s natural behavior 
(see the initials in the figure that are uppercase) and their 
adapted behavior (see the lowercase initials). 
You can see that in most cases in the preceding exam-
ple, the team members’ natural and adaptive behaviors are 
similar. Look closely at Stressed Developer (SD). His natu-
ral behavioral profile is a D, but his adaptive behavior is a 
C. That is, to successfully be a developer in this organiza-
tion, he has adapted his behavior to that of a C. However, 
under stress his natural behavior will be revealed. 
Team members who naturally seem to get along may all 
of a sudden become conflicted when the project falls be-
hind schedule and the team feels pressured or when some 
stakeholder indicates she was not happy with the results of 
a sprint. Stressed Developer will revert to his natural be-
havioral tendencies and will start to drive things and be a 
little more outspoken than he used to be. Without knowl-
edge gained from the wheel, team members may get caught 
off guard, resulting in clashes and even greater stress on 
the team. 
By viewing the wheel in advance of stressful situations 
that occur from time to time on projects, the team can 
be prepared for different behaviors that will surface under 
stress or pressure. 
Fill the Gaps 
Another important item that can be gleaned from observ-
ing the wheel is gaps on teams. For example, envision a 
team’s wheel displaying no individuals in the D segment 
of the circle. The team would most likely lack a drive for 
closure, take longer to make decisions, and have less of a 
sense of urgency. In this situation, either someone needs to 
take the role of a D when working on the project, or the 

Closing 
95
team should hire a D. Either way works; however, a team 
member acting in a role outside of his normal behavioral 
style may become overly stressed   as he works harder try-
ing to behave in a way that conflicts with his natural style. 
Organizational or Team Culture 
Teams and sometimes entire organizations share a com-
mon culture. For example, a large biotech company em-
ployed mostly scientists. Even the leaders of the organiza-
tion were once hands-on scientists. As you might imagine, 
most individuals at this company were high C’s. In gener-
al, the company made slow decisions, the employees were 
low-key and detail-oriented and did not like change. 
In another example, at a large finance company, the cul-
ture was fast-paced, voicing conflicting opinions was en-
couraged, and there was frequent change. This company’s 
culture was that of a D. 
By observing the wheel of a team or the wheels of many 
teams within a company, you can depict what the culture 
will be and gain significant insight on how the team and/or 
organization will behave. 
Closing
The best teams have a blend of behavioral profiles, which 
also means that the best teams will be up against natu-
ral human conflict. Understanding the DISC as a general 
framework is one step in helping to minimize conflicts. 
Visually seeing who on the team will likely conflict with 
whom will best prepare everyone. Doing this at the onset 
of a project is critical. After conflict occurs and relation-
ships potentially are destroyed, it is too late. 

This page intentionally left blank 

97
Chapter 7 
Change
Lydia was happy that the team had now optimized its in-
teractions. Everyone was aware of the natural and adapt-
ed behavioral traits of one another on the team. All team 
members respected one another and understood why team 
members behaved the way they did. 
Lydia observed another issue. Some members of the 
team felt less comfortable with the changes associated with 
their relatively newly adapted agile approach. 
A True Story 
In early 1984, the headquarters of a large insurance com-
pany in Texas was in the throes of email adoption. As with 
many companies at that time, the promising new tech-
nology had a provocative return on investment. Benefits 
included increased productivity through faster commu-
nication, elimination of the typing pools, reduction of sec-
retarial positions, and most significantly—paper savings. 
The hundreds of thousands of pages per year that were 
typed, distributed, read, and discarded would be virtually 
eliminated. With this new technology, it was possible that 
paper could completely disappear from the office scene. 
The business case used to justify buying all the fancy new 

Chapter 7 Change
98
computing equipment was based completely on the cost 
savings from less paper. 
The implementation team was unprepared for what hap-
pened. Although many of the new “office automation” us-
ers were enamored with this new toy, many others resisted. 
Logging into this new system to get access to intra-office 
communication was tedious, and it was easy to forget to 
check. The “old way,” glancing over at the inbox on the 
corner of the desk, was more intuitive and efficient. It had 
been much easier to know if there were a memo to read 
because it would be there, easily visible inside the inbox. 
Because a faction of users resisted using the new elec-
tronic mail system, it was useless for others to use it as a 
reliable way to communicate. It hardly seemed worth the 
trouble to send someone an email if there were no way to 
know when and if they would actually see it. Nevertheless, 
they didn’t have a choice because they no longer had secre-
taries and typists to create memos for them. 
For many of those who used the new system, reading 
memos online was a chore. Because they were so accus-
tomed to reading memos on paper, many of these peo-
ple printed every email. Because the volume of emails was 
greater than the volume of paper memorandums, paper 
consumption was an order of magnitude more than be-
fore email. The unexpected printing volume thwarted any 
chance to meet the return on investment goals, based on 
the original paper savings-based ROI formula. 
So why all the fuss? The company made a huge invest-
ment in some cool technology that would make everyone’s 
life easier. How could anyone possibly resist? This true 
story is a great example of the power that change resist-
ance can have on a company, a department, a team, and 
even individuals. By overlooking the resistance to change, 
implementation and adoption of the new system be-
came much more laborious and expensive than originally 
planned.

Why Is Change Difﬁcult? 
99
Project teams adopting new approaches such as agile of-
ten encounter resistance as well. This resistance often has 
no logical or rational basis, yet it can be powerful enough 
to impede adoption of better, more efficient ways to run 
a project. 
Why Is Change Difficult? 
In 1589, Gerardus Mercator created a world map that 
would forever impact the way the world is viewed. The 
Mercator Projection flattened the world and significant-
ly skewed proportions of the land masses. For example, 
the Mercator map greatly exaggerates the size of Alaska, 
Greenland, and Europe, while at the same time depicts 
Brazil and Africa as significantly smaller than they actu-
ally are (see Figure 7.1).
Figure 7.1 Standard Mercator projection 

Chapter 7 Change
100
Looking at a map based on the Mercator projection, 
it’s not too difficult for most people to pick out the United 
States, Africa, South America, and China. Put your finger 
on the map near your home town; then follow a line de-
picting a trip from your home town to the center of the 
east coast of Australia. 
Your understanding of the map, and our ability to navi-
gate the map, is learned and conditioned over time. The 
more often you see the standard Mercator map, the more 
you internalize it as the true representation of the world. 
Now, what if the map were turned upside down? Using 
the map in Figure 7.2, try plotting a line from Los Angeles, 
California, to London, England. Although those are two 
well-known cities, most people find this task much more 
difficult because the map is upside down. 
An upside down map isn’t as unnatural as it may seem. 
Most people don’t realize that placement of north on the 
top, and south on the bottom, was an arbitrary decision 
made by an early mapmaker named Ptolemy. In the first 
century AD, most geographic areas known to Egyptians 
such as Ptolemy were in the northern Hemisphere, so he 
chose to place them on the top of the map. Other map-
makers followed suit, and hence north on the top became 
a notational convention. 

Why Is Change Difﬁcult? 
101
Figure 7.2 Upside-down Mercator projection 
Over time, Ptolemy’s simplistic arbitrary notational 
convention defined people’s visual understanding of geog-
raphy. If a mapmaker in today’s world were to depict a 
geographic area with north on the bottom and south on 
the top, the map would be rejected by most people. Adapt-
ing to that type of change would be uncomfortable, and 
the learning curve would be undesirable. 
Despite this awareness, many people involved in project 
work can be ignorant of the effect that change has on oth-
ers. When building a new system, the software developers’ 
livelihood is based on creating change. At the same time, 
the world of many users of the new software may resist 
having to learn new tools. 
When Microsoft introduced Office 2007, it made a radi-
cal overhaul to the user interface. Microsoft touted these 
changes as much needed enhancements to the interface, 
yet many consumers complained about them. “Better” is 
a relative term, and from the perspective of many consum-
ers, Microsoft did an inadequate job of defining “better.” 

Chapter 7 Change
102
Process change is unsettling to many as well. Some peo-
ple may jump at the chance to try a “shiny new” process 
such as Scrum or eXtreme Programming. Many others, 
though, will be overwrought with concern about aban-
doning old skills, developing new skills, extensive learning 
curves, and reduced positions of power based on years of 
experience doing things the old way. 
Change Squirm 
At 9:00 a.m. on Monday morning, Joe walked to the front 
of the room to launch into his usual kickoff speech for the 
two-day training class he was about to teach. 
Joe started, “Good morning, my name is Joe, and I will 
be your instructor for Agile Software Development for the 
next two days. It’s always a good idea when starting a 
class for us all to get to know one another.” At that point, 
Joe said nothing. He looked around the room, making 
eye contact with those students who would permit it. Joe 
moved from the front of the room to this side and then to 
the back, continuously paying attention to the students but 
saying nothing. 
After no more than ten seconds, students were already 
starting to look around at each other. Some made inquisi-
tive gestures, whereas others just looked confused. After a 
while, a soft murmur started to bubble up from the group, 
which eventually turned to a smattering of nervous laugh-
ter.
Joe created an uncomfortable environment for his stu-
dents by doing absolutely nothing. In this case, nothing 
was actually a whole lot. Joe changed the rules without let-
ting anyone know. Those who had ever been in a training 
class before knew that after his introduction, Joe would 
likely go around the room and ask people to introduce 
themselves (or conduct some other form of an interactive 
ice breaker). 

Change Apprehension 
103
Moments before all this happened, the last of the stu-
dents had settled into their carefully selected seats, adjust-
ed the seat height, placed their coffee next to their freshly 
unshrink-wrapped course notebook, and relaxed for a pre-
dictable stress-free course introduction. 
The silence that Joe created was awkward and painful, 
and most of the students likely wanted it to end as soon 
as possible. The awkwardness centered on the uncertainty. 
Nobody knew what was happening or what was about to 
happen. This change to conventional expectations put the 
students outside their comfort zone. You can only imagine 
their relief when Joe finally broke the silence! 
Change Apprehension 
Many people dislike change due to fear. Any individual’s 
level of change apprehension is usually due to fear of dis-
ruption to core needs. In Chapter 4, “Communication,” a 
depiction of these core needs was shown using Maslow’s 
Hierarchy of Needs. Using that model, you can recognize 
that at the tip of the hierarchy, changes (or anticipated 
changes) to those needs can cause apprehension. As you 
move down the hierarchy to the basic needs, the apprehen-
sion increases by orders of magnitude (see Figure 7.3).

Chapter 7 Change
104
Self-
Actualization
Needs
Esteem Needs
Love/Belonging Needs
Safety Needs
Physiological Needs
Increasing Impact of Change
Figure 7.3 Impact of change related to the Hierarchy of Needs 
Fear of Changes to Self-Actualization Needs 
This level of the hierarchy is focused on people’s needs 
related to how their job functions, roles, and responsibili-
ties may be affected by the change. 
Individuals who enjoy a high level of creativity in their 
job may stress about a change that is going to restrict their 
creative outlet. Perhaps the introduction of a new highly 
prescriptive process will remove their ability to make spon-
taneous decisions about what should be done and when. 
An accomplished painter would be uncomfortable if re-
quired to paint using a paint-by-numbers kit. Similarly, in-
dividuals who are motivated by their ability to solve prob-
lems creatively and autonomously will be uncomfortable 
when told to step in alignment and follow a structured 
process.
The reverse situation is also true: individuals who prefer 
following a prescriptive step-by-step process when told to 
rely more on intuition, experience, and instinct. 

Change Apprehension 
105
Fear of Changes to Esteem Needs 
When introducing process changes, there can often be 
an impact to organizational status. Those who like man-
aging other people may fear a change to a flatter organi-
zation in which supervisor/subordinate roles are shuffled 
around. A seemingly subtle change can cause undue stress 
to some individuals: changes to job titles. Many individu-
als work for years to climb the ladder of job titles, and to 
some, the title can be more valuable than a corresponding 
salary increase. This is especially true when these individu-
als’ workplace motivators are individualistic/political (see 
Chapter 8, “Motivators,” for more details). 
When a Scrum coach announces to a new agile team 
that all former titles are going away and will be replaced 
by these fancy new titles, this can be perceived by some 
as stripping away stripes that were earned over years of 
sweat and loyalty. A cavalier pronouncement of the aban-
donment of job titles can cause a great degree of stress for 
members of a team. 
Fear of Changes to Love/Belonging Needs 
At the Love/Belonging level the initial instinct is to think 
of family and loved ones. Certainly any change that can 
have an impact on the quality of family life can cause fear 
and stress. 
Beyond family, many sociological units exist within a 
company that individuals may fear being separated from. 
When reorganizations happen and new project teams 
are formed, many thoughts will run through individuals’ 
heads, such as the following: 
• Will they like me? 
• Will I have someone to eat lunch with? 
• Will somebody on the team be interested in talking 
about my Fantasy Football team with me? 

Chapter 7 Change
106
Fear of Changes to Safety Needs 
Any change that can cause concern about job security 
and continued employability fall into this category. Even 
if management states that training and time for reskilling 
will be provided, the fear may still often be present. The 
only certainties related to an employee’s skills are those 
already present. There is never a guarantee that new skills 
can and will be acquired and honed in a timely manner. 
John the project manager, who worked hard to earn 
his Project Management Professional (PMP™) designa-
tion, was told that he will now be a ScrumMaster. Further, 
he was told by an agile consultant that his “old school” 
project management skills are no longer useful. Whether 
that statement is true or not, John may develop fear at 
multiple levels. He may fear loss of his job if he doesn’t do 
well in the new role, which carries with it changes to the 
relationships he has developed with his colleagues, loss of 
esteem by having his title stripped away, and loss of job 
responsibilities that he enjoys doing. 
Fear of Changes to Physiological Needs 
The base of the needs hierarchy, those fundamental 
needs that stand above all, includes the needs for food, 
water, sleep, air, and so on. Pure human instinct ought to 
be enough to ensure that these needs are met. Some may 
think that they can’t be affected by change in the work-
place. However, that’s not the case. 
When new project teams are formed and new processes 
are introduced, often some individuals will worry about 
changes to their eating and sleeping cycles. When the eager 
new ScrumMaster announces that the daily standup meet-
ings will be held at 7:30 every morning so that “We can 
launch every day bright and early on the right foot,” it’s 
bound to be met with resistance. 

Change Coach 
107
James may complain that this interferes with taking his 
child to school, which could be accommodated as a valid 
reason. However, Mary has a productive sleep cycle that 
would be disrupted if she had to get to work before 9:00 
a.m. Although James’ excuse may be seen as valid, Mary’s 
may be scoffed at as trivial. Coming in an hour and a half 
earlier could completely disrupt Mary’s productivity and 
mood.
Change Coach 
An experienced individual such as a consultant can be 
brought onto the team to coach the members through the 
change process. 
Many coaches in the marketplace tout their skills in agile 
software development, which can qualify them to be good 
coaches. When hiring a coach, you also need to assess the 
coach’s skills at managing individual and team changes. 
A good coach is skillful at identifying and addressing the 
many fears of change so that they don’t stand in the way 
of advancing the project forward. 
Imagine Jenny’s boss Fred noticing that she seems to 
have self-confidence issues. Is it advisable for Fred to give 
Jenny a book titled How to Improve your Self-Esteem?
Certainly it’s possible, and ethical, and maybe even ap-
propriate to some. However, is it advisable? Self-help is 
usually only effective when it is self-driven. 
In the same spirit as not handing someone a self-help 
book, an effective coach helps an individual understand 
and rationalize barriers to change so that they can be re-
moved.

Chapter 7 Change
108
Change Catalyst 
Change in the overall dynamics and behavior of a team 
can change as a result of one individual’s behavior. When 
the team captain of a losing basketball team steps up his 
game while encouraging everyone else to do the same, he 
can positively affect the behavior of everyone on the team. 
If another team member who isn’t in a leadership role were 
to do the same thing, it could still potentially boost the 
productivity of the rest of the members of the team. 
In business, inserting a highly productive person on a 
team has the capability of positively affecting other team 
members’ productivity. Some may follow suit out of shame 
or competition or perhaps just out of respect or admira-
tion for the positive role model. 
The role model can work against the desired goals of a 
team as well. It’s also possible for the behavior of an entire 
team to be negatively influenced by one team member. Dr. 
William Felps from the University of Washington Business 
School ran an experiment in which he assembled groups to 
solve a problem together. Felps assembled groups of indi-
viduals to participate in a problem solving exercise. One 
participant was a “plant”—a confederate trained by Felps 
to behave a specific way. 
In the first group, the confederate behaved in a manner 
that Felps labeled interpersonal deviance, which is referred 
to as the “jerk.” The jerk was quick to dismiss others’ 
ideas for solving the problem, yet he didn’t offer concrete 
solutions of his own. 
In the second group, the confederate withheld effort and 
is referred to as the “slacker.” The slacker showed little 
interest in the problem-solving exercise and leaned back in 
his chair with his feet up on the table while texting on his 
cell phone. 
In the last group, the confederate showed affective nega-
tivity, or the “depressive.” He told the group that his cat 

Tracing to the Roots 
109
just died and took on the appearance of a person in de-
spair. He expressed doubt that the group could succeed at 
the unpleasant exercise. 
When conducting this experiment, Felps found that the 
confederate’s toxic behavior became contagious; it cata-
lyzed negative behavior across the team. The confederate’s 
jerk behavior begets jerk behavior by others on the team, 
and the same was true for the slacker and the depressive. 
The negative effect of the bad apple drove down the rate of 
success on the problem being solved. 
Negative behavior has a more profound emulating af-
fect on a group than positive behavior. In other words, 
team members are more likely to adopt the behavior of a 
negative individual than they are to adopt the behavior of 
a positive individual. 
It may not be possible to eliminate bad-apple behavior 
completely. Although some individuals may regularly ex-
hibit negative behavior, it’s possible for any or all team 
members to behave negatively on any given day. There-
fore, to avoid the bad-apple effect, it’s best when the team 
maintains conscious awareness of the effect so that it can 
expose it and shut it down when it appears. This may 
sound good on paper but requires a highly mature and 
self-aware team. 
Tracing to the Roots 
Most current pop, rock, and jazz songs last approximately 
three minutes, more or less. For years, the music industry 
was built around that parameter. Why not ten minutes, or 
five minutes, or one minute? How was it decided that three 
minutes was the default duration of a single? 
In the early 1900s, most recordings were sold on seven-
inch 78 rpm discs. The groove on these discs could hold a 
recording up to three minutes and five seconds. To sell a 
song, a musician was constrained to this time limit. 

Chapter 7 Change
110
Modern recording and music distribution technolo-
gies have eliminated the physical constraint of the length 
of a song. Nevertheless, the music industry has grown up 
around the notion that a single is three to four minutes 
long. Some artists deviate, of course, but most single track 
recordings still conform to that arbitrary constraint. If a 
new artist were to release a series of six-minute songs, it’s 
probable that listeners would notice that they are unusu-
ally long. When things become a certain way, it’s difficult 
to change even if the original purpose no longer exists. 
Grass Roots Resistance to Change 
Often a process, system, or organizational structure has 
passed its reason for being long ago. Nevertheless, chang-
ing or eliminating it can be an uphill battle. When routines 
become habit, and habits become comfortable, change or 
elimination can become seemingly impossible. 
Recall the upside-down map from the beginning of the 
chapter. Putting the northern hemisphere on the bottom 
of a map is certainly possible; however, widespread adop-
tion of that change would be an extraordinary undertak-
ing, even if everyone agreed that Ptolemy’s decision to put 
north on the top was an arbitrary one. 
The approximate calendar used by most schools in the 
United States begins in late August or early September and 
continues until late May or early June. This was originally 
established in the nineteenth century in rural areas to en-
able children to be home to work in the fields during the 
summer. About the same time, wealthy families in big cit-
ies pressed for longer vacation periods in the summer so 
that they could escape the heat of the city. 
There have been efforts in recent years by some school 
districts to change to a year-round school calendar with 
breaks distributed throughout the year. A goal of the 

Exposing the Origins 
111
year-round calendar is to provide students with seamless 
continuity from one grade to the next. 
In 1991, Northside School District in San Antonio, Tex-
as, was one of many school districts in the United States 
that introduced a pilot year-round school program. The 
program was deemed a success by the families that had 
volunteered to participate in the pilot. The two-week break 
in October was touted as a great benefit because family va-
cations were possible while the weather was still nice but 
the crowds were gone. 
When the school district tried expanding the program 
beyond the pilot, however, it was met with tremendous re-
sistance from parent groups. Many of the complaints were 
based on logistical concerns such as arranging childcare 
during several short breaks versus one long break. The 
primary reason most objected, however, was resistance to 
change. Elimination of the traditionally long summer va-
cation was perceived as too dramatic a shift from what 
people were used to. 
Although some year-round school programs still exist, 
most were abandoned. The force of resistance was far too 
great for the resources of most school districts to contend 
with. The introduction of change in companies often can 
also be met with frustration and great forces of resistance. 
Pushing change from the top-down is always certain-
ly possible, but in the face of that, grass roots resistance 
can block change. Change can be imposed, but it may not 
accomplish its goals if there is sufficient force working 
against it. For this reason, pushing change from the top-
down should be complemented with acceptance and sup-
port from the bottom-up as well. 
Exposing the Origins 
When encouraging change in the face of a fear of change, 
it can be helpful to expose the origins of the conventional 

Chapter 7 Change
112
processes. Just as the school calendar was based on ex-
pired needs, many processes in business were conceived 
based on traditional requirements that are no longer valid. 
Many traditional project managers use a Gantt chart to 
depict the project plan. The Gantt chart was developed 
by Henry Gantt in 1910. The first major project to use it 
was the construction of the Hoover Dam. For years, Gantt 
charts were used for managing construction projects—
many decades before the existence of software projects. 
Many of the earliest software project management proc-
esses were based on processes that had been used to con-
struct buildings and roadways. 
Building software, particularly with current-day tools, 
differs greatly from building and roadway construction 
projects. Building construction projects usually require 
comprehensive planning and design before actual con-
struction can begin. On software projects, however, crea-
tive choice during construction is permissible and actually 
results in software that better meets customer needs. 
For most, Gantt charts are hard not to like. They align 
well with the way most people think about organizing 
work. Consider the following example of the tasks in-
volved in a family cleaning a house: 
Clean the kitchen.
• Clean the oven. 
• Clean the dishes. 
• Clean the refrigerator. 
• Clean the floor. 
• Clean the counters. 
Clean the family room.
• Vacuum the floor. 
• Dust the furniture. 

Exercise 
113
• Vacuum the sofa. 
• Clean carpet stains. 
And so on...
Sequence matters for some of these tasks because they 
depend on other tasks having already happened, whereas 
others could be done at any time. Say you have four work-
ers: Joe, Tim, Nikki, and Danni. By assigning these work-
ers to specific tasks, you could lay out a neat plan for get-
ting the house cleaned in a quick efficient manner. 
Some days, this plan could be executed flawlessly with 
a high degree of predictability. At other times, it could 
fail miserably. Perhaps a worker gets sick, or the vacuum 
cleaner breaks, or the carpet has grape juice stains that 
require additional effort to remove. 
Projects with a high degree of creative choice, however, 
don’t usually work well by following a prescriptive step-
by-step serial plan. Choices of what tasks to do and when 
to do them is often more spontaneous than in the house 
cleaning example. Tasks are determined based on recently 
completed work. Those who have grown up in the Gantt 
world may have a difficult time accepting any other way 
of organizing work. 
Using Gantt charts to run a software development 
project could be analogous to using a riding mower to cul-
tivate a flower garden. Nevertheless, Gantt charts continue 
to be used on software projects despite the introduction of 
better tools for managing projects iteratively. Yes, change 
certainly is difficult. 
Exercise
In Chapter 15, “Change Exercise,” you can find an ex-
ercise that creates a fun, safe environment to openly dis-
cuss things that require changing. The facilitator should 

Chapter 7 Change
114
carefully read this chapter and the workshop instructions 
before diving into this exercise, more so than any of the 
other exercises in this book. Change can cause hot flashes 
and cold sweats, and it’s important for the facilitator to 
keep an observant eye out for signs of resistance and to be 
prepared to address that resistance when it surfaces. 
Closing
Aversion to change is inherent in most people. Even a per-
son who is a catalyst for change (a change agent) may re-
sist when others attempt to impose changes of their own. 
This phenomenon makes it difficult for organizations and 
teams to adapt to better ways of working together on 
projects.
A step in the right direction is to accept that change is 
difficult for most people. This can help overcome frustra-
tion with those who resist change. The change exercise in 
Chapter 15 of this book offers a tool that you can use to 
expose those areas needing change so that they can be ad-
dressed head-on. 

115
Chapter 8 
Motivators
The team was now performing as an agile team with high 
bandwidth communication, self-organization, collabora-
tion, and teamwork. To ensure everyone maintained the 
highest level of motivation, Lydia wanted to find out more 
information regarding what motivated each member of the 
team. This way she and the team could best ensure each 
individual on the project remained satisfied. 
This chapter discusses three factors that influence the 
motivation of team members: 
• Individual workplace motivators 
• Leveraging personal strengths 
• Leadership and environment 
Individual Workplace Motivators 
DISC explains how people will behave. Workplace moti-
vators explain why they behave as they do. As mentioned 
in Chapter 2, “Behaviors and Individuals,” if you master 
understanding DISC you can often tell a person’s behavio-
ral profile just by observing their body language combined 
with the way the person communicates. Motivators are 
different. You cannot tell what motivates a person just by 
observation. They are therefore often referred to as “hid-
den motivators.” 

Chapter 8 Motivators
116
Similar to how DISC indicates that everyone has a blend 
of four behaviors, workplace motivators indicates that 
everyone has a blend of six motivators. But the dominant 
motivators drive why they do things. 
Resource
Types of Men: The Psychology and Ethics of 
Personality, Eduard Spranger, 1928. 
Some of the DISC providers also offer motivator assess-
ments. The following paragraphs describe the six motiva-
tors that comprise the blend. 
Theoretical
Individuals who rank high for the theoretical motivator 
have a need for learning. They have a passion for knowl-
edge and discovery of truth. They love ideas, explore new 
interests, and have a desire to learn about almost anything. 
They seek to observe and reason. 
Utilitarian/Economic
Some providers of motivation assessments call this cat-
egory the economic motivator, and others call it utilitar-
ian. Regardless of the category name, people who have a 
high score in this category have a need for practicality, 
utility, and financial gain. They tend to feel more secure 
when they have and accumulate tangible wealth. They of-
ten have a drive to feel financially secure in later years. 
They want what is useful, practical, and efficient. 

Individual Workplace Motivators 
117
Aesthetic
Those who score high in the aesthetic category have a 
tendency to appreciate beauty, nature, the environment, 
pleasant surroundings, unity, and balance. They continu-
ally search for beauty and harmony in everything they do. 
They are typically highly aware of their inner feelings and 
their surroundings. They value the environments where 
they work and live and have a desire to experience new 
things, activities, and places. 
Social
Socially motivated individuals have a need to help oth-
ers. They may even have a passion to help others and feel 
fulfilled when they succeed. They are less concerned about 
profit than for the needs of others. They tend to sacrifice 
their own needs for the needs of others and to help others. 
Individualistic/Political
Some providers of motivation assessments call this cat-
egory individualistic, and others call it political. Individu-
als strong in this category tend to have a need for personal 
power, influence, and fame. They have a desire and a pas-
sion to be at the top of an organization. Title is important. 
They have a passion to control others: people, money, as-
sets, and so on. They like having responsibility, individu-
ally and within the team. 
Traditional/Regulatory
Depending on the provider, this category is called either 
traditional or regulatory. People who rank high in this cat-
egory tend to have an interest in rules, unity, order, and 
tradition. They believe in structure; there is a right and a 

Chapter 8 Motivators
118
wrong way to do things. They have a passion to search 
for the highest meaning of life and look for rules to guide 
their behaviors. They typically live by a set of standards or 
a belief system and encourage others to also embrace these 
rules/beliefs. They like to have rules and regulations and to 
do things “by the book.” 
Why Is This Important? 
In DISC, there are no good or bad behavioral profiles; 
people are just different. The same goes for motivators. 
There are no right or wrong motivators. It is simply that 
people are wired differently, and what motivates one per-
son may not motivate another. 
Individuals perform best when they are in roles and 
environments that leverage what motivates them. For 
example, if people are highly motivated by learning (the 
theoretical motivator) and are on a project or team where 
there is no opportunity to learn, they will not be satisfied, 
will most likely experience some stress because of this, and 
may eventually quit. 
Knowing each member of the team’s motivators can help 
team members perform tasks or do things that match their 
needs whenever possible. As examples, have a theoretically 
motivated individual lead efforts on analyzing a new tech-
nology required for the project; allow the aesthetically mo-
tivated person to sit in the cube by the window; have the 
politically motivated person integrate the newly acquired 
organization into the team. Because agile teams are self-
organizing, it is valuable for team members to know one 
another’s workplace motivators in order to be cognizant 
of each other’s needs. 
Work can change from “work” to “fun” when the job 
closely matches and satisfies a person’s motivations or 
needs.

Individual Workplace Motivators 
119
Strategies for Motivating 
Table 8.1 provides examples of strategies for motivating 
others depending on their motivational profiles. 
Table 8.1 Strategies for Motivating 
Motive 
Strategies for Motivating 
Theoretical 
Give them activities to learn and discover; ask them 
questions; challenge them to demonstrate why they 
are correct about something. 
Economic/
Utilitarian
Give them opportunities for financial advancement; 
effectively use their time; give them something in 
return for what they contribute. 
Aesthetic 
Give them a pleasant work environment; allow them 
to express their thoughts and ideas. 
Social 
Give them opportunities to help others; help them 
understand their true value because it is more 
important than they think. (They tend to undervalue 
their services and give them away to others.) 
Individualistic/
Political
Give them opportunities to lead others and to set/
enforce the rules; Allow them to be visionaries and 
work toward achieving those visions. 
Traditional/
Regulatory
Give them structure and guidelines to follow that fall 
within their principles/rules/belief system. 
As a real-world example, there was a senior vice presi-
dent (SVP) in a company in the financial services domain 
that was under stress because he had promised a critical 
system would be complete by a certain date but was be-
hind schedule. He therefore told the team to work nights 
and weekends to ensure the project was completed on time. 
He gave an incentive to the project manager by telling him 
that he would be promoted to a vice president (VP) if the 
project were implemented on time. Similarly, he attempted 
to motivate the developers by offering a financial bonus if 
the date were achieved. Now, aside from violating many 
agile principals by not maintaining a sustainable pace; by 
promising an arbitrary project end date to stakeholders; 

Chapter 8 Motivators
120
and by telling the team what to do in a command-and-
control like manner, there were additional flaws in the 
SVP’s actions. It turned out that the PM was not actually 
motivated by a VP title because his individualistic/politi-
cal component was one of his least important motivators. 
Moreover, the majority of the development team was mo-
tivated mostly by the theoretical motive, and most had a 
low economic motivator. 
At first the motivation of an increase of money was ap-
pealing to some of the team members. But as the project 
dragged on longer and longer, and as many nights and 
weekends were required, the project began to unravel fur-
ther and was unsuccessful at the end. Even if the members 
were motivated by these incentives, it still would likely 
have failed in this particular case. But one interesting ob-
servation from this experience was that most individuals 
tend to assume that the motivations of others match their 
own. The SVP, who was highly motivated by title and 
money, assumed everyone else   must be. He did not realize 
that people are wired differently. 
Somewhat similar to the concept of a DISC wheel dis-
cussed in Chapter 6, “Behavior and Teams,” some work-
place motivator providers supply a “wheel” of workplace 
motivators for a team. Figure 8.1 shows an example of a 
wheel, provided by The Abelson Group. The team mem-
bers’ top motivators are shown in the center circle, their 
second highest motivators in the second circle, and least 
passionate motivators in the outer circle. 

Individual Workplace Motivators 
121
JD
JD
TT
PP
SS
PP
DD
SS
TT
SS
DD
JD
DD
Most Passionate
1
Second Most Passionate
2
Least Passionate
SS : Sean ScrumMaster
PP : Paul ProductOwner
JD : Joe Developer
DD : Doug Developer
TT : Tom Tester
6
1
2
CO
MP
EL
LE
D -
CA
RIN
G
RU
LE
S _
FO
LL
OW
IN
G
AB
ST
RA
CT
- C
OG
NIT
IV
E
CO
MP
EL
LE
D -
EF
FIC
IE
NT
se
lfl
es
s
ot
he
rs
ori
en
te
d
re
gu
lat
io
ns
fo
llo
ws
ru
le
s
ra
tio
na
l
kn
ow
le
dg
e f
oc
us
ed
eff
ici
en
t u
se
of
ti
me
/re
so
ur
ce
s/e
ne
rg
y
be
au
ty
ha
rm
on
y
cr
ea
tiv
ity
re
co
gn
iti
on
se
ts
ru
le
s
pe
rs
on
al
po
we
r
lif
e
ba
la
nc
e
ev
en
ts
fo
cu
s
po
lit
ic
al
ta
ke
s r
es
po
ns
ib
ili
ty
lo
vi
ng
na
tu
re
em
pa
th
eti
c
a
sy
st
em
fo
r l
iv
in
g
di
sc
ov
er
y
of
tr
ut
h
em
pir
ic
al
mo
ne
y -
fo
r s
ec
ur
ity
so
ci
et
al
fo
cu
s
ki
nd
st
ru
ct
ur
e
gu
id
eli
ne
s
in
te
lle
ct
ua
lly
or
ie
nt
ed
pr
ac
tic
al
us
ef
ul
ar
ti
st
ic
in
te
re
st
sy
m
m
et
ry
co
nt
ro
l
of
se
lf/
ot
he
rs
re
dr
aw
n
S
OC
IA
L
T
R
A
DI
TI
O
N
A
L
T
H
E
O
R
ET
IC
A
L
U
TI
LI
TA
RI
A
N
A
E
ST
H
ET
IC
IN
DI
VI
D
U
A
LI
ST
IC
CO
GN
ITI
VE
- R
ATI
ON
AL
AB
ST
RA
CT
- E
MO
TIO
NA
L
RU
LE
S -
SE
TTI
NG
FE
ELI
NG
- E
MO
TIO
NA
L
TT
PP
6
Figure 8.1 Team Motivators Wheel— The Abelson Values/Motives/
Work-Related-Passions Wheel™ is an adaptation of the Target Training 
International, LTD. Motives Wheel and is a trademark of The Abelson 
Group™.
The wheel provides a simple visual representation to 
quickly view the workplace motivators of every team 
member and to also observe similarities within the team. 

Chapter 8 Motivators
122
Leveraging Strengths 
The second element that greatly affects motivation of 
each member of the team is the ability to leverage natural 
strengths in day-to-day activities. The book, Now Discov-
er Your Strengths, by Marcus Buckingham discusses how 
individuals who leverage their strengths will be most suc-
cessful and happiest in their jobs. 
Resource
Now, Discover Your Strengths, Marcus Buck-
ingham and Donald O. Clifton, Simon and 
Schuster, 2001. 
Chapter 6 discussed DISC and how team members may 
become overly stressed when acting in a role that conflicts 
with their natural behavioral styles. Similarly, team mem-
bers can become stressed when performing daily responsi-
bilities that do not align with their natural strengths. As a 
real-world example, a colleague was asked to play a role 
in a desk job writing architectural design documentation 
when his core strength was communicating with people. 
His greatest strength and most successful roles performed 
in the past were those of a coach, mentor, instructor, and 
change agent. When playing the role of an architect how-
ever, he was   exhausted at the end of each day and eventu-
ally became burnt out on the job. Needless to say, he was 
quite unhappy while playing this role. 
Understanding your team members’ strengths and hav-
ing everyone perform tasks that best use these strengths 
can result in the highest performing teams and the most 
motivated team members. 

Leadership and Environment 
123
Leadership and Environment 
Even if individuals work in jobs that align with both their 
workplace motivators and strengths, it is also critical to 
work in a good environment that fosters respect and au-
tonomy in order to remain highly motivated. An applicable 
quote comes from Patrick M. Lencioni’s book, The Five 
Dysfunctions of a Team, where he says, “Not finance. Not 
strategy. Not technology. It is teamwork that remains the 
ultimate competitive advantage, both because it is so pow-
erful and so rare.” It is amazing to see companies spend 
millions of dollars on technologies and tools to enable a 
competitive advantage. Yet treating people   with respect 
and fostering an environment of teamwork and empow-
erment costs nothing and is probably the most powerful 
thing any company or team can do to enable success. 
Resource
The Five Dysfunctions of a Team, Patrick
M. Lencioni, Jossey-Bass, 2002. 
Command-and-control management is the antithesis 
of agile. Therefore, this is not an issue on agile projects. 
Right? Unfortunately, the majority of agile projects report 
into some hierarchy somewhere in the chain of command 
within the company. A common problem is when an agile 
project reports to a command-and -control manager. 
The following is a true story. Two sprints into an agile 
project, the director called the ScrumMaster into his of-
fice and asked, “Can you explain why this agile project is 
so successful when we have tried agile in the past and it 
has never really worked?” In response, the ScrumMaster 
discussed many of the differences in the mechanics being 
employed currently versus what the company had done in 
the past. The discussion ranged from the task board where 

Chapter 8 Motivators
124
everyone could visually see the current project status, to 
the way they ran their daily standup meetings, to the dem-
onstrations held every   sprint. By the end of the project, 
however, the ScrumMaster realized the real answer to the 
director’s question. 
The entire management team of this organization was 
deeply entrenched in a command-and-control culture. It 
was a common occurrence that the managers would de-
mand and expect everyone to work the weekend and 
to work after 5 p.m. each day. (One manager was even 
known to “walk the halls” each day at 5 p.m. to see if eve-
ryone was still there.) Also the managers would rarely ex-
plain any rationale to the team regarding decisions. These 
managers would not be part of the solution but would just 
tell people what to do and often made what appeared to be 
unreasonable requests. 
Not only did some of this behavior violate the agile prin-
cipal of “a sustainable pace,” but also some of the things 
this management team would say and the way it treated in-
dividuals was bordering on abuse. Many employees would 
refer to the managers as bullies, and several said they were 
in fear of losing their jobs. Although this extreme behavior 
is not common, it is common to have some elements of 
traditional command-and-control behavior within a com-
pany. And this behavior is one of the most common fac-
tors leading to the detriment of agile adoption or success 
on individual agile projects. 
Closing
DISC explains how people will behave, and workplace 
motivators explains why they behave as they do. Everyone 
has a blend of six workplace motivators, but the dominant 
motivators drive why they do things. Individuals perform 
best when they are in roles and environments that leverage 
what motivates them. 

Closing 
125
The book Now Discover Your Strengths by Marcus 
Buckingham contains a code where readers can take an 
online assessment to discover their top strengths. Under-
standing and leveraging these strengths can result in the 
highest performing teams and motivated team members. 
Agile is about good leadership. A good leader trusts and 
empowers his team. For individuals to maintain a high de-
gree of motivation, it is important that they also have a rel-
atively high degree of autonomy. Command-and-control 
managers will hopefully read this chapter, reflect on their 
own behaviors, and subsequently change. 

This page intentionally left blank 

P ART II 
Workshop
Chapter 9 
Team Dynamics Workshop 
129
Chapter 10 
Communication Origami 
139
Chapter 11 
Bridge Building 
145
Chapter 12 
Moon Survival 
151
Chapter 13 
BalderDISC 
 163
Chapter 14 
Assessing Concordance 
and Discordance 
169
Chapter 15 
Change Exercise 
175
Chapter 16 
Groups and Decisions 
183

This page intentionally left blank 

129
Chapter 9 
Team Dynamics 
Workshop
As a result of Lydia’s hard work, Nathan’s team was trans-
formed from a bunch of individuals to a high-performance 
team. So Nathan decided to put together a team workshop 
to enable future teams at Autonomous Securities, LLC to 
quickly learn all these valuable lessons. 
Preparation
This book contains all the materials needed to facilitate 
and run the workshop, with the exception of the follow-
ing:
• Supplies for the Bridge exercise are inexpensive and 
can be purchased at a drugstore or grocery store. 
• Certain exercises (as described next) require paper, 
pens, flip charts, whiteboards, index cards, and so on, 
which most companies have available, but the facili-
tator needs to be prepared with these supplies. 

Chapter 9 Team Dynamics Workshop
130
Workshop Instructions 
The Agile Team Dynamics workshop is a powerful way to 
begin the process of coaching a team toward productiv-
ity optimization. The workshop provides a way for team 
members to learn new skills while learning about each 
other. Therefore, to get the most value from the time spent 
participating in the workshop, it’s best when a project 
team attends the workshop together. 
The workshop instructions are split into three parts: 
• Pre-Workshop
• The Workshop 
• Post-Workshop
Pre-Workshop
A day or two prior to the workshop, all participants 
should complete the DISC assessment and bring their re-
sults to the workshop. Many of the workshop exercises 
and discussions leverage the DISC profile of the partici-
pants. From a logistics standpoint, getting all participants 
to complete the DISC assessment at least one day before 
the workshop may be the most challenging task of the en-
tire workshop! Participants who show up on the day of 
the workshop without a completed DISC can disrupt the 
experience for everyone else, so the facilitator is encour-
aged to pester everyone with reminders in the days leading 
up to the workshop. 
Do the following: 
1. Select a date, location, and times for the workshop. 
Choose a date when all members of a team are avail-
able to attend together. When selecting a room for 
the workshop, be mindful that the Bridge exercise 

Workshop Instructions 
131
requires that the participants be split into groups of 
4–6 people, and each group needs a space with two 
desks or tables separated by three feet. This exercise 
may not work in a typical conference room, and it 
may not work in classrooms where the furniture can’t 
be moved. If you can’t find a room that works, you 
may be able to bring in   small rolling file cabinets or 
other similar pieces of furniture that can serve as the 
surfaces required for building the bridge. All the other 
workshop exercises can work in any type of room. 
2. Have every participant take a DISC assessment prior 
to the workshop and bring their reports to the work-
shop. The free DISC contained in this book will suf-
fice for all the exercises other than the BalderDISC 
exercise found in Chapter 13, “BalderDISC.” The 
BalderDISC exercise requires all participants to take 
a DISC assessment from a provider that provides a 
detailed DISC report and a wheel (as opposed to a 
simple DISC graph). It is therefore important that you 
plan this well in advance. 
3. Make plans for lunch. The Moon exercise is planned 
to be run during lunchtime, and there is no additional 
time budgeted for leaving to get food. Ask participants 
to bring a bag lunch or plan to have lunch brought in 
during the midpoint of the workshop. 
4. Prepare the following materials that will be required 
during the workshop exercises: 
The Bridge
• Drinking straws (three boxes/bags per group) 
• Scotch tape (two rolls per group) 
• Elastic bands (three small bags or one large bag per 
group)
• Paper clips (four boxes per group) 

Chapter 9 Team Dynamics Workshop
132
Moon Survival
• There are several handouts for this exercise in 
Chapter 12, “Moon Survival.” It’s important that 
participants not look ahead when participating in 
this exercise. You may choose to bookmark speci-
fied pages and instruct the participants not to look 
ahead, or you may find it easier to copy those pages 
and distribute them as they are needed during the 
exercise.
Origami
• There is an origami instruction sheet in Chapter 10,
“Communication Origami.” Only half the partici-
pants will use this instruction sheet. As with Moon 
Survival, you may choose to copy the instruction 
sheet ahead of time and hand it out to select par-
ticipants at the appropriate time. For this exercise 
you also need a blank sheet of 8½ x 11-inch paper 
for the other half of the participants. 
The Workshop 
The workshop lasts approximately eight and a half 
hours when conducted in the following format. The in-
structions for all workshop exercises are included in this 
book. The starting/ending times for each segment can be 
adjusted if necessary. The times shown in Table 9.1 enable 
you to run the workshop between 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
with an exercise during lunch. 

Workshop Instructions 
133
Table 9.1  Workshop Times and Activities
Time 
Activity
8:30–8:45 
Introductions
Only 15 minutes is budgeted for introductions. The 
workshop is all about getting to know each other on 
several levels. The obligatory “Let’s go around the room 
and each tell something about yourself” exercise is un-
necessary at this point and would waste valuable time. 
Instead, use this time to set expectations for the day. 
These guidelines are recommended to ensure that 
everyone participates 100% for the entire workshop. If 
anyone misses all or part of the workshop, it can dimin-
ish the value for everyone. 
Do you have your DISC assessment results? 
Plan to work through lunch. There will be short breaks 
between some of the exercises. Please don’t stray too far 
and return on time. 
8:45–9:15 
Communication Origami
The origami exercise is a great way to start the day. It 
energizes the room and gets everyone prepared for a day 
of highly engaging interactive learning. The origami ex-
ercise puts everyone on the same plane because everyone 
in the room has the same degree of participation. 
When setting up for this exercise, everyone in the room 
must be paired up with a partner. One member of each 
pair needs access to the origami instructions found at 
the end of Chapter 10, but don’t allow them to view the 
instructions until told to do so. The other member of 
each pair should be given a blank sheet of 8½ x 11-inch 
paper.
Follow the facilitation instructions carefully so that the 
participants fully experience the learning objectives. 
Spend approximately 5 minutes setting up, 10 minutes 
folding, and 15 minutes discussing the results. The fa-
cilitation instructions describe helpful discussion points. 
It’s helpful to study those prior to running the exercise. 

Chapter 9 Team Dynamics Workshop
134
Time 
Activity
9:15–9:25 
The Bridge—Introduction
Introduce the Bridge exercise. Be careful not to give 
away too much information. Most of the learning in this 
exercise is discovered while the participants are building 
their bridges, so it’s important not to expose the learn-
ing objectives ahead of time. 
As facilitator, read the Bridge instructions in Chapter
11, “Bridge Building,” thoroughly ahead of time. Make 
sure you fully understand the learning objectives and be 
observant for examples of behavior to discuss after the 
timed portion of the exercise is complete. 
While describing the exercise, move furniture (if neces-
sary) and hand out a set of materials to each group. Let 
everyone know that the “project” will be rigorously 
timed; they will have 20 minutes to build their bridges. 
9:25–9:45 
The Bridge—Project
As stated in the instructions, with little fanfare and a 
brief introduction, say, “You have 20 minutes to build a 
bridge between two tables three feet apart that will hold 
the weight of a book. One, two, three, go!” 
Follow the facilitation instructions for guidance on 
things to watch for and when to insert the scripted 
interjections.
9:45–10:05
The Bridge—Discussion
See Chapter 11 for post-exercise discussion recommen-
dations.
10:05–10:20
Break
10:20–10:30
Moon Survival—Introduction
Describe the Moon Survival exercise without giving 
away too many details. Read through the material in 
Chapter 12 and follow the facilitation instructions. 
There are multiple handouts for this exercise that must 
each be distributed at the proper time. 
To make the most efficient use of time, this exercise can 
be run during lunch. Participants will be reading and 
writing during the first part of the exercise, so it’s best 
to choose food that is easy to eat while working. 
10:30–10:45
Moon Survival—Individual Exercise
The exercise has two parts. Each person completes the 
first part alone for approximately 15 minutes. 

Workshop Instructions 
135
Time 
Activity
10:45–11:30
Moon Survival—Group Exercise
Without delay, break the room into groups and per-
form the group exercise in approximately 40 minutes. 
Some participants may get chatty and interfere with 
the group’s ability to complete this exercise quickly, so 
the facilitator should keep on top of the time and urge 
everyone to keep it moving. 
11:30–11:45
Break; lunch setup
11:45–12:30
Moon Survival—Discussion (during lunch)
The Moon Survival instructions in Chapter 12 provide 
recommendations for facilitating the post-exercise 
discussion. In addition to reinforcing the wisdom of 
crowds, this can be a good opportunity to refer back to 
their DISC profiles. 
12:30-12:45
BalderDISC Setup
Each individual reviews his own detailed DISC report, 
highlights the sentences he believes most accurately 
reflect who he is, and creates index cards as described 
in Chapter 13. To save time, the facilitator could ask 
the team to perform this setup prior to the start of the 
workshop.
12:45-1:45
BalderDISC (team communication)—Exercise
Depending on the size of the team and level of discus-
sion that occurs while playing the game, this section 
could take longer or shorter than one hour. Assuming 
you have a ten-person team, and assuming you limit 
each member’s discussion to six minutes, this discussion 
would take one hour. If you have a larger team, you can 
save time by having the members highlight their DISC 
reports in advance of the meeting, or you could shorten 
the time to less than six minutes per person. 
1:45-2:15 
BalderDISC (team communication) Post-Exercise Dis-
cussion
See Chapter 13 for post-exercise discussion recommen-
dations.
2:15–2:30 
Break

Chapter 9 Team Dynamics Workshop
136
Time 
Activity
2:30–2:35 
Assessing Concordance Discordance—Introduction
Be sure that the facilitator is willing to expose his/
her weight to the group. Otherwise, choose a different 
facilitator and/or a different measurable attribute. Prior 
to starting this exercise, be sure to have three blank slips 
of paper and a pen available per participant. Prepare the 
blank weight plot so that it may be revealed with plot-
ted data during each of the three rounds of the exercise. 
This could be done on a white board or on a spread-
sheet, or simply plotted on a piece of paper passed 
around the room. 
2:35–2:45 
Assessing Concordance Discordance—Exercise
Follow the instructions in Chapter 14, “Assessing Con-
cordance Discordance.” It’s important to do each round 
without revealing who guessed what weights and to 
have no further explanation or instruction between the 
three rounds. After finishing three rounds, discuss the 
results with the group. 
2:45–3:00 
Assessing Concordance Discordance—Discussion
See Chapter 14 for post-exercise discussion recommen-
dations. Remember that the point of the exercise is to 
better understand the magnitude of influence members 
of the group have on one another. When discussing the 
conformance profile of the group, it’s best to accept the 
behavioral tendencies of the group and focus the conver-
sation on how to operate most productively because of 
(or despite) what the profile indicates. 
3:00–3:10 
Change—Introduction
Decide how many teams will be competing and desig-
nate a space for each team to work. Have a flip chart 
or white board available for each team to draw on and 
a marker or pen. Have a stack of 3x5 cards available. 
(Assume 5–10 cards per participant.) 
Explain the game to the team following the instructions 
in Chapter 15, “Change Exercise,” and give 5 minutes 
for each person to fill out the cards. Collect all the cards 
and mix them up for use during the exercise. 

Workshop Instructions 
137
Time 
Activity
3:10–3:55 
Change—Exercise
For each round, the facilitator will pick a card off the 
pile and read the name on the back of the card. This 
person will come up to the front of the room and help 
the facilitator monitor this round. Have each team select 
one person to be the drawer for the round. Follow the 
instructions in Chapter 15 and ensure that everyone has 
a chance to participate as a drawer and as a guesser. 
When someone makes a correct guess, a point is earned 
for that team, and the round ends. The facilitator should 
determine how to end the game.   Often a time limit or a 
specified number of rounds is used. 
3:55–4:15 
Change—Discussion
Be sure to have a white board or flip chart available 
to draw the target. See Chapter 15 for facilitating this 
part of the exercise. The facilitator should be prepared 
to delicately handle changes that cause discomfort for 
some. Additionally, there may be disagreements that 
require some mediation. 
4:15–4:30 
Break
4:30–4:35 
Groups and Decisions—Introduction
Have everyone sit in quadrants of the room in accord-
ance with their DISC profiles. Read the problem exactly 
as written. 
4:35–4:50 
Groups and Decisions—Exercise and Discussion
Give each team 15 minutes to solve the problem. 
4:50–5:00 
Groups and Decisions – Discussion
Be sure to have the answer to the problem handy so you 
can refer to it. Remember that the purpose of the exer-
cise is not about solving the puzzle; it’s about examining 
and discussing the dynamics of each DISC-homogeneous 
group as they work to solve the puzzle. See Chapter 16
for details. 

This page intentionally left blank 

139
Chapter 10 
Communication Origami 
This workshop corresponds to Chapter 4, “Communica-
tion.”
Oral communication is an essential component of team-
work. Team members are likely to choose forms of commu-
nication that suit their behavioral profiles. Someone who is 
a high C on the DISC profile is more likely to want to send 
an email than make a phone call. That person may feel 
less at ease when a situation warrants a conversation and 
will probably have to work harder than someone who is a 
high I. Because project teams often have several C mem-
bers, there is value in helping these people increase their 
confidence when placed in situations that require good oral 
communication skills. For others, not all situations are con-
figured to optimize productive communication. This exer-
cise was designed to provide practice with oral communica-
tion in three different configurations and illustrate which of 
these configurations yields the best results. 

Chapter 10 Communication Origami
140
Materials
Materials include the following: 
• Origami instruction sheet 
• Blank 8½ x 11-inch paper 
Setup
Split the participants into three groups. This works best if 
each of the groups is located together. (for example, back 
of the room, front left side, and front right side.) Have 
participants pair up with someone else in their group. It’s 
necessary to have an even number of participants so that 
everyone has a partner. If needed, move someone to anoth-
er group to find a partner. After this, worst-case scenario, 
there will be one person in the room without a partner. 
Just have that person join one of the pairs; the exercise still 
works for a trio. 
Designate that one person in each pair is the “guide” 
and the other person is the “folder.” Hand out a copy of 
the origami instruction sheet face down to the guide and 
hand a blank sheet of paper to the folder. Tell the guides 
not to turn over the instruction sheet until told to do so. 
Assign one of the following roles to each of the three 
groups with the following instructions: 
1. Face-to-face group: Partners sit face to face. The 
guide will read the instruction sheet and communi-
cate instructions to the folder. The guide may provide 
feedback to the folder but may not touch the paper 
being folded. The folder may not look at the instruc-
tion sheet. 

Facilitation 
141
2. Side-by-side group: Partners sit side-by-side. Both 
partners may look at the instruction sheet, but only 
the folder may touch the paper being folded. 
3. Back-to-back group: Partners sit back to back. The 
guide will give instructions to the folder but may not 
see the paper being folded. The folder may not look 
at the instruction sheet. 
Facilitation
Say “1-2-3-Go!” Tell the participants to create the item 
described on the instructions and to stand up when they 
finish. The exercise is straightforward and usually doesn’t 
require any more explanation. Try to avoid any more ex-
planation and guidance. There are unique communication 
dynamics that can occur within each of the three groups, 
and it’s important to let those dynamics happen on their 
own.
The facilitator may want to wander and observe with-
out offering help. You might need to remind the back-to-
back partners not to look over their shoulders. Allow the 
exercise to continue until at least a few of the groups have 
successfully completed the exercise. Usually the side-by-
side groups will finish first, and it’s rare that a back-to-
back group ever successfully completes the task. 
After stopping the exercise, have one of the success-
ful teams show off their results. It can be fun to pick on 
one of the back-to-back teams and illustrate how far off it 
was from the goal. You may even find a frustrated folder 
clutching onto a crumpled ball of paper! 

Chapter 10 Communication Origami
142
Post-Exercise Discussion 
Discuss the challenges and frustrations in each of the 
groups. Some key discussion points to draw out include 
the following: 
• Side-by-side group
• Ask how they worked together. 
• Discuss the challenges of the guide not being al-
lowed to help with the folding. 
• The instructions are intentionally slightly ambigu-
ous. Ask how they interacted to figure out instruc-
tions that were not clear. 
• Emphasis: Collaboration with full access to avail-
able resources allows people to best solve problems 
together.
• Face-to-face group
• Ask what challenges the guide faced having to de-
scribe the instructions without being allowed to 
show the illustrations. 
• By seeing the work in progress, the guide adapted 
the instructions and injected additional informa-
tion to support successful completion of the task. 
• Emphasis: Oral communication may not be enough. 
Written instructions and/or visual representations 
can be helpful to supplement the spoken word. 

Post-Exercise Discussion 
143
• Back-to-back group
• By removing collaboration, visual clues, and real-
time feedback, these teams were challenged, and 
the probability of success was low. 
• The exercise demonstrates spoken communication 
as it typically occurs on telephone calls, which are 
common to geographically dispersed teams. 
• Emphasis: The challenges faced by this group are 
not exclusive to spoken communication. They also 
occur when sending emails back and forth or when 
writing a requirements document and sending it to 
another for interpretation. 
Figure 10.1 presents the instructions for the origami. 
(See the following page.)

Chapter 10 Communication Origami
144
Origami Instructions
2. Fold in half long-ways.
5. Unfold the side you 
 just folded.
6. Fold in the top two corners.
Include all three layers of
 paper.
3. Fold one side in half again.
1. Start with an 81/2 x 11 paper.
4. Flip over and fold the other 
side in half.
7. Fold up the bottom two 
corners.  Fold the bottom 
half back up to meet the 
top half.  It should now
look like a trapezoid.
10. Reach into the center of 
the sculpture and open.
11. Finish it off with eyes!
8. Fold the bottom half back 
up to meet the top half. 
It should now look like a 
 trapezoid.
9. Make a small tear on the
bottom center.  Fold back 
a triangular shape from 
the corner to the center 
tear.  Do this on both sides, 
then flip the trapezoid over 
 and repeat.
Figure 10.1 Origami instructions 

145
Chapter 11 
Bridge Building 
This workshop corresponds to Chapter 3, “Team 
Dynamics.”
Teamwork takes hard work. When a team is assigned 
to a new project, there are many unknown requirements, 
risks, and barriers that must be handled. When team mem-
bers are assigned to roles, there are often predetermined 
expectations of the responsibilities of each of those roles. 
The success of the project then becomes dependent on 
whether all the necessary roles were assigned and that the 
individuals assigned to those roles have adequate skills and 
experience to fulfill the needs of the role. 
On an agile project, there is less emphasis on prescribed 
roles and more emphasis on teamwork and collaboration 
to accomplish the work. Team members who are new to 

146
Chapter 11 Bridge Building
agile may come from organizations with more structure 
and may have a difficult time adapting to the concept of 
a self-organizing team. The bridge exercise was designed 
to help participants discover where their strengths lie as 
members of a team. The exercise generates a sense of ur-
gency that encourages the members of a team to abandon 
preconceived notions of canned roles and instead adapt to 
the needs of the project and capitalize   on each team mem-
ber’s strengths. 
Materials
Materials for the workshop included the following: 
• Plastic drinking straws 
• Paper clips (any size) 
• Cellophane tape 
• Rubber bands 
• Hardback textbooks 
• Two tables or desks with a two-foot gap between 
them
Setup
Split the participants into teams of 4–6 people. Provide 
each team with an ample supply of drinking straws, paper 
clips, tape, and rubber bands. Situate the team near two 
desks or tables that have a two-foot gap between them. If 
space allows, locate the teams far enough away from each 
other so that they won’t get in each others’ way. 

Facilitation 
147
Facilitation
It’s important for the facilitator to provide clear direction 
but not to provide too much information. A key learning 
objective of this exercise is the self-discovery process that 
members of each team will go through. 
When all the teams are situated with their materials, 
provide the following instructions: “Your goal is to build 
a bridge between two tables using only the materials you 
have been provided. Your bridge should hold the weight 
of a textbook without collapsing. You have 20 minutes.” 
Make note of the current time; then say, “1-2-3-Go!” 
While the teams are figuring out how to start, draw a 
simple timeline on a whiteboard or flip chart that depicts 
the milestones 0, 5, 10, 15, and 20 (see Figure 11.1).
10
5
0
15
20
Figure 11.1 Bridge building timeline 
Don’t mention the timeline yet. Instead, casually add a 
twist to the requirement by stating, “Let’s also see which 
bridge is strongest. When you finish, we’ll test your bridg-
es to see which one can hold the most books without col-
lapsing.” This casual afterthought accomplishes a couple 
things:
• It introduces an ambiguous goal that the team mem-
bers must resolve. Together they must figure out how 
strong the bridge should be to beat the other teams. 
• It prevents a team from creating an overly simplistic 
solution such as just running a couple pieces of tape 
between the tables and saying, “Done.” 

Chapter 11 Bridge Building
148
As each time milestone is reached, draw everyone’s at-
tention to the timeline and say, “Your project is 25% com-
plete!” “...50% complete!” and so on. Update the timeline 
to show how much time is complete (see Figure 11.2).
25%
10
5
0
15
20
Figure 11.2 Shaded timeline after five minutes 
Expect to see some scrambling after announcing the 
75% milestone. As the clock winds down, count down the 
final seconds and make sure that everyone stops working 
when time runs out. 
Although testing the bridges is not relevant to the team 
building point of the exercise, it does provide closure that 
the participants will expect. First test that each bridge can 
hold the weight of the textbook; then determine the win-
ning team by piling on books (or other heavy objects) until 
each bridge collapses. 
Post-Exercise Discussion 
Several discussion points follow this exercise. The facilita-
tor should avoid spending time focusing on specific de-
sign and engineering choices made. Rather, the discussion 
should center on the dynamics and behavior of the team 
during the exercise. 
When the exercise concludes, consider some of the fol-
lowing discussion points: 
• How long did the team dawdle before starting on the 
construction of bridge? 
• Did a leader emerge? How long did that take, and 
how did the leader become the leader? 

Post-Exercise Discussion 
149
• How did the leader lead? How was it effective? How 
was it ineffective? 
• Did someone play the role of the engineer or chief 
architect of the bridge? 
• Who followed? Who led? 
• Did anyone resist playing a follower role but resign to 
the role to keep the project moving forward? 
• What conflict arose during the exercise? How did the 
team resolve that conflict? 
• What changes happened to team dynamics after the 
project completion percent was announced? 
• Did awareness that time was burning help motivate 
productivity, or did it detract focus? 
• How did the team’s behavior adapt when the non-
functional requirement was introduced after the 
project was well underway. (“Let’s also see which 
bridge is the strongest.”) 
After discussing these questions, you need to draw at-
tention to behaviors, roles, and feelings that were exposed 
during the exercise. When conducting this exercise with 
an existing team, it’s helpful to tie the learning objectives 
from the bridge exercise to situations that arise on an ac-
tual project the team is working on. 

This page intentionally left blank 

151
Chapter 12 
Moon Survival 
This workshop corresponds with Chapter 5, “Collabora-
tion.”
Collaboration often requires more energy than working 
independently. It’s also likely that the total effort exerted 
by a team to solve a problem can greatly exceed the ef-
fort of an individual solving the problem alone. This raises 
the question, “Why go through the hassles of working as 
a group?” The Moon Survival exercise, which was devel-
oped by NASA, provides a profound demonstration of the 
contrast between team and individual work. 

Chapter 12 Moon Survival
152
Setup
Prepare a copy of each of the following handouts for each 
participant:
• Moon Survival Scenario 
• Moon Survival Worksheet 
• Moon Survival Scoring Instructions 
• Moon Survival Expert Analysis 
Refer to the facilitation instructions to determine when 
to distribute each of these handouts. Each participant also 
needs a pen or pencil. 
Facilitation
Start the exercise by handing out the Moon Survival Sce-
nario sheet to each of the participants. Give them five min-
utes to read the sheet and ensure that everyone understands 
the instructions. At this point, do not discuss the scenario; 
just discuss the procedure for completing the individual 
portion of the exercise. 
Individual Exercise 
When everyone is ready, hand out a copy of the Moon 
Survival Worksheet to each participant. Give everyone 15 
minutes to rank the items from most important for surviv-
al (1) to least important (15). Participants should complete 
the exercise independently with no discussion. 
After the individual exercise, ask the participants to fold 
over enough of the left side of the worksheet to cover their 
individual rankings. This is to prevent participants from 

Facilitation 
153
seeing each other’s rankings during the team portion of the 
exercise.
Team Exercise 
Next, organize into 4–6 person teams and have each 
group come up with a single ranking that the group agrees 
to. When the group ranking has been determined, all team 
members should record the group ranking on column D of 
their worksheets. 
Scoring
Hand out a copy of the Moon Survival Scoring Instructions 
to each participant. When scoring has been completed, each 
participant should have an individual total and a team total. 
This portion of the exercise may take 30–45 minutes. 
The facilitator plays an important role in keeping all 
groups on task and ensuring that they successfully agree to 
a ranking for the group. 
Post-Exercise Discussion 
Ask the participants to reveal their individual rankings 
to their teammates and discuss the differences. When dis-
cussing scores, remember that the lower the difference, the 
closer the match with the expert’s ranking. Usually, the 
team score will be better (a lower number) than anyone on 
the team’s individual score. 
The ensuing discussion should center on why the team 
score beats the individual scores. Even if some individuals 
happen to beat the team, you should find that the team 
score will beat the score of the majority of its individual 
team members. 
It’s recommended that the facilitator read Chapter 5 for 
insight to help facilitate this discussion. Work to focus the 

Chapter 12 Moon Survival
154
discussion more on team dynamics than on the reasoning 
behind the expert choices. You are likely to find that high 
D participants won’t be as concerned with the expert’s ex-
planation because they may not agree with it anyway. On 
the other hand, high C participants are unlikely to be satis-
fied until they are given a complete explanation for why 
the experts ranked the items as they did. 
After you are satisfied that the participants understand 
the value of teamwork, you may distribute the Moon Sur-
vival Expert Analysis handout for participants to read at 
their leisure. As with most of the activities in this book, 
you might want to remind participants not to discuss the 
details of the exercise with others who may have an op-
portunity to participate in the future. 

Facilitation 
155
 Moon Survival Scenario 
Please read the scenario and wait for instructions from the facili-
tator.
SCENARIO
The year is 2025, and you are part of a four-member team 
traveling toward the Moon in the Orion spacecraft. Orion is a gum-
drop-shaped spacecraft designed to carry humans from Earth to the 
Moon. Orion is similar in shape to but larger than the capsules used 
during the Apollo program. Attached, or docked, to Orion is the 
Lunar Surface Access Module (LSAM), which you will use to land 
on the Moon. 
As your spacecraft enters lunar orbit, you spot the lunar outpost. 
This outpost has grown, having been built piece by piece during past 
missions. You are excited to see the outpost. It is located on a crater 
rim near the lunar south pole in near-constant sunlight. This location 
is not far from supplies of water ice that can be found in the cold, 
permanently shadowed part of the crater. 
After transferring into the LSAM and separating from Orion, 
you prepare to descend to the lunar surface. Suddenly, you notice 
that there is a problem with the thrusters. You land safely but off 
course, about 80 kilometers (50 miles) from the lunar outpost. As 
you look across the charcoal-gray, dusty surface of the Moon, you 
realize your survival depends on reaching the outpost, finding a way 
to protect yourself until someone can reach you, or meeting a rescue 
party somewhere between your landing site and the outpost. 
You know the Moon has basically no atmosphere or magneto-
sphere to protect you from space radiation. The environment is unlike 
any found on Earth. The regolith, or lunar soil, is a mixture of materi-
als that includes sharp, glassy particles. The gravity field on the Moon 
is only one-sixth as strong as Earth’s. More than 80 percent of the 
Moon is made up of heavily cratered highlands. Temperatures vary 
widely on the Moon. It can be as cold as –193°C (–315°F) at night at 
its poles and as hot as 111°C (232°F) during the day at its equator. 
Survival depend[s] on your mode of transportation and ability to 
navigate. Your basic needs for food, shelter, water, and air must be 
considered.
INDIVIDUAL EXERCISE
You are challenged to choose items that will help you survive. On 
the Moon Survival Worksheet, you will find a list of 15 items avail-
able to you. In Column A, rank these items from 1 to 15 according 
to their importance to you and your crew. Place the number 1 by the 
most important item and continue ranking the items to number 15, 
the least important to your survival. 
STOP. Before proceeding to the next step, please fold over the left 
side of the Moon Survival Worksheet to hide your individual ranks; 
then wait for instructions from the facilitator. 
Source: NASA and Jamestown Education Module EG-2006-09-25-LaRC 

Chapter 12 Moon Survival
156
Individual
Rank
   (1–15) 
Moon Survival Worksheet
Team
Rank
(1–15) 
Life raft 
A self-inflatable floatation device 
Two 45.5-kilogram (100-pound) tanks of oxygen 
Pressurized tanks of oxygen 
Space blanket 
A thin sheet of plastic material that is coated with a 
metallic reflecting layer 
Lights with solar-powered rechargeable batteries 
Portable lights powered by solar batteries 
Signal mirror 
A handheld mirror 
38 liters (10 gallons) of water 
A container of water 
First aid kit 
A basic first aid kit with pain medication and medicine 
for infection 
Food concentrate 
Total:
Total:
Dehydrated food to which water is added 
Magnetic compass 
A tool that uses a magnetic field to determine direction 
Solar-powered radio receiver-transmitter 
A communication tool powered by the sun 
Map of the Moon’s surface 
A map showing the Moon’s terrain 
15 meters (about 50 feet) of nylon rope 
Manufactured rope 
Parachute 
A large piece of silk cloth 
Space suit repair kit 
Materials to repair tiny holes in fabric 
Box of matches
Wooden sticks with sulfur-treated heads

Facilitation 
157
Moon Survival Scoring Instructions 
Please follow the facilitator’s instructions. 
Align this page with the Moon Survival Worksheet, and enter the values on the 
right into the corresponding cells in both column B and column E. 
For each row, calculate the value of column C by subtracting column B from 
column A. If less than zero, drop the negative sign (e.g., take the absolute value).
Calculate the column F values using the same procedure from step 2.  
Sum the total of columns C and F. 
Compare the totals—the lower the score, the closer the match to the expert’s  
opinion. (Golf-style scoring) 
Discuss the difference between your individual score and your team score. 
B/E
12
1
9
11
10
2
5
3
14
4
6
8
13
7
15
Total:   54
1
4
3
8
12
4
10
8
2
A 
B 
C
C = |A - B| 
|1 – 4 | = 3  

Moon Survival
158
Moon Survival Expert Analysis 
Two NASA scientists separately ranked the same items 
and explained their reasons for their rankings. Dr. Carl-
ton Allen was the first expert. Dr. Allen is the curator and 
manager of the Astromaterials Research and Exploration 
Science (ARES) Astromaterials Acquisition and Curation 
Office. This office is responsible for protecting, preserv-
ing, and distributing extraterrestrial samples to help others 
learn more about solar system exploration. These samples 
include the Apollo Moon rocks and regoliths, Antarctic 
meteorites, and particles of solar wind. Dr. Allen’s back-
ground is in planetary science. The second expert was 
John Gruener, who is a flight systems engineer at NASA’s 
Johnson Space Center, and his background is in aerospace 
engineering and physical sciences with an emphasis in 
planetary geology. He has worked as a rocket scientist de-
signing missions to the Moon and Mars, as a space farmer 
growing plants in advanced life-support systems and as a 
planetary scientist studying the rocks and soils on Mars. 
Both experts agreed that the type of lander in which you 
were traveling would determine your course of action if 
you landed on the wrong place on the Moon. If you were 
in a two-stage lander (one stage for descent and one stage 
for ascent, like the Apollo lunar module), they suggested 
that you terminate the surface mission, head back to orbit, 
rendezvous with Orion in lunar orbit, and head home. 
If returning home were not a choice and you were stuck 
on the Moon, the experts suggested that you sit tight and 
wait for someone at the outpost to come and get you. They 
agreed that the safest thing to do in this situation, as in 
most emergencies, is to stay put and call for help. 
If someone from the outpost cannot reach you, the ex-
perts felt that you had no option other than to try to make 
it to the outpost. The rankings and explanations in Table
12.1 indicate how each expert ranked the items to help 
you reach the outpost. 

Moon Survival Expert Analysis 
159
Table 12.1 Expert Analysis 
Rank 
Item 
Explanation for Expert’s Rank 
1
Two 45.5-kilogram 
(100-pound) tanks 
of oxygen
Pressurized tanks of 
oxygen
Expert 1: “With basically no atmos-
phere on the Moon, oxygen (O2) to 
breathe is the most pressing survival 
need. The average person needs 
about 0.84 kilograms (a little less 
than 2 pounds) of O2 per day.” 
Expert 2: “Oxygen to breathe is the 
most important survival need, since 
the Moon has virtually no atmos-
phere.”
2
38 liters (10 gallons) 
of water
A container of water 
Expert 1: “Though we believe there 
is some water in the form of ice on 
the Moon, there is no liquid water. 
Water is essential to all life. Cur-
rently, each astronaut aboard the 
International Space Station (ISS) 
uses about 11 liters (3 gallons) of 
water daily.” 
Expert 2: “Water is another basic 
survival need for the astronauts. 
Because there is no liquid water on 
the Moon, the astronauts will need 
the water they brought with them to 
survive.”
3
Food concentrate
Dehydrated food to 
which water is added 
Expert 1: “Food concentrate is a 
good source of food and an efficient 
way to carry it.” 
Expert 2: “Although the food con-
centrate must have water added to 
be useful, it is lightweight and easy 
to carry, meeting a third basic need 
for survival.” 

Moon Survival
160
Rank 
Item 
Explanation for Expert’s Rank 
4
Solar-powered radio 
receiver-transmitter
A communication tool 
powered by the sun 
Expert 1: “Hopefully people from 
the lunar outpost are looking for 
you while you are trying to reach 
them. A solar- powered radio 
receiver-transmitter is important to 
maintain this communication.” 
Expert 2: “As people from the lunar 
outpost are looking for you, you 
should try to reach them. Main-
taining communication with your 
outpost is essential.” 
5
First aid kit
A basic first aid kit 
with pain medication 
and medicine for infec-
tion
Expert 1: “No matter where you 
are, a first aid kit is a good idea. Be 
sure you carry pain medication and 
medicine for infections.” 
Expert 2: “A first aid kit takes up 
little space and may be important to 
have in case of illness or injury.” 
6
Map of the Moon’s 
surface
A map showing the 
Moon’s terrain 
Expert 1: “A map of the Moon’s 
surface is your primary way to 
identify your location and to help 
you navigate.” 
Expert 2: “With no other direc-
tional tools available, a map of the 
Moon’s surface is the most impor-
tant means of finding your way 
from one location to another.” 
7
Space suit repair kit
Materials to repair tiny 
holes in fabric 
Expert 1: “You cannot afford to 
have any tears in your space suit. 
Your suit protects you from harsh 
conditions while you make your 
way to the lunar outpost. The soil 
of the Moon (regolith) ‘sticks’ to 
space suits and equipment. It is very 
sharp, like tiny fragments of glass 
or coral, and can cut holes that put 
your life at risk.” 
Expert 2: “Your space suit protects 
you from the harsh conditions on 
the Moon. The sharp soil of the 
Moon can cut tiny holes in the suit, 
which may compromise its effective-
ness.”

Moon Survival Expert Analysis 
161
Rank 
Item 
Explanation for Expert’s Rank 
8
15 meters (about 50 
feet) of nylon rope
Manufactured rope 
Expert 1: “The nylon rope is useful 
in scaling cliffs or craters you may 
have to cross. To prevent injury or 
in case you cannot walk, rope is 
helpful for tying you to others.” 
Expert 2: “The rope makes drag-
ging the life raft easier or may come 
in handy when crossing difficult 
terrain.”
9
Space blanket
A thin sheet of plastic 
material that is coated 
with a metallic reflect-
ing layer 
Expert 1: “The space blanket helps 
reduce heat loss from a person’s 
body. The reflective material reflects 
about 80 percent of the wearer’s 
body heat back to the body. The 
reflected side is also used to prevent 
absorption of sunlight.” 
Expert 2: “The space blanket is used 
to insulate the oxygen and water 
from the hot daytime temperatures. 
Temperatures vary widely on the 
Moon. It can be as cold as -193°C 
(–315°F) at night at its poles and 
as hot as 111°C (232°F) during the 
day at its equator.” 
10
Signal mirror
A handheld mirror 
Expert 1: “The signal mirror is an 
important way to communicate 
during the daylight. The Moon’s 
daylight is brighter and harsher 
than Earth’s. There is virtually no 
atmosphere to scatter the light, no 
clouds to shade it, and no ozone 
layer to block the sun burning ultra-
violet light.” 
Expert 2: “The signal mirror is used 
as a form of communication if the 
radio is not working.” 

Moon Survival
162
Rank 
Item 
Explanation for Expert’s Rank 
11
Lights with solar-
powered rechargeable 
batteries
Portable lights pow-
ered by solar batteries 
Expert 1: “These lights allow for 
nighttime travel. The nights on the 
Moon are brighter than nights on 
Earth, at least on the side of the 
Moon that is facing Earth. With its 
clouds and oceans, Earth reflects 
more light than the dark Moon 
rocks. Earthlight on the Moon is 
much brighter than moonlight on 
Earth.”
Expert 2: “The lights are helpful if 
you travel across large shadowed ar-
eas. Some areas in the polar regions 
are permanently dark.” 
12
Life raft
A self-inflatable 
floatation device 
Expert 1: “The life raft makes a 
great sled for carrying the oxygen 
and water.” 
Expert 2: “A life raft is of little use 
for survival on the Moon. Although 
it could be used to drag heavy items, 
the sharp regolith would quickly 
puncture the raft.” 
13
Parachute
A large piece of silk 
cloth
Expert 1: “Compared to other 
items, this item is of little use.” 
Expert 2: “Parachute silk comes in 
handy as a backup sled to the life 
raft, or as shade.” 
14
Magnetic compass
A tool that uses a mag-
netic field to determine 
direction
Expert 1: “The Moon has no global 
magnetic field, which makes a mag-
netic compass virtually useless.” 
Expert 2: “The compass is virtually 
useless because there is no Moon-
wide magnetic field.” 
15
Box of matches
Wooden sticks with 
sulfur-treated heads 
Expert 1: “Matches are virtually 
useless on the Moon because there 
is little oxygen.” 
Expert 2: “With little oxygen on the 
Moon, the matches are useless.” 

163
Chapter 13 
BalderDISC
This workshop corresponds with Chapter 6, “Behavior 
and Teams.” 
The “wheel” (as described in Chapter 6) is an excel-
lent tool for enhancing team communication on an agile 
project because the entire team can quickly and easily see 
who will naturally get along and who may conflict. Ad-
ditionally, DISC reports are highly valuable because they 
contain a lot of detail about each individual. Many DISC 
reports include a comprehensive section that describes nu-
merous characteristics of the individual, how best to com-
municate with the individual, and more. 
DISC is highly accurate but should not be considered 
an exact science. Moreover, the reports can be lengthy. 
Therefore, creating a communication chart that summa-
rizes each team member’s most appropriate characteris-
tics and communication styles can be useful for each team 
member:
• To see the components of the report that individuals 
believe best depict who they are. 
• To know how to most effectively communicate with 
each individual. 
It is worth the time it takes for all members on an agile 
team to understand one another at a level deep enough 
to comprehend what makes them tick and how they will 

Chapter 13 BalderDISC
164
behave. This can enhance communication effectiveness 
and can often avoid conflicts that would have arisen dur-
ing the project if the team had not gone through this exer-
cise. Human conflict can be more costly to a project than 
defects in code. 
Materials
Materials for this exercise include the following: 
• Highlighter
• Index cards 
• A set of cards you create for each player containing 
five voting cards that have the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, and 
5 (one number per card) 
• Computer, spreadsheet (or word processor), and 
printer
• Detailed DISC report for each participant 
Setup
Prior to starting this exercise, have every member of the 
team take a DISC assessment from a provider that pro-
vides a detailed DISC report describing the individual as 
well as a wheel. The free DISC provided in this book pro-
vides only a DISC graph. To perform this exercise, you 
must find a DISC provider (by searching the Internet) and 
request all participants take the DISC assessment and bring 
a printed report to the workshop. 
During the workshop, all individuals review each sec-
tion of their own reports and highlight the sentences that 
they believe most accurately reflect who they are and how 

Facilitation 
165
best to communicate with them. This can be as much or 
as little of the report they feel is important for other team 
members to know what makes them tick and who they are. 
Have each individual select the top four sentences they 
feel best depict who they are and are most important to 
share with the team. Next each individual should create 
one sentence that is not a true statement of who they are. 
They can either make up a lie or could take one of the 
statements in their report and say the opposite. For exam-
ple, if the report indicates, “Flattery will always generate 
a positive reaction with him.” You might choose to say 
the opposite, “Do not try to use flattery to try to persuade 
him.” Write all four sentences on   an index card (in any 
random order)—see Figure 13.1 for an example. 
Figure 13.1 Example index card 
Facilitation
Each person takes a turn by reading his or her cards con-
taining five sentences (four truths about themselves and 
one lie). After someone reads a card, everyone else in the 

Chapter 13 BalderDISC
166
room votes by holding up a voting card containing the 
number they feel is the lie. The facilitator should say, 
“One, two, three, vote” for everyone in the room to hold 
up their guess at the same time to prevent unfairness. 
Each player that guesses the correct lie scores one point. 
In the preceding example, every player holding up the 
number “4” would win one point. If no one in the room 
guesses the correct lie, the card reader gets two points. In 
the preceding example, if no one guessed a “4,” the reader 
would score two points. At the end of each round, have the 
reader tell the team his or her dominant DISC profile ele-
ment. For example, Earl might say, “I am an “I.” Whoever 
has the most points after everyone has taken a turn reading 
wins the game. 
This is a fun exercise that enables the team members to 
bond and get to know one another at a personal level. 
Post-Exercise Discussion 
This exercise can enable the team to more quickly move 
along the forming, storming, norming, performing stages 
as mentioned in Chapter 3, “Team Dynamics.” It can also 
help avoid conflicts that would occur without having a 
better understanding of each of the team members’ behav-
ioral tendencies. 
Allow open discussion to occur during the facilitation 
by the team members. 
In the post-discussion, ask the team to quickly reassem-
ble the room into four quadrants by the highest element of 
each individual’s DISC profiles—that is, have all the D’s 
sit in one section of the room, all the C’s in another, and 
so on. Point out the importance of the quadrants. That 
is, there will be natural conflicts that occur between the 
groups. D’s and C’s, for example, will conflict because the 
C’s might appear to the D’s to be overly quiet and take too 

Post-Exercise Discussion 
167
long to ponder the details, whereas the D’s might appear 
to the C’s to be outspokenly   rude and always want to skip 
the details and drive to a solution. Emphasize the impor-
tance of embracing the DISC to better accept others and 
understand why they behave the way they do. Encourage 
people to use the language of DISC in situations in which 
they feel conflicts are starting to arise. 
Reinforce that the best teams comprise a blend of be-
havioral profiles. You want team members to consist of 
a combination of D’s, who will make quicker decisions 
and help drive the project; C’s, who will focus on the de-
tails as they analyze requirements, test, and write code; 
S’s, who will bring harmony to the team; and I’s, who will 
keep the communication going, optimism high, and energy 
flowing. It is healthy to have some team members optimis-
tically viewing the project in a glass-is-half-full perspec-
tive, whereas others are continually concerned about the 
project’s status or level of quality. Therefore the best   teams 
have a mix of behavioral profiles, which in turn tends to 
also result in natural conflict. 
After the workshop is complete, it is recommended that 
the facilitator create a Team Communication Chart con-
taining each team member’s highlighted sentences. This 
chart should not be limited to the four top elements that 
individuals selected to place on their index cards. This 
chart could be created in a spreadsheet or in a word proc-
essor. Either email the chart to all members of the team or 
post it on a wall in the project room. 
Additionally, the team should create a team wheel. As 
an example, Figure 13.2 shows a team wheel if the team 
chose The Abelson Group as their DISC provider. Have all 
team members write their names or initials on the wheel 
corresponding to their adaptive/work behavior provided 
in their report. If any team member’s natural behavior 
is extremely different than their adaptive behavior, have 
them write their name or initials in a different color. 

Chapter 13 BalderDISC
168
TA
SK
OR
IE
NT
ED
pr
od
uc
t o
rie
nte
d
sy
ste
ma
tic
de
tai
l a
nd
qu
ali
ty
ori
en
te
d
co
mp
eti
tiv
e d
ire
ct
cr
ea
tiv
e
co
nfr
on
tat
io
na
l
ch
an
ge
ag
en
t
in
de
pe
nd
en
t
pr
oc
es
s o
rie
nt
ed
lis
te
ne
r
in
dir
ec
t
sta
ble
em
pa
th
eti
c
te
am
pla
ye
r
pe
rs
on
ab
le
tru
sti
ng
int
er
ac
tiv
e
ac
co
m
mo
da
tin
g
pa
tie
nt
pe
rs
is
te
nt
tr
us
tin
g
co
nv
in
ci
ng
no
t i
nt
o
de
ta
ils
pe
ss
im
is
tic
fo
llo
we
r
ca
uti
ou
s
ac
cu
ra
te
ex
ac
tin
g
se
ns
e
of
ur
ge
nc
y
de
ma
nd
in
g r
is
k t
ak
er
pe
rs
ua
si
ve
op
ti
mi
sti
c
lik
es
st
ru
ct
ur
e
ta
sk
fo
cu
se
d
pe
ss
im
is
tic
sl
ow
st
ar
t
fa
st
fin
is
h
dr
iv
in
g
re
su
lts
or
ie
nt
ed
qu
ic
k t
o
ch
an
ge
in
sp
iri
ng
sl
ow
to
ch
an
ge
pr
ed
ic
ta
bl
e
wa
rm
co
op
er
ati
ve
op
ti
mi
sti
c
im
pu
ls
iv
e
C
O
O
R
DI
N
AT
O
R
A
N
AL
YZ
E
R
IM
PL
EM
E
NT
O
R
C
O
N
D
U
CT
O
R
PE
R
SU
A
D
E
R
S
U
P
P
O
RT
E
R
R
EL
AT
E
R
P
R
O
M
OT
E
R
IN
TE
RN
AL
FO
CU
S
EX
TE
RN
AL
FO
CU
S
PE
OP
LE
OR
IE
NT
ED
C
COMPLIANCE
D
DOMINANCE
INFLUENCER
I
STEADINESS
S
8
24
23
22
21
37
9
25
40
39
38
56
41
26
27
10
55
54
53
60
57
59
58
52
36
20
35
19
18
34
50
49
48
47
46
17
16
15
32
33
30
31
29
45
13
14
12
11
28
44
43
42
51
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
The Abelson DISC Behaviors Wheel is an adaptation of the Target Training 
International, LTD. Wheel and is a trademark of The Abelson Group™ 
Figure 13.2 Example Team Wheel template 

169
Chapter 14 
Assessing Concordance 
and Discordance 
This workshop corresponds with Chapter 5, “Collabora-
tion.”
It’s helpful to know how easily the members of a team 
are influenced by the rest of the membership. When a lead-
er knows if a team has more conformant versus discordant 
tendencies, it’s easier to determine how closely a team’s 
decision-making behavior must be managed. When the re-
sults of this exercise are shared and discussed with a team, 
the team may be more open to improving the efficiency of 
discussing topics and making decisions. 
Materials
Materials include the following: 
• Weight Plot Chart 
• Three blank slips of paper per person 

Chapter 14 Assessing Concordance and Discordance
170
Setup
The most important element of this exercise is a prepared 
facilitator who has the confidence and willingness to 
expose his/her weight to the group. A different measurable 
attribute could be used, but body weight tends to work 
well.
Start by handing out three blank slips of paper to each 
participant and make sure that everyone has something to 
write with. Prepare the blank weight plot so that it may be 
revealed with plotted data during each of the three rounds 
of the exercise. This could be done on a white board, on 
a spreadsheet, or simply plotted on a piece of paper that 
is passed around the room. Figure 14.3 contains a blank 
weight plot template. 
Facilitation
Start by asking everyone in the room to guess your weight. 
Have them write down that guess on one of the slips of 
paper without discussion or collaboration. Gather up eve-
ryone’s guesses and plot them along the first column of 
the weight plot. Be sure to plot the guesses along a straight 
vertical line (see Figure 14.1). When plotting two guesses 
with the same value, go ahead and offset the plots a bit to 
depict that there is more than one guess for that value. 
When plotting the guesses, do not reveal who made 
each guess. After all the guesses have been plotted, reveal 
the chart to the group and ask everyone to make another 
guess. Do this without further explanation or instruction. 
Plot the results, reveal the results, and repeat for a third 
round.

Post-Exercise Discussion 
171
240
220
200
180
160
140
120
1
Figure 14.1 Weight guessing plot (Round 1)
After finishing three rounds, assess the graph and dis-
cuss the results with the group. 
Post-Exercise Discussion 
The goal of this exercise is to understand the conformance/
discordance level of the group. The shape of the plot cre-
ated in this exercises reveals this. The facilitator starts by 
showing the plot and explaining the group’s behavior that 
it reveals. 
The depictions of plotted data presented in Figure 14.2
show two contrasting possible outcomes: On the left is a 
group with a high level of conformance and a low level 
of discordance. The plot on the right depicts low (or no) 
conformance and high discordance. The facilitator may 

Chapter 14 Assessing Concordance and Discordance
172
choose to draw these shapes and discuss the different be-
havior characteristics of each of the groups that each of 
these shapes represents. It could be interesting to ask how 
individuals would feel if they were a member of each of 
these groups; then contrast those feelings with the actual 
group plot from the   exercise. This discussion can expose 
opportunities for improving the dynamics of the group. 
High Conformance
Low Discordance
Low Conformance
High Discordance
Figure 14.2 Data plots 
After reading Chapter 5, you may now realize that the 
point of this exercise is not to grade the group as positive 
or negative. Rather, the point is to better understand the 
magnitude of influence members of the group have on one 
another. When discussing the conformance profile of the 
group, accept the behavioral tendencies of the group and 
focus the conversation on how to operate most produc-
tively because of (or despite) what the profile indicates. 

Post-Exercise Discussion 
173
1
300
295
290
285
280
275
270
265
260
255
250
245
240
235
230
225
220
215
210
205
200
195
190
185
180
175
170
165
160
155
150
145
140
135
130
125
120
115
110
105
100
2 
3
Figure 14.3 Weight plot chart template 

This page intentionally left blank 

175
Chapter 15 
Change Exercise 
This workshop corresponds with Chapter 7, “Change.” 
Change can be difficult for some people to talk about 
or to even think about. Addressing need for change head-
on can be fruitful and is an essential prerequisite to mak-
ing change happen. This exercise is designed to soften the 
severity of discussions about change through the use of 
a fun and lively game. The fast-paced nature of the ex-
ercise avoids arduous emotionally charged discussions 
about change. Rather, it facilitates quick brainstorming 
about things that need to be changed without stewing over 
the challenges or consequences—almost like pulling off a 
bandage in one quick swipe. 
Overview
The room is split into small groups that will be competing 
against each other. Each team will sit in front of a flip chart 
or white board while one member of each team is drawing 
a picture of a desired change. The facilitator shows a card 
containing a description of a desired change on it to the 
designated drawer on each team. Each team should guess 
what is being drawn by shouting out the answer. Drawing 
responsibility rotates on each team so that everyone serves 
as drawer and guesser. The first team to guess correctly 

Chapter 15 Change Exercise
176
earns a point. At the   end of the game, the team with the 
most points wins. 
Setup
The materials required are simple: 
• Blank 3x5 cards 
• Pens
Prior to beginning the game, hand out stacks of 3x5 
cards and ask all participants to grab a card and draw a 
vertical line down the middle of it, dividing it into two sec-
tions. Label the left side “Now” and the right side “Goal” 
(see Figure 15.1). Next, on the left half of the card, write 
a phrase or a single sentence describing something that is 
undesirable now. On the right side, write a phrase or single 
sentence describing a corresponding positive goal. When 
writing the goal, consider the changes that will need to oc-
cur in order to attain the   stated goal. Give five minutes to 
fill out as many cards as possible. Ask the participants to 
work individually and not share or discuss the information 
on their cards. Tell them that others will be reading their 
cards, so be helpful by writing or printing as neatly as pos-
sible. Have the participants write their names on the back 
of their index cards. 
Collect all the cards and mix them up for use during the 
next part of the exercise. 
Now:
Goal:
Figure 15.1 The card should look like this. 

Setup 
177
Examples include the following: 
Now: The project requires skills we don’t have on 
the team. 
Goal: Training is provided for everyone needing 
new skills. 
Now: Each team member is expected to juggle mul-
tiple projects at once. 
Goal: 100% dedicated resources on the project. 
Now: Daily standup meetings take too long. 
Goal: Everyone follows the Scrum meeting format 
in the daily meetings. 
The Drawing Board 
Decide how many teams will compete and designate a 
space for each team to work. Remember that the facilita-
tor will observe all the teams during the game to listen for 
a winning answer, so try to position the teams where the 
facilitator can see and hear each team. The overlapping 
chaos contributes to the high-energy fun of this game. Be-
cause all teams are solving the same “puzzle” simultane-
ously, some individuals may eavesdrop on what the other 
teams are doing. In the spirit of the purpose of the game 
(open communication) there’s no need to be concerned 
when this happens. 
The Teams 
Divide up the room with approximately the same 
number of people on each team. There are no specialized 
skills required for this game, so there’s no benefit in try-
ing to “even up” the teams in any manner other than head 

Chapter 15 Change Exercise
178
count. If the teams don’t have the same number of peo-
ple, it will not affect the outcome of the game. The goal 
is to ensure that everyone has a chance to participate as a 
drawer and as a guesser. 
Facilitation
For each round, the facilitator picks a card off the pile and 
reads the name on the back of the card. This person comes 
up to the front of the room and helps the facilitator moni-
tor this round. 
Have each team select one person to be the drawer for 
the round. Make sure the drawer has a pen and is standing 
in front of the drawing board before the game begins. 
Give the following instructions to all participants: 
“Shortly I will be showing one of the change cards to 
each of the drawers. When I say ‘Go!’ the drawer should 
draw the desired change. After you read the card, focus on 
the section labeled ‘Goal’ and draw a picture representing 
that change. You may not use words, letters, or numbers, 
and you may not speak while drawing.” 
Typically, most participants are not going to be skilled 
artists. If any of the players happen to have artistic talent, 
the game moves so fast that there is little time to create a 
masterpiece. Master doodlers, on the other hand, may find 
the game easier than others. Some things are easier to draw 
than others, and lack of artistic talent can generate a lot of 
laughter!
For example, when reading a card containing the goal, 
“Training is provided for everyone needing new skills,” 
one drawer might try to show some depiction of a class-
room or a teacher. Another might draw a metaphor or 
even a homonym (such as picture of a train). 

Post-Exercise Discussion 
179
“As you draw, your teammates will try to guess the 
change that you are drawing. Listen closely to the guesses, 
and when you hear the correct answer, point to the person 
who made the guess. The facilitator will ask the player to 
repeat the answer and judge whether it is correct. If the 
answer is correct, it scores a point for that team, and the 
round is over.” 
Because of the possible complexity of each described 
change, it’s rare that anyone’s guess precisely matches 
what’s on the card. The person who wrote the original 
card will judge whether a team’s guess is close enough to 
count as correct. 
When someone makes a correct guess, a point is earned 
for that team, and the round ends. The facilitator should 
determine how to end the game. Often, a time limit or 
a specified number of rounds is used. When the end of 
the game has been reached, the team with the most points 
wins!
Post-Exercise Discussion 
After the game concludes, it’s important to have a discus-
sion about the change goals. The facilitator should be pre-
pared to delicately handle changes that cause discomfort 
for some. Additionally, there may be disagreements that 
require some mediation. 
A structured way to facilitate the post-game discussion 
is to use the S-T-O-W technique. On a white board or flip 
chart, draw a target with four rings. Mark the center “S”; 
then mark each subsequent ring with “T,” “O,” and “W.” 
Write a legend next to the target showing Self, Team, Or-
ganization, and World (see Figure 15.2). This target will 
be used to specify the subject of each change. 

Chapter 15 Change Exercise
180
S
T
O W
Self
Team
Organization
World
Figure 15.2 The target 
Next, retrieve the first change card from the game. Write 
“1.” followed by the change goal from the card. Ask the 
participants where this change belongs in the target and 
write the number in the corresponding ring on the target. 
For example, some may feel that “100% dedicated re-
sources assigned to the project” may fall in the “Team” 
ring, whereas others believe it belongs in the “Organiza-
tion” ring. This offers an opportunity to discuss where and 
who can make this change happen. You might discuss that 
if the team is not empowered to change how individuals 
are assigned to projects, the change should likely be esca-
lated to the organization level. This approach can center 
the discussion on how to get to decision makers in the 
organization that have the authority to make the change 
happen.
During discussions about changes to the organization, 
be prepared for statements such as “It’ll never change; it’s 
been that way forever,” or “Nobody knows why we do 
things this way; we just do.” Recently, in a presentation 
about agile software development to 100 executives at a 
major corporation, one of the executives interrupted the 
presentation with the comment, “This agile stuff makes 
sense, but it will never work here. Our organization would 

Post-Exercise Discussion 
181
never permit such a radical change to the way we run 
projects.” Another executive in the room piped in, “What 
are you talking about? We are the organization.   We are 
the reason we do things the way we do. If we are ever 
going to change, it has to start here, with us.” It’s funny 
how many people can refer to an organization as an ab-
straction, as though they are not the organization. Rec-
ognition of the presence of individuals in an organization 
who wield decision-making ability is an important step in 
accommodating changes in organizations. 
For change items assigned to the “Self” ring, the dis-
cussion will be quite different—centered on how to en-
courage individuals on the team to change. Be cautious 
during these discussions. Talking about how to change an 
abstraction (the organization) or change other individu-
als is vastly different than discussing changes to one’s self. 
Also be cautious to avoid directed criticism. If John says, 
“Mary needs to avoid discussing irrelevant details during 
the standup meeting,” Mary may feel cornered, vulnera-
ble, and uncomfortable. Try generalizing “self” changes so 
that they could potentially apply to any or all individuals 
on the team. 
On an agile team, changes to “Team” offer a great op-
portunity that could be resolved during the exercise. The 
lightweight organizational structure of a team on an agile 
project provides the leverage needed to efficiently intro-
duce change. If the team decides to change the way stand-
up meetings are held or how work is assigned, it shouldn’t 
require any bureaucracy. It ought to make a decision to-
gether and move forward. 
Changes to “World” may seem unnecessary because it’s 
beyond the power of a group to change the world. How-
ever, identification and discussion of items that influence 
us and that we cannot change can be helpful. Working 
around (and despite) immutable things is a necessary ele-
ment of how a healthy team works productively together. 

This page intentionally left blank 

183
Chapter 16 
Groups and Decisions 
This workshop corresponds with Chapter 5, “Collabora-
tion.” It enables your team to better understand group dy-
namics and decisions. 
Setup
For a group whose members have all completed the DISC 
assessment, organize into DISC-homogeneous teams. Cre-
ate separate teams, combining the D’s, I’s, S’s, and C’s into 
separate teams based on the element of their profiles that 
are the most dominant (highest point in the DISC graph). 
Give the following problem to each team and examine 
the unique dynamics of each group as they work to come 
up with a solution. 
When reading the problem to the groups, it’s important 
to read it just as it is written. This ensures that the problem 
is described clearly and unambiguously to everyone. Also 
the final instruction, which asks for the optimal solution, 
can have an impact on the dynamics of each of the groups 
when solving the problem. 

Chapter 16 Groups and Decisions
184
If you have a group of high C’s, for example, they may 
solve the puzzle yet strain their brains to find a better solu-
tion. A group of D’s, on the other hand, may strive to solve 
the problem faster than the other groups. (Even though 
speed was never expressed as a measurement of success.) 
The Problem 
A farmer needs to transport a goose, a fox, and a sack of grain 
across a river. His boat is so small that there is only room for 
himself and one of the others at a time. 
If he leaves the fox and goose together, the fox will kill the 
goose. If he leaves the goose and the grain together, the goose 
will eat the grain. 
What is the optimal solution for getting the farmer, the 
goose, the fox, and the grain all to the other side of the river? 
The Solution 
The default solution to this age-old puzzle is as follows: 
• The farmer crosses with the goose, leaving the fox and 
the grain. 
• Farmer returns, leaving goose on the other side. 
• Farmer crosses with the fox. 
• Farmer leaves the fox and returns with the goose. 
• Farmer leaves the goose and crosses with the grain. 
• Farmer leaves the fox and the grain, crosses back and 
returns with the goose. 
Bear in mind that the purpose of the exercise is not about 
solving the puzzle; it’s about examining the dynamics of 
each DISC-homogeneous group as they work to solve the 
puzzle.

DISC-Homogeneous Behavior 
185
It’s possible that some clever team members may intro-
duce solutions that others may believe are “against the 
rules.” For example, “Geese can swim, so he keeps the 
goose tied to the boat as he crosses with the fox; then re-
turns for the grain” or “The farmer puts the fox and the 
grain in the boat, and swims with the goose along-side the 
boat.” These revelations may be moments of brilliance to 
some and may be considered cheating by others. 
Again, focus on the behavioral dynamics of each group 
and focus the discussions on why they interacted the way 
they did and how important it is to maintain awareness of 
those behavioral tendencies when functioning as a member 
of a project team. 
DISC-Homogeneous Behavior 
During the previous group exercise, following are some of 
the observations you might make: 
• D Predominant Group: Most competitive; trying to 
work quickly to solve the problem the fastest; loudest; 
multiple people speaking, interrupting one another; 
very happy if they “win.” 
• I Predominant Group: Laughing and having fun; en-
couraging one another; straying off topic; remaining 
positive and optimistic. 
• S Predominant Group: Relatively quiet and calm; sup-
portive of one another; coming up with the solution 
as a team; less concerned with speed or winning. 
• C Predominant Group: Overanalyzing the problem; 
relatively quiet; taking a systematic and academic ap-
proach to solving the problem. 

Chapter 16 Groups and Decisions
186
If you try the exercise with a mixture of behavioral pro-
files, some are likely to be influenced by others, whereas 
others are unlikely to be easily influenced. For example, 
the D’s and I’s will tend to dominate the conversation over 
the S’s and C’s. 
Note that it’s possible that one or more participants 
may know the solution to the puzzle because they’ve seen 
it before. When this occurs, it doesn’t necessarily spoil the 
exercise. It might be interesting to see a D work to con-
vince the other D’s that his/her answer is correct—or to 
see an S not reveal knowing the answer already in order to 
allow the others to experience the enjoyment of solving the 
puzzle. The key to successfully facilitating this exercise is 
to observe all group dynamics keenly and to discuss those 
observations when the puzzle-solving portion of the exer-
cise is   complete. 

187
Appendix
How to Take the DISC 
This appendix provides a free DISC assessment. In each 
row in the DISC Assessment, select the word that describes 
you most. Color in that shape under the M column with 
a pen/pencil. Of the remaining three words, pick the word 
that describes you least and color in that shape with a pen/
pencil under the L column. Picture yourself in a work envi-
ronment. Do not over analyze. You should select whichev-
er word comes to mind as your gut reaction. It should take 
approximately 15–20 minutes to complete all 26 rows. 
For example, in the first row of words, assume you be-
lieve that “daring” describes you most and “accurate” de-
scribes you least, you would color in the shapes as shown 
in Figure A.1.
M
L
M
L
M
L
M
L
accurate
daring
good-humored
even-tempered
Figure A.1 Example taking DISC Assessment 
Please note that this instrument works only if your input 
is a reflection of who you are. That is, do not try and select 
who you “want” to be. Picture yourself at work and be 
honest with who you are. Remember, there are no right 
or wrong answers and no good or bad behavioral profiles. 

Appendix How to Take the DISC
188
The best teams contain a blend of all profiles. So begin fill-
ing in your assessment (see Figure A.2).
M
L
M
L
M
L
M
L
accurate
daring
good-humored
even-tempered
adventurous
dedicated
follower
charismatic
refined
powerful
sociable
tolerant
influential
unassuming
gentle
innovative
outgoing
easily intimidated
aggressive
apprehensive
open minded
welcoming
bold
sensible
cooperative
persistent
attracts  people
sweet
driver
analyzer
team player
influencer
supportive
strong-willed
amenable
cheerful
motivational
obedient
fearless
introverted, shy
thoughtful
submissive
admirable
assertive
precise
candid
even keeled
jovial
giving
dynamic
 disciplined
determined
considerate
joyful
competitive
agrees with others
determined
persuasive
cautious
pleasant
compliant
unbeatable
picky
fun
gutsy
tactful
articulate
content
leader
mentor
doer
harmonizer
tolerates others
self-sufficient
sociable
quiet
hospitable
popular
restless
organized
pioneering
optimistic
respectful
obliging
reserved
conservative
conversational
decision-maker
impatient
agreeable
cooperative
energetic
full of compassion
tolerant
self-assured
forceful
flexible
casual
confrontational
light hearted
at ease
confident
trusting
peaceful
Figure A.2 DISC Assessment 
Next, add up the colored-in shapes in the four M col-
umns and place the totals in Figure A.3. (The total of all 
the numbers should equal 26.) 

189
total: 
26
MOST SHAPES
Figure A.3 Template to enter Most values 
Now add up the colored-in shapes in the four L columns 
and place the totals in Figure A.4. (The total of all the 
numbers should equal 26.) 
total: 
26
LEAST SHAPES
Figure A.4 Template to enter Least values 
Now you are ready to plot your data. Plot the shapes, us-
ing the template in Figure A.7, by coloring in the graph up 
to the number of each shape. For example, if the number 
of Ds in the Most columns add up to 15, take your pencil 
or highlighter and color in the squares from the bottom to 
top until you reach the number 15. Not all numbers are 
listed in the graph, so color to the closest number (or be-
tween the two numbers that are closest to yours). Do this 
for both the Most and Least graphs. For example, assume 
your values are as shown in Figure A.5. 

Appendix How to Take the DISC
190
D
15
I
7
S
1
C
2
-
1
26
MOST SHAPES
D
1
I
3
S
9
C
10
-
3
26
LEAST SHAPES
Figure A.5 Example of DISC results adding up values 
These values would result in the graphs shown in Figure
A.6 for the Adapted (Most) and Natural (Least) behaviors. 
An individual’s dominant behaviors are depicted by the 
elements above the bolded midline. In these graphs, the 
individual’s behavioral profile would be a DI. 

191
22
19
21
17
0
0
0
0
20
14
12
 
 
 
 
9
1
15
8
7
1
1
2
2
7
12
9
 
3
11
6
6
3
2
 
3
5
 
4
 
9
7
5
4
 
 
4
 
4
6
 
3
6
5
4
5
6
6
4
6
4
5
3
3
 
7
3
7
6
2
3
 
8
2
2
10
 
9
8
1
1
2
0
1
0
1
2
1
1
1
3
1
2
1
5
1
0
0
8
1
0
2
0
2
3
2
0
0
D 
I 
S 
C 
D 
I 
S 
C
MOST (Adapted behavior)
LEAST (Natural behavior)
Figure A.6 Example of DISC plotting results 
The template in Figure A.7 should be used to plot your 
results.

Appendix How to Take the DISC
192
20
14
12
 
 
 
 
9
1
15
8
7
1
1
2
2
0
0
0
0
7
3
9
12
11
6
6
3
2
 
3
4
5
9
7
5
4
 
 
4
3
6
4
6
5
4
5
 
6
6
4
6
4
5
3
3
 
 
 
7
7
3
8
6
2
3
9
0
1
2
2
8
1
1
2
0
1
0
1
2
1
1
1
3
1
2
1
5
1
0
0
8
1
0
2
0
2
3
2
0
0
D 
I 
S 
C 
D 
I 
S 
C
MOST (Adapted behavior)
LEAST (Natural behavior)
22
19
21
17
Figure A.7 DISC plotting template 
Note that the preceding exercise yields a simple DISC 
graph for you to depict your dominant behavioral profile. 
See Chapter 2, “Behavior and Individuals,” for details de-
scribing the DISC behavioral profiles, and see Chapter 6,
“Behavior and Teams,” for an explanation of adaptive 
and natural behaviors. We advise that you take a full DISC 

193
assessment from a provider that analyzes and provides ad-
ditional information using all behavioral elements and not 
one that simply provides a DISC graph. In addition to the 
graphs, the results should include detailed text describing 
numerous characteristics of the individual, how best to 
communicate or not   to communicate with the individual, 
and a “wheel” (as described in Chapter 6). You can find 
many DISC providers by simply searching in your favorite 
browser.

This page intentionally left blank 

195
References
“A Theory of Human Motivation,” Psychological Review
50(4) (1943): 370–96. 
Beck, Kent and Mike Beedle, et al., www.agilemanifesto.
org., 2001. 
Buckingham, Marcus, and Donald O. Clifton. Now, Dis-
cover Your Strengths. New York: Free Press, 2001. 
Cockburn, Alistair. Agile Software Development. Boston: 
Addison-Wesley, 2002. 
Galton, Francis, “One Vote, One Value,” Nature, 1907. 
Galton, “Vox Populi,” Nature, 1907. 
Gilbreth, Frank B. and Ernestine Gilbreth Carey. Cheaper
by the Dozen. New York: T.Y. Crowell Co., 1948. 
Golding, William. Lord of the Flies. New York: Coward-
McCann, 1962. 
Hammer, Michael (1990), “Reengineering Work: Don’t 
Automate, Obliterate,” Harvard Business Review, Jul/Aug 
1990, 104–112. 
Exploration: Then and Now—Survival! Lesson at http://
www.nasa.gov/audience/foreducators/topnav/materials/
listbytype/Survival_Lesson.html.

References
196
Landsberger, Henry A. Hawthorne Revisited, Manage-
ment and the Worker: Its Critics, and Developments in 
Human Relations in Industry. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Uni-
versity, 1958. 
Marston, William Moulton. Emotions of Normal People.
London: K. Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co. Ltd.; 1928. 
McGregor, Douglas, and Joel Gershenfeld. The human 
Side of Enterprise. Annotated ed. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 2006. 
Maslow, A.H. Motivation and Personality, Third Edition, 
Harper and Row Publishers, 1987. 
Schwaber, K. “Scrum Development Process,” in OOPSLA 
Business Object Design and Implementation Workshop, 
J. Sutherland, et al., Editors. Springer: London, 1997. 
Senge, Peter M. The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Prac-
tice of the Learning Organization. New York: Doubleday/
Currency, 1990. 
Spranger, Eduard, and Paul John William Pigors. Types
of men: The Psychology and Ethics of Personality. Halle 
(Saale): M. Niemeyer, 1928. 
Stacey, Ralph. Strategic Management and Organisational 
Dynamics, Second Edition. Prentice Hall, 2007. 
Surowiecki, James. The Wisdom of Crowds: Why the 
Many Are Smarter Than The Few. London: Abacus, 2005. 
Takeuchi, Hirotaka, and Nonaka, Ikujiro. “The New New 
Product Development Game.” Harvard Business Review,
January–February 1986. 

197
Taylor, Frederick W. Scientific Management: Comprising 
Shop Management, the Principles of Scientific Manage-
ment, Testimony Before the Special House Committee.
New York: Harper, 1911. 
Treynor, Jack L. “Market Efficiency and the Bean Jar Ex-
periment,” Financial Analysts Journal, May/June 1987, 
Vol. 43, No. 3: 50–53. 
Tuckman, Bruce (1965). “Developmental Sequence in 
Small Groups.” Psychological Bulletin 63(6): 384–99. 
Reprinted with permission in Group Facilitation, Spring 
2001.

This page intentionally left blank 

199
Index
A
The Abelson Group, 90, 
121, 168
ambiguity in communication, 
49-50
adapting communication styles, 
19-20
aesthetic motivator, 117, 119
Agile Manifesto, xv, 14
Agile Software Development, xvi
Allen, Carlton, 158
anarchy, authority versus, 30
Apollo 13 example (team self-
organization), 25-26
assessments, DISC, 22-23,
187-193
authority, anarchy versus, 30
average values, 74-77
B
BalderDISC exercise, 163-168
facilitation of, 165-166
materials needed, 164
post-exercise discussion,
166-167
setup for, 164-165
behaviors. See teams, 
behaviors
blocking, avoiding in 
conversations, 60-61
body language 
cues in, 50-52
cultural awareness, 53
eye contact, 48-49
reflecting, 54
BPR (Business Process 
Reengineering), 5 
Bridge exercise, 145-149
facilitation of, 147-148
materials needed, 131, 146
post-exercise discussion, 148-
149
setup for, 146
Buckingham, Marcus, 28, 122,
125
business analyst, 87
Business Process 
Reengineering (BPR), 5
C
C (critical thinker) 
communication strategies, 21
communication tendencies, 71
defined, 16-17
DISC-homogeneous
behavior, 185
Castaway (film), 44
catalysts for change, 108-109
certainty, defined, 34
change
difficulty of, 99-102
resistance to 
change coaches for 
overcoming, 107

200 
Index
email adoption example, 
97-99
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs 
and, 103-107
music industry example, 
109-110
origins of conventional 
processes, 111-113
positive and negative role 
models, 108-109
school calendar example, 
110-111
silence example, 102-103
Change exercise, 175-181
facilitation of, 178-179
post-exercise discussion,
179-181
setup for, 176-178
chaos zone (Stacey’s Zone of 
Complexity model), 37-38
coaches for overcoming change 
resistance, 107
Cockburn, Alistair, xvi
collaboration
attitudes about, 73-74
Concordance/Discordance
Assessment exercise,
169-173
facilitation of, 170-171
materials needed, 169
post-exercise discussion, 
171-173
setup for, 170
conflict, role of, 85-88
in conversations, 57-69
feigning ignorance, 63-64
grammar usage, 68-69
improvisational theater 
practices, 59
latency, 65-67
levels of communication, 
58-59
silence, 64-65
Socratic questions, 62-63
group decision making, 79-80
group influence on behavior, 
80-83
group survival, 77-78
Groups and Decisions exercise, 
183-186
DISC-homogeneous behavior, 
185-186
setup for, 183-185
individual decision making, 79
Moon Survival exercise,
77-78, 151-162
expert analysis, 158-162
facilitation of, 152-153
materials needed, 132
Moon Survival Scenario 
worksheet, 155-157
post-exercise discussion, 
153-154
setup for, 152
problem solving versus 
decision making, 78
sundae-making example, 83-84
Vox Populi (mean/median 
values), 74-77
collaborative interactions, 59
command-and-control
management, 123-124

Index 
201
communication
ambiguity in, 49-50
body language, 50-52
collaboration in, 57-69
feigning ignorance, 63-64
grammar usage, 68-69
improvisational theater 
practices, 59
latency, 65-67
levels of communication, 
58-59
silence, 64-65
Socratic questions, 62-63
cultural awareness, 53
DISC behavioral tendencies in, 
69-71
empathy in, 46-47
eye contact, 48-49
language choices in, 45-46
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, 
43-44
Origami exercise, 139-143
facilitation of, 141
materials needed,
132, 140
post-exercise discussion, 142
setup for, 140-141
reflecting body language, 54
small talk, 54-57
communication framework.
See DISC 
complexity zone (Stacey’s Zone 
of Complexity model), 
38-40
Concordance/Discordance
Assessment exercise,
169-173
facilitation of, 170-171
materials needed, 169
post-exercise discussion,
171-173
setup for, 170
conflict in teams 
DISC behavior wheel, 89-92
creating “dream team,” 
92-95
organizational culture, 95
handling, 33-40
role of, 85-88
conformant teams 
Concordance/Discordance
Assessment exercise,
169-173
facilitation of, 170-171
materials needed, 169
post-exercise discussion, 
171-173
setup for, 170
discordant teams versus, 80-83
continuous improvement in self-
organization, 27-28
conventional processes, origins 
of, 111-113
conversations, 58. See also 
communication
critical thinker. See C (critical 
thinker)
cues in body language, 50-52
cultural awareness, 53
culture. See organizational 
culture
Curb Your Enthusiasm
(television program), 59

Index
202 
D
D (dominator) 
communication strategies, 21
communication tendencies, 69
defined, 16
DISC-homogeneous
behavior, 185
decision making 
group influence on behavior, 
80-83
by groups, 79-80
handling conflict during, 33-40
by individuals, 79
problem solving versus, 78
delay. See latency in collabora-
tive conversation 
diametrically opposing forces, 
role of, 85-88
DISC, 4
assessments, 22-23, 187 -193
attitudes about collabora-
tion, 73-74
BalderDISC exercise,
163-168
facilitation of, 165-166
materials needed, 164
post-exercise discussion, 
166-168
setup for, 164-165
communication tendencies, 
69-71
complexity zone (Stacey’s 
Zone of Complexity model), 
effect on, 39-40
defined, 15-17
in group decision making, 
79-80
Groups and Decisions exercise, 
183-186
DISC-homogeneous
behavior, 185-186
setup for, 183-185
history of, 15
importance of, 17-21
communication differences 
among DISC types, 19-20
communication strategies, 21
language of DISC, usage 
examples, 20-21
understanding others, 17-18
in individual decision 
making, 79
team behavior wheel, 89-92
creating “dream team,” 
92-95
organizational culture, 95
DISC-homogeneous behavior, 
185-186
discordant teams 
Concordance/Discordance
Assessment exercise,
169-173
facilitation of, 170-171
materials needed, 169
post-exercise discussion, 
171-173
setup for, 170
conformant teams versus, 
80-83
dominator. See D (dominator) 
“dream team,” creating, 92-95

Index 
203
E
economic motivator, 116, 119
efficiency experts, 3
email adoption example (resist-
ance to change), 97-99
The Emotions of Normal People
(Marston), 15
empathy in communication, 
46-47
empowered teams, 27, 6
esteem needs, resistance to 
change and, 105
exercises. See workshops 
eye contact, 48-49
F
facilitated discussions, 58
fear of change. See resistance to 
change
feigning ignorance in collabora-
tive conversation, 63-64
Felps, William, 108
first-person versus third-
person usage, 68-69
The Five Dysfunctions of a Team
(Lencioni), 123
folded arms (body language), 
51-52
Forming stage (team 
maturity), 31
G
Galton, Francis, 74-76
Gantt, Henry, 112
Gantt charts, 111-113
gaps in teams, filling, 94-95
gestures. See body language 
Gilbreth, Franklin and 
Lillian, 3
grammar usage in collaborative 
conversation, 68-69
grass roots resistance to change, 
110-111
group decision making, 79-80
group influence on behavior, 
80-83
group survival, 77-78
groups. See teams 
Groups and Decisions exercise, 
183-186
DISC-homogeneous behavior, 
185-186
setup for, 183-185
groupthink, 37
Gruener, John, 158
H
Hammer, Michael, 5
Hawthorne Works , 4 
high agreement, high certainty 
zone (Stacey’s Zone of 
Complexity model),
34-35
high agreement, low certainty 
zone (Stacey’s Zone of 
Complexity model),
36-37
Hippocrates, 15
history
of DISC, 15
of organizational behavior ,
2-6

Index
204 
I
I (influencer) 
communication strategies, 21
communication tendencies, 70
defined, 16
DISC-homogeneous
behavior, 185
ignorance, feigning in collabora-
tive conversation, 63-64
improvisational theater practices 
in collaborative 
conversation, 59
individual decision making, 79
individualistic motivator,
117, 119
influencer. See I (influencer) 
The Invention of Lying (film), 55
L
language choices in 
communication, 45-46
language of DISC, usage 
examples, 20-21
Larman, Craig, 15
latency in collaborative 
conversation, 65-67
leadership in command-and-
control environment,
123-124
Lencioni, Patrick M., 123
Lord of the Flies (Golding), 30
love/belonging needs, resistance 
to change and, 105
low agreement, high certainty 
zone (Stacey’s Zone of 
Complexity model), 35-36
low agreement, low certainty 
zone (Stacey’s Zone of 
Complexity model),
37-38
M
Marston, William Moulton, 15
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, 4,
43-44
resistance to change and,
103-107
esteem needs, 105
love/belonging needs, 105
physiological needs,
106-107
safety needs, 106
self-actualization needs, 104
maturing stages of teams, 30-33
McGregor, Douglas, 4
mean values, 74-77
median values, 74-77
Mercator, Gerardus, 99
Mercator projection maps,
99-100
Microsoft Office 2007, 101
Moon Survival exercise,
77-78, 151-162
expert analysis, 158-162
facilitation of, 152-153
materials needed, 132
Moon Survival Scenario 
worksheet, 155-157

Index 
205
post-exercise discussion,
153-154
setup for, 152
Moon Survival Scenario 
worksheet, 155-157
motivation
command-and-control
management, 123-124
leveraging strengths, 122
strategies for, 119
workplace motivators,
115-118
aesthetic, 117
example of, 119-120
importance of, 118
individualistic/political, 117
motivation wheel, 120-121
social, 117
theoretical, 116
traditional/regulatory, 117
utilitarian/economic, 116
multifunctional teams in self-
organization, 28
music industry example (resist-
ance to change), 109-110
N
NASA, Moon Survival exercise, 
77-78, 158-162
negative role models in resistance 
to change, 108-109
Nonaka, Ikujuir, 26
nonverbal communication.
See body language 
Norming stage (team 
maturity), 31
Now, Discover Your Strengths
(Buckingham), 28, 122, 125
O
“One Vote, One Value” 
(Galton), 75
oral communication.
See communication 
organizational behavior, history 
of, 2 -6
organizational culture, 95
organizational transformation , 6 
organizations as machines, 
history of organizational 
behavior, 4 -6
Origami exercise, 139-143
facilitation of, 141
materials needed, 132, 140
post-exercise discussion, 142
setup for, 140-141
origins of conventional processes, 
111-113
Othello (Shakespeare), 50
P
people as emotional beings, 
history of organizational 
behavior, 3 -4
people as machines, history of 
organizational behavior , 3 
Performing stage (team 
maturity), 32
physiological needs, resistance to 
change and, 106-107

206 
Index
plural versus singular usage, 
68-69
political motivator, 117, 119
positive role models as change 
catalysts, 108-109
power of many, 77-78
problem solving, decision making 
versus, 78
psychological inventories, 4
Ptolemy, 100-101
Q
questions, avoiding in 
conversations, 61-62
R
reflecting body language, 54
regulatory motivator, 117, 119
requirements for self-
organization, 26-28
resistance to change 
change coaches for 
overcoming, 107
email adoption example, 97-99
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs 
and, 103-107
esteem needs, 105
love/belonging needs, 105
physiological needs, 106-107
safety needs, 106
self-actualization needs, 104
music industry example, 
109-110
origins of conventional 
processes, 111-113
positive and negative role 
models, 108-109
reasons for difficulty of,
99-102
school calendar example,
110-111
silence example, 102-103
resources for information 
Agile Manifesto, 14
“Developmental sequence in 
small groups” 
(Tuckman), 33
The Five Dysfunctions of a 
Team (Lencioni), 123
“Groupthink” (Whyte), 37
Lord of the Flies (Golding), 30
“Market Efficiency and the 
Bean Jar Experiment” 
(Treynor), 76
Now, Discover Your Strengths 
(Buckingham), 28, 122
“One Vote, One Value” 
(Galton), 75
Strategic Management and 
Organisational Dynamics
(Stacey), 34
The New New Product Devel-
opment Game (Takeuichi 
and Nonaka), 26
Types of Men: The Psychology 
and Ethics of Personality
(Spranger), 116
The Wisdom of Crowds 
(Surowiecki), 76

Index 
207
S
S (supporter) 
communication strategies, 21
communication tendencies, 70
defined, 16
DISC-homogeneous
behavior, 185
safety needs, resistance to change 
and, 106
schedules, team dynamics 
workshop, 132-137
school calendar example (resist-
ance to change), 110-111
Scientific Management,   2 
self-actualization needs, resist-
ance to change and, 104
self-organization
anarchy versus authority, 30
Apollo 13 example, 25-26
conflict, handling, 33-40
maturing stages of teams, 
30-33
requirements for, 26-28
strengths, capitalizing on, 
26-28
team dynamics, role in, 39-40
Senge, Peter, 5
silence
in collaborative conversation, 
64-65
resistance to change example, 
102-103
singular versus plural usage, 
68-69
small talk, 54-57
social motivator, 117, 119
sociological needs, resistance to 
change and, 105
sociology of organizations, 
history of , 2 -6
Socratic questions in collabora-
tive conversation, 62-63
speeches, 58
Stacey, Ralph, 33-34
Stacey’s Zone of Complexity 
model, 33
complexity zone, 38-40
high agreement, high 
certainty, 34-35
high agreement, low 
certainty, 36-37
low agreement, high 
certainty, 35-36
low agreement, low certainty, 
37-38
Storming stage (team 
maturity), 31
S-T-O-W technique, 179-181
strengths
capitalizing on, 26-28
leveraging in motivation, 122
stress, behavior during, 94
stretch goals, 26-27
Sullivan, Maureen, 50
sundae-making example 
(collaboration), 83-84
supporter. See S (supporter) 
Surowiecki, James, 76-77
sympathy, empathy versus, 46-47

Index
208 
T
Takeuchi, Hirtaka, 26
Taylor, Frederick, 2-3
team dynamics , 25, 129
Bridge exercise, 145-149
facilitation of, 147-148
materials needed, 131, 146
post-exercise discussion, 
148-149
setup for, 146
Groups and Decisions exercise, 
183-186
DISC-homogeneous
behavior, 185-186
setup for, 183-185
role in self-organization, 39-40
workshop, 129-137
preparation for, 129-132
schedule for, 132-137
teams
behaviors
BalderDISC exercise,
163-168
creating “dream team,” 
92-95
DISC behavior wheel, 89-92
organizational culture, 95
collaboration
attitudes about, 73-74
conflict, role of, 85-88
group decision making, 
79-80
group influence on behavior, 
80-83
group survival, 77-78
individual decision 
making, 79
problem solving versus 
decision making, 78
sundae-making example, 
83-84
Vox Populi (mean/median 
values), 74-77
communication.
See communication 
communication framework.
See DISC 
motivation. See motivation 
self-organization
anarchy versus authority, 30
Apollo 13 example, 25-26
conflict, handling, 33-40
maturing stages, 30-33
requirements for, 26-28
strengths, capitalizing on, 
28-29
team dynamics, role in,
39-40
theoretical motivator, 116, 119
Theory X managers , 4 
Theory Y managers, 4
third-person versus first-person 
usage, 68-69
traditional motivator, 117, 119
transformation of 
organizations, 6 
Treynor, Jack, 76
Tuckman model (team maturity 
stages), 30-33

Index 
209
U
understanding others with DISC 
framework, 17-18
utilitarian motivator, 116, 119
V
“Vox Populi” (Galton), 74
W
Walton, Bill, 92
wheel (team behaviors), 89-92
BalderDISC exercise, 168
wheel (workplace motivation), 
120-121
Whose Line Is it Anyway?
(television program), 59
The Wisdom of Crowds 
(Surowiecki), 77
workplace motivators, 115-118
aesthetic, 117
example of, 119-120
importance of, 118
individualistic/political, 117
motivation wheel, 120-121
social, 117
theoretical, 116
traditional/regulatory, 117
utilitarian/economic, 116
workshops
BalderDISC exercise, 163-168
facilitation of, 165-166
materials needed, 164
post-exercise discussion, 
166-167
setup for, 164-165
Bridge exercise, 145-149
facilitation of, 147-148
materials needed, 131, 146
post-exercise discussion, 
148-149
setup for, 146
Change exercise, 113-114,
175-181
facilitation of, 178-179
post-exercise discussion, 
179-181
setup for, 176-178
Concordance/Discordance
Assessment exercise,
169-173
facilitation of, 170-171
materials needed, 169
post-exercise discussion, 
171-173
setup for, 170
Groups and Decisions exercise, 
183-186
DISC-homogeneous
behavior, 185-186
setup for, 183-185
materials needed, 125,
131-132
Moon Survival exercise,
77-78, 151-162
expert analysis, 158-162
facilitation of, 152-153
materials needed, 132
Moon Survival Scenario 
worksheet, 155-157
post-exercise discussion, 
153-154
setup for, 152

Index
210 
Origami exercise, 139-143
facilitation of, 141
materials needed, 132, 140
post-exercise discussion, 142
setup for, 140-141
team dynamics workshop, 
129-137
preparation for, 129-132
schedule for, 132-137
Y
“Yes, and...” in collaborative 
conversation, 60
yin and yang, 85

This page intentionally left blank 

