

Photographs by Michael Freeman
Essays by Alistair Shearer
India
LAND OF LIVING TRADITIONS

Published by Periplus Editions with editorial offices at 364 Innovation Drive, North
Clarendon, Vermont 05759 U.S.A and 61 Tai Seng Avenue, #02-12, Singapore 534167 
Text copyright © 2008 Periplus Editions (HK) Ltd.
Photographs copyright © 2008 by MichaelFreeman
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or utilized in any form or
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any infor-
mation storage and retrieval system, without prior written permission from the publisher.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2008927101
Distributed by
North America, Latin America and Europe  
Tuttle Publishing 
364 Innovation Drive, North Clarendon, VT 05759-9436, USA 
Tel: 1 (802) 773-8930; Fax: 1 (802) 773-6993
info@tuttlepublishing.com
www.tuttlepublishing.com
Japan
Tuttle Publishing
Yaekari Building, 3rd Floor; 5-4-12 Osaki
Shinagawa-ku; Tokyo 141 0032
Tel: (81) 03 5437-0171; Fax: (81) 03 5437-0755
tuttle-sales@gol.com
Asia Pacific  
Berkeley Books Pte. Ltd. 
61 Tai Seng Avenue #02-12, Singapore 534167 
Tel: (65) 6280-1330; Fax: (65) 6280-6290
inquiries@periplus.com.sg
www.periplus.com.sg
Printed in Malaysia
12  11  10  09  08
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
Front endpaper: A modern mural on the walls of the Udaivlas resort in Udaipur
depicts in the traditional Rajasthani style a procession led by oxen.
Back endpaper: A detail of pietra dura at the Taj Mahal, Agra.
Right: A painter in Cochin continues the Indian tradition of giant hand-painted
posters, this one advertising perfume.
Opposite: In the foothills of the Himalayas, yoga classes take place in the open pavil-
ion of a palace in Rishikesh.
ISBN: 978-1-4629-0923-0 (ebook)

Introduction
Land and People
History
Religion and Ritual
Architecture
Arts and Crafts
Visiting India
4
16
34
50
64
74
86
C o n t e n t s

“The sole country under the sun that is endowed with
imperishable interest…the one land all men desire to see,
and having seen once, by even a glimpse, would not give
that glimpse for the shows of all the rest of the globe
combined.”
—Mark Twain, ninteenth-century
American writer and traveller.
Introduction

I
ndia is not just another country—it is an extraordinary adventure. Nowhere else has the same power to ravage the senses, strain the credi-
bility, expand the mind and open the heart as this teeming kaleidoscope of seeming contradictions, a land full of contrasts as legion as they
are legendary. It is the living museum of the human mind; to journey here is to time travel among sights, beliefs and practices that have long
since disappeared elsewhere. Nothing is hidden in India. She is the land of dreams and tales, where travelling storytellers still mesmerize their
village audiences, yet she is simultaneously the world’s biggest inventor of sophisticated computer software. A fabulous, ancient and stately
civilisation, where respected feudal rulers still live in palaces and millions hold the cow sacred, India somehow manages to be the world’s
largest democracy, which, while only 52 per cent literate, contains the world’s second largest pool of trained scientists and engineers. 
Everywhere one looks in India, time-hallowed tradition meets the twenty-first century head-on in a dizzying cocktail of intense impres-
sions. Peacocks sit imperiously atop satellite dishes; elephants and cows cause good-natured traffic jams; processions of naked ascetics amble

6
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
past crowded cybercafes. All humanity seems to be on the move on
India’s roads, where the latest Mercedes jostles with wooden bullock-
carts designed five thousand years ago and painted trucks, vertigi-
nously laden, lurch past brilliant swathes of cotton, silk and chillies
spread out to dry in the scorching sun beneath impossible tangles of
telephone wires. The city streets, sizzling with entrepreneurial energy,
are packed with people, yet beyond the cities lie the somnolent villages
where seven out of every ten Indians live and time hangs suspended;
beyond them again stretch tranquil forests and silent deserts where wild
animals still reign.
India’s uniqueness has attracted adventurers—merchants, poets,
artists—for millennia; today’s tourists are merely the latest wave of visi-
tors to stand and marvel. This is a civilisation that has suffered and
absorbed innumerable foreign conquests, creating a a richly variegated
tapestry of peoples and traditions, yet it is today facing perhaps the
greatest threat to its survival. For traditionally India—and this is part of
her fascination—has stood for values that are very different to those of
the modern, secular West. She has believed that humanity is inextrica-
bly part of nature, not merely its exploiter; that human communities—
family, tribe, caste—have enduring value, not just their individual mem-
bers; that the worlds of the imagination, the hidden realms of gods,
myths and magic, are just as real as the daylight world of history and
science. Above all she has taught that we should lead a tolerant and bal-
anced life in rhythms well-established, the goal of which is not merely
to accumulate money, power and things, but to find God. In the brave
new world of globalisation and the Internet, what is unique in India
may not survive for long, yet it may be that she has things to teach us. 
Scenes from the annual parade of painted elephants, just before the festival of
Holi in the city of Jaipur.

7
I N T R O D U C T I O N


9
I N T R O D U C T I O N
Left: Man Mandir Palace, Gwalior. Built between 1486 and 1517 by
Raja Mansingh, the palace dominates Gwalior Fort, which stands on a
steep mass of sandstone overlooking the city.
Above: Cut into the sandstone cliffs below Gwalior Fort are a series of
Jain statues.These are in the best-preserved southeast group.

10
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S

11
I N T R O D U C T I O N
Opposite, top and above: The backwaters of Kerala, a labyrinth of canals surround-
ing Lake Vembanand. Many of the original rice barges known as kettuvallams (top)
have been converted into houseboats.Village life (above) nevertheless continues,
despite the growth of tourism.
Top: A misty sunrise over harvested rice fields in the southern state of Tamil Nadu.
Above: Farmers winnowing rice during the harvest following the monsoon rains in a
village near Mamallapuram, south of Chennai.

12
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
Fatehpur Sikri,‘the City of Victory,’ was built by the Mughal emperor Akbar in 15 years, starting in about 1569. Sheikh Salim Chishti’s white
marble mausoleum is the jewel of the courtyard of the Friday Mosque.

13
I N T R O D U C T I O N
The tomb of Itmad-ud-Daulah was built on the banks of the Yamuna River in Agra between 1622 and 1625. It includes many design fea-
tures that were later used in the construction of the nearby Taj Mahal.

14
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
The Taj Hotel in Mumbai is one of the city’s enduring landmarks. Built in 1903, it was the first modern hotel in
the city, then known as Bombay.

15
I N T R O D U C T I O N
The Gateway of India, seen from the upper floors of the Taj Hotel, was completed in 1928 to celebrate
the arrival of King George V and Queen Mary.

“Though outwardly there was diversity and
infinite variety among our people, every-
where there was that tremendous impress
of oneness, which had held all of us
together for ages…some kind of a dream
of unity has occupied the mind of India
since the dawn of civilisation.”
—Jawaharlal Nehru, first prime minister of
independent India.
Land and People

17
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
I
ndia is vast. The world’s seventh largest country, her landmass is over 3.28 million square kilometres (1.26 million square miles), an area as large
and varied as Europe. Her coastlines run 5,650 kilometres (3,533 miles) and her frontiers with neighbours extend an astonishing 15,168 kilome-
tres (9,425 miles). From the state of Jammu and Kashmir, her northern border with China, to her southern tip at Kanniyakumari (‘the Abode of the
Virgin Goddess’), the subcontinent stretches from 38 degrees north latitude, well above the Tropic of Cancer, to just 7 degrees above the equator.
Within this span lies every type of physical terrain. To the north rise the mighty Himalayas (hima meaning ‘snow’; laya meaning ‘abode’),
the world’s highest mountain range and the largest area covered by snow and ice outside of the poles. The many Himalayan valleys flow with
sparkling rivers and are clothed with flowers and forests of pine, juniper, deodar and silver birch, while lush thickets of banana and rustling

18
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S

19
L A N D
A N D
P E O P L E
Page 17: Mehrangarh Fort, founded in 1459, stands on a
150-metre (165-foot) hill overlooking and dominating the
Rajasthani city of Jodhpur. In the foreground is the Jaswant
Thada, a cluster of royal cenotaphs in white marble built in
1899 in memory of Maharaja Jaswant Singh I.
Above: A Sikh temple guardian, or nihang, at the Golden
Temple, Amritsar.
Above: A young Sikh girl during the annual procession
of the Granth Sahib (the Sikh sacred book kept in the
Golden Temple) around Amritsar.
Opposite: A group of tribal women from a village on
the edge of the Thar desert in Rajasthan walk to the
local well in the late afternoon to draw water.
Above: A Rajasthani woman drawing water from a
desert well close to Khuri village, near Jaisalmer.

20
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
Village life in Rajasthan. Left: A painted doorway to a farm in Khuri.
Above: A turbaned man at the weekly market in Agolai, near Jodhpur.
Opposite: A calf in Khuri village, near Jaisalmer.

21
L A N D
A N D
P E O P L E

22
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
bamboo cover the foothills, where temperate zones are swathed in
rhododendron, sal, oak, maple and birch. The western foothills trail
off into the well-irrigated and prosperous Punjab, India’s wheat bas-
ket and where the ‘green revolution’ took off in the 1960s. Further
south stretches the Great Thar desert, covering the states of Western
Rajasthan and Kutch—and 8 per cent of the country’s surface—in
sand dunes and rocky outcrops. To the east unfolds the lush alluvial
plain of the River Ganges, the most densely populated area on
earth. The Ganges meets her sister the Brahmaputra to enter the Bay
of Bengal in a marshy delta lying below sea level, where mangrove
forests spawn a wide variety of exotic flora and fauna.
India’s great triangular central plateau, known as the Deccan,
descends to the sea through low hills known as the Western and
Eastern Ghats, which give way to thin coastal strips bordering the
Arabian Sea to the west and the Bay of Bengal to the east. The
Deccan, with geological strata several hundred million years old,
is considered the oldest part of the country; coal, diamonds and
gold are mined here. Finally converging towards the subconti-
nent’s tip, the Ghats form the Nilgiri Hills, where much tea is
grown. Below are India’s two southernmost states, Kerala and
Tamil Nadu, distant in everything but location. Kerala, on the
western seaboard, is the verdant spice garden that first lured
traders to India and has a polyglot culture shaped by Arab,
Roman, Chinese, Dutch, British and Marxist influences. A rela-
tively modernised state, her Christian community, a fourth of her
Left:The Darjeeling Himalayan Railway, nicknamed ‘the toy train’, is a narrow-
gauge line serving the famous hill station in West Bengal from the town of
Siliguri.
Opposite: Leaves being picked on the terraces of a tea plantation near
Coonoor in the southern state of Tamil Nadu.

23
L A N D
A N D
P E O P L E

24
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S

25
L A N D
A N D
P E O P L E
population, is the oldest outside of Israel and her 99 per cent lit-
eracy rate is five per cent higher than America’s. To the east, Tamil
Nadu is a bastion of traditional Hindu civilisation, boasting mag-
nificent medieval temple-cities—treasure houses of art, culture and
arcane ritual—rising like exotic carved islands from glittering
emerald seas of paddy.
India’s climate is as varied at her topography. A spectacular
example: in 1969 most of Rajasthan had been without rain for 13
years, while parts of Assam, about 1,609 kilometres (1,000 miles)
to the east, had no less than 21 metres (69 feet). The north and
central regions enjoy four seasons. Winter (December–March),
with sunny days and cool nights, is the best time to travel; spring
(April–June), when the pre-monsoon tension builds up oppres-
sively and temperatures can reach a gasping 50˚C (122˚F);
Summer (June–September), when the monsoons finally break
and the parched country enjoys an obligatory bath, followed by a
brief autumn (September–November) sprinkled with fresh green
shoots fanned by warm breezes. At this time a second monsoon
begins to blow across southern India from the northeast, bringing
rains that make this the greenest part of the subcontinent.
Nowadays, however, global climatic changes make the monsoon
increasingly unpredictable. This irregularity, coupled with the
effects of widespread deforestation in most of the hill areas, leads
to swings of drought and flood that can devastate the lives of mil-
lions. India is no stranger to Mother Nature’s fickleness, and the
Left: A small traditional boat known as a shikara floats on Lake Dal in
Kashmir, close to the capital Srinagar.
Opposite: An Indian farmer near Mysore leads his cow down to the river
to bathe on a misty morning.

26
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
Left, top: A Bengali priest, centre, instructs the garlanded couple at a wed-
ding ceremony in Kolkata.
Left: Male guests wearing distinctive local costumes that include a sash and
decorative dagger at another wedding, this time in Coorg (Kodagu) in
Karnataka’s Western Ghats.
Opposite: A woman at the Mysore temple of Venugopalaswamy dons a
sari.
Far opposite: Marigolds, used extensively for garlands throughout India, for
sale at a flower market in Jaipur.
resultant fragility of life has been deeply etched onto the Indian
psyche during the nation’s long history.
Throughout this enormous terrain is spread the world’s sec-
ond largest population, over one billion people and increasing by
more than 14 million each year. They come in every conceivable
hue of skin and cut of feature, and between them speak no less
than 17 major languages (each as different as the major European
languages), 18 minor ones (each with its own script, grammar
and cultural associations) and over 20,000 distinct dialects. Such
linguistic variety poses daunting problems: even Hindi, the
national language, is understood by less than half the country.
This richly differentiated people—which includes almost 70
million tribals, some of whom still live at Stone-Age level—is dis-
tributed between 26 semi-autonomous states and seven union
territories. While each has its distinct traditions, dress, customs
and cuisine, all owe allegiance to the central government at Delhi.
Ramshackle as this super-pluralist democracy may be as it
lurches periodically from crisis to crisis, it continues on, sometimes
surprising in a typically Indian way. Kerala, for example, was the
first place in the world to freely elect a communist government,
throw it out, and then re-elect it—all by fair ballot. Though the
strains at the edges threaten to erupt, somehow the centre does
hold, and ‘Unity in diversity’ has long been India’s proud motto. 

27
L A N D
A N D
P E O P L E


29
L A N D
A N D
P E O P L E
A misty morning near Manikarnika Ghat,Varanasi. Built on the banks of the sacred
River Ganges (Ganga),Varanasi, also known as Banaras, Kashi, and ‘the City of Light’, is
the world’s oldest continuously inhabited city, ancient even at the time of the Buddha.

30
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
Close to Allahabad, the confluence of the Ganges,Yamuna and Saraswati rivers is popularly known as Triveni Sangam. Its
sandbanks are a constant attraction for bathing pilgrims.

31
L A N D
A N D
P E O P L E
Sunrise attracts scores of ritual bathers beneath the Howrah Bridge, further down the Ganges in Kolkata.
Following page: Lake Pichola in the city of Udaipur.The white artificial island is the famous Lake Palace Hotel, built as a summer
palace in the seventeenth century by the ruler Jagat Singh. Facing it to the right is the City Palace.



History
“All the convergent influences of the
world run through this society:
Hindu, Muslim, Christian, secular;
Stalinist, liberal, Maoist, democratic
socialist, Gandhian. There is not a
thought that is being thought in the
West or East that is not active in
some Indian mind.”
—E.P. Thompson, twentieth-century
English historian.

A
s a glance at the map makes clear, India’s history is her geography. Her funnel-shaped landmass is closed by an impenetrable 2,897 kilometre
(1,800 mile) mountain chain to the northeast, surrounded by water to the south, west and east, and open only on its northwest flank. It is this
penetrable northwest frontier that has provided the route for overland foreign invaders from earliest times, each influx creating its own place in the
highly variegated mosaic that is India.
Although much early Indian history is far from certain, the first invaders we know of were the Aryans, pastoral nomads from the central Asian
steppes, who entered the subcontinent in a series of waves starting in about 2000 BC. They brought with them many features of what was later to
become the religion we call Hinduism—the sacred language of Sanskrit, esoteric rituals, reverence for the cow, the caste system and the Vedas, scrip-
tures the orthodox Hindu continues to hold in the highest esteem. The Aryans (meaing ‘noble’) settled across North India, especially along the fertile

36
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
Gangetic plain. The light-skinned Aryans were of very different eth-
nic stock to the indigenous people they met. Among these were the
members of the highly sophisticated Indus Valley civilisation. In
existence for perhaps 1,500 years, this civilisation had traded with
ancient Mesopotamia and built astonishingly well-organized cities
such as Harappa and Mohenjodaro, as well as more than one hun-
dred other settlements. Another important group was the
Dravidians—smaller, darker people who had also formed an ancient
culture and are now found predominantly in southern India.
The basis of much of modern India can be explained as a mix-
ture of these initial civilisations, but decisive as the Aryan invasion
was, it was only the first of many that streamed through the Khyber
Pass. Next came the Persians, under such famous warrior-leaders as
Cyrus and Darius (521–485 BC), who the brought formative ideas
such as sun worship and the divinity of the monarch. Alexander the
Great reached the Indus in 328 BC and, according to legend, met a
speaking tree that prophesied not only that he would never conquer
India, but also that he would never see his homeland again. The tree
was right: he died travelling back to Greece to collect more troops for
an invasion. Though he never conquered the country, he left behind
him artists and sculptors who introduced Greek artistic ideals that
flowered in the Buddhist art of the Gandhara school, located in the
Hellenic province of Bactria, in what is now northern Afghanistan
and Pakistan. 
Previous page: The cave paintings at Ajanta, dating to the fifth and sixth
centuries AD, are considered masterpieces of Buddhist religious art.
Right: Kailash temple, Ellora, is arguably the greatest rock-cut temple in the
world. It was commissioned around AD 760 by the Rashtrakuta king
Krishna I, and carved beginning at the top.

37
H I S T O R Y

38
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
The main resistance to Greek incursions was offered by the
powerful Magadha kingdom, ruled most notably by Chandragupta,
who ascended the throne in 320 BC. Around this time in the coun-
try’s northeast, the egalitarian teachings of the Buddha (died c. 450
BC) were exerting a tremendous influence on the development of
Indian society. Buddhism was consolidated by the conversion and
patronage of Chandragupta’s grandson, Ashoka (269–232 BC)—ruler
of the Mauryan Empire—and its civilising influence persisted until
the arrival of the Muslims over one thousand years later.
Other invaders followed—Scythians and Parthians from Persia,
Kushanas and White Huns from Central Asia—but this turmoil
did not prevent the flourishing of the remarkable Gupta dynasty in
eastern India, ruled by Chandragupta and his son Samudragupta
(third to fourth centuries AD), who generously patronized religion,
art and learning to create a golden age of Indian civilisation.
The most profound impact on India’s history came from Islam’s
arival. First were peaceful Arab traders who landed on the west
coast as early as the seventh century AD, followed by a series of raids
by assorted freebooters lured by tales of the fabulous riches of the
Indian courts. The most ruthless was an Afghan named Mahmud of
Ghazni, who invaded India no fewer than 17 times between 1000
and 1027. Mahmud devastated much of North India, destroying
temples and looting cities wherever he went, but he did patronize
Islamic culture—the great poet Firdausi and the famous historian al-
Biruni were part of his court. Then in 1192 came the consolidation
Built by the Mughal emperor Akbar, Fatehpur Sikri was abandoned by
1584, within years of its completion. Its style is Indo-Islamic—a fusion of
native Indian and imported Islamic. Left: The Diwan-i Khass, or ‘private
audience hall’. Opposite: The Astrologer’s Seat.

39
H I S T O R Y

40
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S

41
H I S T O R Y
Right: A fusion of Persian, Central Asian and Islamic architecture, the Taj
Mahal houses the tombs of Shah Jahan and his wife Mumtaz Mahal.
Opposite: The Taj Mahal’s symmetry is emphasised by the long reflecting
pool in front.
of Islamic influence. An Afghan named Muhammad of Ghor took
the Punjab and then Delhi, and Islam had come to stay. The Hindu
kingdoms were disunited, and according to caste rules only the
warrior groups were able to fight. Moreover, the Muslims had
archers and, most importantly, the horse, while traditional Indian
armies relied on the powerful but cumbersome elephant and foot
soldiers armed with lances and swords. The Turk, Afghan or
Mongol was often bigger than his opponent; this advantage of size,
in the service of crusaders’ zeal and plunderers’ greed, made them
unstoppable.
A series of Islamic sultanates, with Delhi as their capital, ruled
the north until the decisive establishment of the Mughal dynasty
in 1526. Through a succession of 6 great rulers, the Mughals gave
much of North India its recognizable face. Humayun (1530–1556)
introduced Persian influences—music, poetry, delicate floral motifs
in art, soaring domes and elegant arches in architecture—and
Persian replaced Sanskrit as the language of the imperial court. His
son Akbar (1556–1605), the greatest of the Mughal emperors, was
unstinting in his patronage of artists, scholars and clerics, tolerantly
supporting all religions and bequeathing to his son Jahangir
(1605–1627) a love of nature, art and literature. Jahangir laid out
many beautiful gardens throughout his kingdom, and it was his
son, Shah Jahan (1627–1658) who, as well as raising elegant cap-
itals at Lahore, Agra and Delhi, built the Taj Mahal, justly cele-
brated to this day as India’s supreme symbol and the world’s most
beautiful building. 

42
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
While all these foreign influences were shaping the north, the
Deccan and the south were left relatively untouched and free to
develop through the economic and military rivalry of a number of
successive and overlapping Dravidian dynasties. The Deccani
dynasties of the Chalukyas (450–700) and Hoysalas (1100–1300)
are remembered today chiefly for developing the form of the Hindu
temple, while in Tamil Nadu, the mighty Pallavas (600–850) estab-
lished a capital at Kanchipuram and ports at modern Madras
(Chennai) and Mahabalipuram that served an extensive maritime
empire. This took Hindu culture as far as Indonesia; its influence
can still be seen on the island of Bali, at sites such as Prambanan in
central Java and in the widespread popularity of the Ramayana
epic throughout the archipelago. The Pallavas gave way to the
Cholas (900–1100); their capital, Tanjore, was the nerve centre of
another mighty empire that stretched from the Gangetic plain to Sri
Lanka, and they extended southeast Asian trading contacts as far as
China. Then came the Pandyas (1150–1350), who ruled from the
sacred temple-city Madurai, still one of the gems of South Indian
architecture. The last great dynasty of the south, famed for its pro-
longed and heroic resistance to Muslim incursions, was that of
Vijayanagar (1336–1565), centred at the extended capital of Hampi,
truly one of the architectural wonders of the subcontinent. 
A new and decisive chapter began with the arrival of the
Europeans, who sought lucrative spices. First were the Portuguese.
The explorer Vasco da Gama arrived at Calicut (from which we get
our word calico) in 1497; by the time he left five years later he had
established a Portuguese trading presence on the western coast and
a fleet to protect it. The Portuguese captured Goa in 1510 (it
remained their colony until 1961), but it was the arrival of the

43
H I S T O R Y
The elaborate carved decoration, screens and inlay work of Itmad-ud-Daulah’s tomb are all typical of Islamic style.
Above: Details of pietra dura work. Opposite: A pierced marble screen.


45
H I S T O R Y
Humayun’s Tomb in Delhi, India. Humayun, the eldest son of the Mughal
empire’s first emperor, Babur, succeeded his father. Humayun’s Tomb was
the first garden tomb made in India.
British that was to prove the most significant. News that the Dutch
had made a 2,500 per cent profit on a cargo of spices from
Indonesia prompted the founding of the British East India
Company (EIC) in 1601. Beaten out of the Indonesian spice
islands by the superior navy of the Dutch, the fledgling company
focused on India; little did those involved at the time realize that
the seed of empire had silently been sown. It was EIC trade in
pepper, cloves and cardamom from Kerala, silk from Bengal, cot-
ton from Maharashtra, and saltpetre and indigo dye from Gujerat
that led to the establishment of company warehouses, known as
‘factories,’ in Chennai (1640) and Mumbai (1668), and the creation
of the port of Kolkata (1690). Little by little, these settlements grew,
protected by forts and locally recruited militia known as sepoys. A
series of tactical alliances with local rulers added to the inexorable
advance of British influence. 
Encouraged by India’s 2,414-kilometre (1,500-mile) western
seaboard, with its strong currents and abundance of natural har-
bours, other European powers established trading interests as
well. By the mid-eighteenth century, with the decadence and
collapse of the centralized Mughal empire, a power vacuum had
appeared in which the main contenders for supremacy were
clearly France and Britain, both already at war in Europe. Largely
due to the military acumen and efforts of Robert Clive, himself a
former clerk of the EIC, the French were defeated in a series of
battles—the most important being Plessey in 1757—that put

46
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
Bengal, a key trading area, under British control and ended
French aspirations in India.
It was in Bengal that the EIC first gained control of local rev-
enue collection. This marked a crucial advance, as it allowed them
to pay for commodities locally without relying on gold and silver
bullion from home. The early nineteenth century saw further pen-
etration of British influence—particularly in the teaching of the
English language, the promotion of Christianity and the setting up
of an English-language legal system. But EIC corruption, the level-
ling of taxes that were invariable (rather than proportionate to the
harvest yield) and the import of cheap mass-produced goods from
industrial Britain damaged local industry and alienated Indian
opinion. This situation culminated in 1857 in what might be
known as the Sepoy Revolt, the Indian Mutiny or the First War of
Independence, depending on one’s viewpoint. This short but
bloody war shocked Victorian Britain to the core, and a new chap-
ter in British-Indian relations began. The Crown officially took over
rule of India from the EIC, which went ignominiously bankrupt a
few years later; the office of viceroy was created; the size of the
army was doubled and the Indian Civil Service formed (the high-
est ranks in both were denied to Indians); new roads, railways and
bridges were built; and the universities of Mumbai (Bombay),
Calcuatta and Madras were founded to promulgate English edu-
cation and values.
An independence movement stirred as early as 1885 with the
founding of the Indian National Congress by a group of loosely
affiliated but disaffected intellectuals, but it was the 1905 plan to
divide Bengal into two parts, one Hindu and the other Muslim,
that first really united Indian opposition to British rule. Though the

Opposite: Mumbai, late in developing a distinct architecture, benefited
from the work of many talented British architects who worked in the
Indo-Saracenic style.
Right: The statue of Queen Victoria, also Empress of India, in front of the
Victoria Memorial in Kolkata.Work on the memorial, designed by Sir
William Emerson, began in 1904, but its completion was delayed until 1921.
resultant campaign of strikes and demonstrations was quashed,
the seed had been sown. In 1911 the imperial capital was moved
from Kolkata to Delhi, an event celebrated by the magnificent visit
of George V and Queen Mary. Four years later, a Gujerati lawyer
educated in England returned to India from South Africa, where
he had been active in the fight against racial intolerance. This was
Mahatma (‘Great Soul’) Gandhi, who became known as ‘Father of
the Nation’ for his nonviolent struggle for independence based on
economic self-sufficiency and traditional village autonomy. Part
saint, part wily politician, Gandhi was not to see his dream of a
peaceful transfer of power realized, but he acted as a figurehead to
unite his countrymen in a campaign of peaceful civil disobedi-
ence that was as revolutionary as it was successful.
After the Second World War the agitation for independence
reached fever pitch as violence erupted between Hindu and
Muslim communities, especially those in northern India, due to
the demands for a separate state for Muslims made by the Muslim
League, led by Mohammed Ali Jinnah. Faced with the prospect of
an imminent civil war, it was decided that the subcontinent would
be partitioned to create two new countries: Pakistan—originally
divided into West andEast Pakistan—was for Muslims, and India
was for a predominantly Hindu population. The result was a dis-
aster. Perhaps 1.5 million people died in intercommunal blood-
shed while a further 13 million refugees, many from the Punjab

48
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S

49
H I S T O R Y
Opposite: The Lotus Mahal at Vijayanagara in northern Karnataka.
Right: A granite column at the Vitthala temple in the Vijyanagara complex,
with the Garuda shrine in the form of a chariot behind.
and the Gangetic plain, desperately sought to escape the mayhem
and rebuild their lives in unfamiliar and inhospitable surround-
ings. It was during this chaos that the last viceroy, Lord
Mountbatten, stepped down on 15 August, 1947, and India
achieved her independence. This bittersweet chapter in a great
nation’s history ended with a tragedy: early in 1948 Mahatma
Gandhi was assassinated by a Hindu fanatic for being too concil-
iatory to the Muslims.
In the years since independence, the Indian political scene
has been dominated by the Congress Party, which followed the
socialist model of a controlled economy for almost 50 years.
Congress was led by a family dynasty: the first prime minister,
Jawaharlal Nehru, was succeeded by his daughter Indira Gandhi
in 1964. Assassinated by Sikhs in 1984, she was succeeded by her
son Rajiv, until in 1991 he, too, was assassinated, but by Tamils.
Both leaders paid the price for their handling of extremist groups
wanting independence from the centre. Since the defeat of the
Congress Party in 1996, the country has had a succession of short-
term and coalition governments, which have increasingly opened
India to multinationals and the free market. Significantly, recent
years have seen the rise of Hindu nationalism. Today Indians
maintain their passionate interest in politics but also a healthy
scepticism towards those who strut and struggle for their brief
moment of power, for hasn’t a country with such a venerable and
volatile history seen it all before?

“As space pervades a jar, both inside and out,
so within and beyond this ever-changing 
universe there exists one Cosmic Intelligence.”
—Shiva Samhita, sixth-century religious text.
Religion
and Ritual

T
he Indians are above all a religious people, and there is not a religion in the world that has not found sanctuary here at some time or other, and
stayed on to prosper. Jews came in the sixth century BC, following the destruction of their temple in Jerusalem; St Thomas the Apostle brought
Christianity in the first century AD; while 600 years later Zoroastrians (known as Parsees) fled here when Arabs ravished their native Persia. And
India herself is the birthplace of four major religions: Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism.
Today, Muslims constitute 12 per cent of India’s population (a higher per cent than in Pakistan!). She is also home to 22 million Christians, 18
million Sikhs, 12 million Buddhists and Jains, and perhaps half a million Parsees. But her population is overwhelmingly Hindu, at 82 per cent.

52
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
The word Hinduism is a western import coined to cover the huge
variety of religious belief and practice found in the subcontinent,
called by the Indians themselves Sanatana Dharma: ‘the Eternal Law.’
Hinduism has no historical founder, no one authority, no single
organizing body; it is not so much a religion as a way of life that
guides its followers from conception to the funeral pyre. And even
beyond, for the Hindu believes that we reincarnate life after life, until
we have fulfilled our task of achieving enlightenment.
Most outsiders’ first reaction to Hinduism is one of confusion.
Such rampant polytheism seems over the top: dozens of gods and
goddesses, some with animal heads and human bodies, sprout heads
and arms with a positively irreligious abandon. To the Hindu, how-
ever, all these divinities are but partial symbolic expressions of one
universal, cosmic intelligence known as Brahman, which upholds
all life. This supreme intelligence is abstract, formless, and not
directly accessible to worship, though the yogi and saint can experi-
ence it through meditation and devotion. Inexpressible, it expresses
itself through all the phenomena of the universe. It is said there are
as many ways to approach Brahman as there are people wanting to
approach it; thus the different divinities, each embodying aspects of
this one intelligence, cater to the unending variety of seekers and
draw them to it. Thus we are attracted to the deity that represents
characteristics we may be in need of, or is suited to where we are in
Previous page: Close to Palitana in Gujarat, Shatrunjaya, or ‘the Place of
Victory’, is a mountain complex of temples sacred to the Jain religion, which
was founded before 1000 BC and stresses nonviolence and vegetarianism.
Left: A Mysore woman, accompanied by her daughter, makes an offering in
front of a sacred tree at Venugopalaswamy temple, Mysore.
Opposite: The temple of Arunachaleshvara and the surrounding town of
Tiruvannamalai seen from the hill dwelling of a sadhu (holy man).The tem-
ple, one of the largest in India, is dedicated to lord Shiva.


our life’s journey. There is no sense of exclusivity; indeed, the tradi-
tionally pious Hindu may be devoted to three different levels of
deity—local god (gramadevata), family god (kula-devata), and per-
sonal, chosen god (ishta-devata)—with no conflict between them. 
The Hindu pantheon is thus as vast and as multifarious as the
country itself. Its many deities have both fierce and gentle forms,
consorts and children, attendants and vehicles. There are three prin-
ciple members, however, each personifying a different phase of the
cosmic evolutionary process: Brahma, the creator; Vishnu, the pre-
server; and Shiva, the transformer.
Brahma, although figuring largely in the Puranas, the main texts
describing the cosmic escapades of the gods, is hardly worshipped at
all today; only two temples to him are active. His consort, Saraswati,
the goddess of learning, music and artistic activity, is largely a
domestic deity, worshipped in the homes of artists, intellectuals and
students.
Vishnu, by contrast, is widely popular. His followers, known as
Vaishnavas, are often distinguished by V-shaped marks on their
foreheads which represent the god’s feet. Associated with the life of
the householder, Vishnu has two consorts: Shri Devi, goddess of
good fortune, and Bhu Devi, mother earth. He also has ten major
incarnations that are born on earth when needed to right the imbal-
ance between good and evil. Two of these are especially popular
across north and central India. The seventh, Rama, is the ideal ruler
and hero of the Ramayana, one of the two great epics (the other is
the Mahabharata), that have gripped the Indian imagination for mil-
lennia. The eighth is Krishna, god of love. One of India’s favourite
scriptures, the Bhagavad Gita, describes Krishna as the wise and
compassionate teacher of humanity, while much of the north’s folk

Opposite: A poster hanging in a shop is one of countless depictions of
Ganesh, the elephant-headed son of Shiva.The popularity of this deity is
undoubtedly connected to the belief that he is the god of education,
knowledge, wisdom and wealth.
Above: The afternoon procession of the images of Balaji (Vishnu) and his
consort around the temple of Tirumala, in Andhra Pradesh.
Right: The ornate western gopuram (gate) of Sri Meenakshi temple in
Madurai.
55
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S

56
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S

57
R E L I G I O N
A N D
R I T U A L
music, poetry and particularly miniature painting celebrates his mis-
chievous youth, his amorous dalliances with the cowgirls and his
great love for Radha, his chief consort. As the ideal couple, together
they represent a paradigm of romantic sexual love between humans
and, at another level, the yearning of the soul for God.
Shiva, the third member of the trinity, combines many contrasts.
He is the archetypal yogi, deity of recluses and celibates, meditating
in solitude in the Himalayan snows or wandering dishevelled
amidst smouldering funeral pyres, counselling his followers to med-
itate on the transience of all life. Yet he is also Nataraja, lord of the
cosmic dance, creating and transforming universes in a wild dance
of bliss, his long hair flying out behind him in an uninhibited
Dionysian revel. And sometimes he is the great lover, who gets into
trouble for seducing the wives of pious sages and flies into a rage
when thwarted. Shiva’s main consort is Parvati, the idealized femi-
nine deity, the graceful and gentle companion of her lord’s pleasures.
Followers of Shiva are known as Shaivas, and wear three white hor-
izontal lines on their foreheads. Shiva temples tend to be more
numerous in the south.
Another important deity is Shakti, the feminine force personi-
fied in countless forms, many quite localized. Examples of these are
the mother goddess; the fierce goddesses Kali (often associated with
Shiva) and her invincible sister, Durga; and the Seven Mothers, who
are worshipped in villages all over the country. There are also a host
of local goddesses, such as Shitala, goddess of fevers; Annapurna,
An annual bathing ceremony at the twelfth-century temple of
Venugopalaswamy, near the Cauvery River in Mysore, dedicated to 
lord Vishnu.

58
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S

59
R E L I G I O N
A N D
R I T U A L
goddess of nourishment; and Ganga Ma, goddess of the life-giving
River Ganges.
One more kind of god should be mentioned: those deities that
link the divine, human and animal kingdoms. Ganesh, the elephant-
headed son of Parvati, is universally loved as the god of good begin-
nings, while Hanuman, the monkey god and lord Rama’s attendant
and general in the Ramayana, is the epitome of devotion, courage
and loyalty.
Along with these classical figures, village Hinduism incorporates
archaic strata of ancient worship centred on natural phenomena
such as snakes, mountains, trees and rivers. This sits quite comfort-
ably with the later, more sophisticated pantheon celebrated in tem-
ple and canonical literature, combining with them to create a
vibrantly sacred universe operating on many interconnected levels.
Despite the great variety of gods, rituals of worship are fairly
standard. When the Hindus worship an image, they are entertain-
ing a royal guest and fulfilling its physical needs. The scale of such
worship can be staggering, continuing for hours and involving hun-
dreds of priests and officiates. This is especially true in the south,
where temple ritual has been preserved intact over the millennia. At
the major annual festival at the great Vishnu temple of Tirupati in
Andhra Pradesh, for example, 32 types of flowers are offered, weigh-
ing almost 2,500 kilograms (5,500 lbs).
Ordinary temple worship (puja) takes place four times a day at
sunrise, noon, sunset and midnight, though often only the morning
and evening sessions are observed. The worship is performed by the
Opposite: The Church of Our Lady of the Immaculate Conception in
Panjim, Goa.
Right: Cleaning a statue.


61
R E L I G I O N
A N D
R I T U A L
Left: Sikh temple guardians, or nihang, at the Golden Temple in Amritsar
on the occasion of the annual parade during which the Granth Sahib, the
Sikh sacred book, is carried through the city.
Above: The Golden Temple, set in the Lake of Ambrosia, is the centre of
the Sikh world. It was founded in 1589 on an island in this small lake known
since the time of the Buddha as a special site and a place of healing.

62
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
priest and there is no need for any members of the public to attend,
though generally many people do in order to have a glimpse (dar-
shan) of the image and partake of blessed food (prasad) that has been
offered. Hymns are sung and mantras chanted that purify the atmos-
phere and extol the god’s greatness. Charmed by such praise, the
immaterial divine energy descends, inhabits the physical image and
thereby blesses all who come near and the community at large. The
visiting deity is offered food, flowers, clothes, anointment, lights,
incense and so on, and where possible circumambulation is per-
formed. All of this enlivens the divine energy to influence and bless
the human world with long life, prosperity, and material and spiri-
tual success. The deities are thus unseen helpers in life, and the pur-
pose of religious ritual is to enlist and benefit from their help.
In addition to the temple, many families have domestic shrines,
usually placed in or adjacent to the kitchen, as this is where the fam-
ily is nourished by its womenfolk and the food they prepare.
Unsophisticated public shrines are found all over the country: by the
roadside, in sleepy villages and bustling city centres. These are often
touchingly simple epiphanies: the roots of a sacred tree daubed ver-
milion or silver; a special stone garlanded with flowers or a rough
wooden image scattered with rice, flower petals and featherweight
coins. Wherever possible the sense of sacred is created to remind us
of the unseen and subtle influences that lie within and behind the
material world.
Left, top and bottom: The holy town of Haridwar is situated at the point
where the sacred Ganges enters the plains from the mountains, and has
long been a pilgrimage site.
Opposite: At Haridwar’s main ghat, Hari-Ki-Pairi, the Ganga Aarti ceremony
is performed every evening at 7 PM. During this ceremony offerings of
lights and flowers are floated on the river.


“A religious patron will always have peace,
wealth, grain and sons. Everything vanishes in
time; only a religious monument lasts for ever.”
—Shilpa Prakasha, ancient architectural text.
Architecture

A
mong the astonishing richness of architectural remains in India, the earliest we have are examples in various states of repair of the Buddhist 
relic mound known as the stupa. These hemispherical domes were first erected to enshrine the ashes of the Buddha himself, and later those
of great Buddhist teachers. The most spectacular is the restored Great Stupa of Sanchi, near Bhopal in Madhya Pradesh, which dates from the third
century BC when the emperor Ashoka laid its foundation stone. Surrounded by railings punctuated at the cardinal points by sandstone gates with
beautiful carvings telling the story of Buddhism, Sanchi shows us the prototype of a structure that was exported wherever Buddhism went. Sri
Lanka, the Himalayas, Southeast Asia and the Far East all developed their own versions of what has come to be Buddhism’s major contribution to
world architecture.

66
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S

67
A R C H I T E C T U R E
At the same time stupas were being erected in various parts of
India, the early monastic communities of all the Indian religions
were excavating rock-cut sanctuaries in isolated places to pursue
their lives of meditation and worship. Supreme among these are
the Buddhist caves at Ajanta, in Maharashtra, a complex of 30
manmade caves, some of which are simple chapels and others ver-
itable cathedrals. Particularly noteworthy at Ajanta are the murals
dating from the Gupta period (AD 320–650), the golden age of
Buddhist art. Glowing with a warm, burnished light, many depict
scenes from the Jatakas, tales of the Buddha’s previous lives.
Nearby, the complex of Ellora contains 32 caves—Buddhist, Hindu
and Jain—including the awesome monolith of Kailashanatha
Temple (AD 750). Its carvings, for which over 200,000 tons (nearly
5 million pounds) of rock are estimated to have been excavated,
constitute an encyclopaedia of Hindu mythology.
The Hindu temple (mandir) is essentially a reception hall for
the gods, where worshippers can come into contact with the deity.
The first freestanding temples were probably built of wood; we can
glean an idea of their appearance from temples still extant in places
such as Nepal and Kerala, geographic margins that until fairly
recently remained heavily forested. By the time of the Shilpa
Shastras, sacred architectural texts dating from the sixth century,
patrons and builders followed scriptural injunctions to reserve per-
Page 65: The Palace of the Winds, or Hawa Mahal, was built in 1799 by
Sawai Pratap Singh. Located in the heart of the old city of Jaipur, its five-
storey façade features 953 small casements in delicate pink sandstone.
Opposite and right: The first Buddhist cave monuments at Ajanta date
from the second and first centuries BC.There are 30 caves in all, but the
site was discovered only in 1819.

68
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
manent materials for religious buildings. Early sites such as Aihole,
boasting the remnants of 125 temples, and the nearby sites of
Badami and Pattadakal are fascinating museums of temple build-
ing dating from the Chalukyan dynasty (sixth century AD). They
contain examples of what were later to become the distinctive
southern and northern styles of building. 
Such huge collections of temples were commonplace through-
out northern India until the Muslim invasions destroyed them. We
can only guess at their glory today. But one cluster that survived
this tragic vandalism was at Khajuraho, where 22 sandstone tem-
ples dating from the tenth century onwards still stand as clear
demonstrations of the basic layout of northern-style temples. A
series of antechambers (mandapas) of decreasing size lead to a dark,
introverted shrine (garbha griha, the ‘womb-house’) housing the
main image under a towering curvilinear spire (shikhara).
Khajuraho also illustrates the inextricable connection between
temple and figure. The honey-coloured carvings famously depict
the refined, sensuous and erotically luxuriant realms of the gods. In
what is a perfect marriage of form and content, sculpture becomes
indistinguishable from building.
The temple cities of Tamil Nadu are veritable citadels of the
sacred. At Tanjore, King Rajarajeshwara built the magnificent
Brihadishvara (1099) in the northern style as a sandstone memo-
rial of his glory, but added massive entrance portals, a feature that
was to be developed. Madurai’s Meenakshi temple, dedicated to a
local form of the mother goddess, demonstrates a pattern followed
in the southern temple style from the fifteenth century onwards: A
relatively low central shrine (vimana) is surrounded by an extensive
interior of massively pillared halls containing many subsidiary

69
A R C H I T E C T U R E
Opposite and above: The temples of Khajuraho (ninth through twelfth centuries) were built in the northern Indian
‘Nagara’ style. Of the original 85 temples, 20 have survived. Khajuraho is probably best known for its exceptional
deep-relief carvings of mithuna, erotic depictions of amorous couples and groups.Traditionally, love, or kama, had
religious sanction as one of the pursuits of life.

70
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
Left: The Jama Masjid or Masjid-
i-Jahan Numa is India’s largest
mosque. Beginning in 1650, it
was built in six years by the
Mughal emperor Shah Jahan.
Opposite: The gnomon of the
great sundial at the Jantar
Mantar observatory in Delhi,
one of five built starting in 1724
by Maharaja Jai Singh II of Jaipur.

shrines. The entire complex is surrounded by high walls, each
punctuated with characteristically tall entrance gates (gopurams)
whose granite bases are surmounted by ascending registers of stuc-
coed brick brightly painted with thousands of figures. These gopu-
rams, sweeping gracefully upwards, are found all over Tamil Nadu
and sometimes announce enormous temples. Forty-five thousand
people still live and work within the precincts of the Rangan-
athaswami Temple (fourteenth century), an important Vishnu
shrine at Shri Rangam, while the south’s largest Shiva temple, the
Arunachaleshvara (eleventh century) in Tiruvannamalai, contains
a famous ‘thousand-pillared’ mandapa that became the model for
similar structures elsewhere.
Each religious group has left its own distinctive buildings. The
Jains, prominent in Rajasthan and Gujarat, covered hilltops with
many-pillared temples of white marble; their breathtakingly intri-
cate carving was achieved by paying the sculptors by the weight
of dust that was chiselled out! Most spectacular of the Sikh temples
(gurudwara) is undoubtedly the Golden Temple (sixteenth century)
in Amritsar, with its superstructure of copper plates covered in
thick gold leaf set on a base of elegantly carved white marble.
The Muslim invaders introduced important architectural inno-
vations. They brought the dome, lime mortar and the ‘true’ arch,
which replaced the Hindu manner of spanning a space with the
less sophisticated post-and-beam method. These new techniques
permitted spacious buildings with large open areas to accommo-
date an assembled congregation, something not as important in
Hindu temples, which are built to facilitate the individual’s contact
with the enshrined image. The first mosque in India, the Qutub
Minar (1199), was built just south of Delhi; many other important

72
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S

73
A R C H I T E C T U R E
Formal in concept, refined and elegant in execution, the Taj Mahal is entirely
sheathed in white marble.The corners of this mausoleum carry minarets,
but they have been reduced in scale in order to emphasise the importance
of the central dome.
mosques followed, such as the magnificent Jami Masjid (1424) in
Ahmedabad and the imperial Friday Mosque (seventeenth century)
in Old Delhi. The Muslims, who loved to combine sandstone and
marble, also built splendid garden-tombs, of which the marble Taj
Mahal (1640), Shah Jahan’s mausoleum for his beloved wife
Mumtaz, is rightly the most famous.
India’s secular architecture is best represented by the great
forts and palaces that date primarily from the late medieval period.
These are to be found in profusion across the princely states of
Rajasthan and Central India; many are built in a hybrid Indo-
Islamic style. Serving as the capitals of the martial Rajput princes,
hilltop forts such as Jaiselmer, Jodhpur and Amber dominate the
flat desert landscape, and often contain whole townships within
their forbidding walls. They are atmospheric places to wander
around; many of them are today the romantic setting for luxury
hotels.
Finally, mention must be made of the last great phase of Indian
building, the architecture of the British Raj. This ranges from splen-
did Victorian Gothic—epitomized by the grandiose domes and
spires of Mumbai’s Victoria Terminus railway station—to the mas-
sive Raisina Hill complex at the heart of New Delhi. Built in sand-
stone by Edwin Lutyens and Herbert Baker in the 1920s, it is still
used by the Indian government today. Such contrasting styles are
very much part of the great legacy of Indian architecture, always
ready to adapt to new influences in its tolerant creativity.

Arts and Crafts
“All of me is on fire,
My voice, my body, my hands!
I tremble with the need to express.
Out of the earth I celebrate,
Out of the skies comes my answer.
Out of the earth I create his body,
Out of space his abode.
This bounty and this beauty is my source;  
My body is the instrument of my expressions.”
—South Indian artist’s song.

T
he continuity of India’s artistic heritage is extraordinary, perhaps unmatched anywhere else in the world. Ancient cultural patterns are kept
nourished and vital through a time-honoured combination of tradition and creativity. These patterns are remarkably homogenous. Laid down
by religion, myth and literature centuries ago, they are transmitted through the guru-disciple relationship that lies at the heart of Indian culture
and have been reproduced in both courtly and popular forms with a regularity dictated by seasonal rituals and sacred festivals. Thus a classical
story thousands of years old—the defeat of the 10-headed demon king Ravanna, for example—may be enacted with equal enthusiasm and rele-
vance in a remote village without electricity and a satirical street theatre in downtown Mumbai. This coherence stretches across all media, with
the same themes being found in dance, music, sculpture and painting. Yet there is never a sense of tiredness or predictability; each performance
infuses the well-tried vehicle with new life and appeal, fresh nuances of meaning.

76
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S

77
A R T S
A N D
C R A F T S
In the past 40 years India’s dances have become increasingly
familiar on the international stage, but few realize that there are at
least 6 major classical dance forms and a host of regional and folk
dances performed at celebrations such as marriage, birth or har-
vest. Outside of India, the most well-known classical style is
Bharatanatyam, the solo dance developed in the temples of Tamil
Nadu that is usually performed by a woman and recounts reli-
gious themes. In neighbouring Kerala there is the spectacular
dance-drama Kathakali, danced only by men. Here, colourful cos-
tumes, elaborate makeup (taking up to four hours to apply) and
gymnastic suppleness are supplemented by an eloquent vocabu-
lary of facial gestures and eye movements in performances that
combine religious instruction with contemporary pantomime. In
the northeast state of Orissa, the Odissi style flourished, combining
lyrical movement and gently curving rhythms; to the south, a vil-
lage in Andhra Pradesh gave its name to the Kuchipudi style,
which uses a large cast to enact stories from the myths and epics.
Kathak developed in the north from a fusion of ancient Hindu sto-
rytelling traditions and the tastes of the Mughal court, whose
patrons added foot movements accentuated by heavy anklets of
bells, rapid pirouettes and the characteristic Muslim dress of long
overskirt and tight pyjama bottoms. Close to the border with
Burma lies the state of Manipur, the home of the less well-known
Page 75: The sitar, a plucked stringed instrument, is probably the best-
known of all Indian musical instruments. In performance it is often accom-
panied by the tabla, a pair of drums.
Opposite: Kudiattam mime performers, continuing an ancient theatrical
tradition.
Right: A Kathakali performance in Kerala.This is the traditional classical
dance-drama of south India, originating in the seventeenth century.The
elaborate makeup, known as chutty, involves hours of preparation.

78
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
Manipuri style. Dances for men are an exciting and energetic com-
bination of fast footwork, strong drumming and martial art, includ-
ing swords and shields. In contrast, veiled female dancers, attired in
long embroidered skirts set with tiny mirrors and sequins, undulate
with sinuous movements of the arm and wrist recalling the dances
of Burma and Thailand they inspired. These dances take a lifetime
of spiritual discipline; the intricate grammar of movement, gesture
and meaning become part of the dancer’s consciousness.
According to ancient Indian musical theory, when the cosmic
intelligence begins to create, it vibrates into sound, and this sound
structures the material world. Reproduced as music, these primor-
dial sounds are classified in families of scale sequences called ragas.
Each classical work has a raga as its skeleton, around which improv-
isation fleshes out the body of the work. Typically, the raga will start
with a meditative solo movement (alap), followed by more complex
elaborations building to a rapid and triumphant climax. There are
ragas appropriate for each time of day, each season, each mood. Not
a single note of this vast repertoire is ever written down, so the top-
rate performer must recall from memory over three hundred ragas.
Indian music thus blends a strict orthodoxy with a creative flex-
ibility the West knows only in free-form jazz. It is also enthusiasti-
cally interactive. Any first-time concertgoer will be amazed at how
stunning technical virtuosity blends with the humorously playful
rapport between the performers, and how the audience will unin-
hibitedly voice its appreciation at the end of a particularly accom-
plished passage, the artists happily acknowledging their pleasure. 
Classical music is divided into two styles: the northern
Hindustani and the southern Carnataka. While equally rooted in
the human voice and ceremonial chanting, the former often dis-

79
A R T S
A N D
C R A F T S
Scenes from Rajasthani mural and folk art. Opposite, top: A mural portrait
from the Jag Niwas, later converted into the Lake Palace, Udaipur.
Opposite, bottom: The back panel of a motor rickshaw. Right: The side
panel of a light chariot drawn in a wedding procession.
plays a cerebral intricacy, and the latter an earthy and direct emo-
tional power. Both styles employ a large array of drums, strings and
wind instruments. India’s best-known instrument, the sitar, is actu-
ally an import from Persia, but the original stringed instrument, the
veena, is found in southern India.
Underpinning this at a popular level is a vast body of devo-
tional music performed in temples and houses, folk songs sung
in villages to celebrate rites of passage and seasonal and daily
work, and the poems and ballads recounting myths and tales of
historical heroes sung by travelling storytellers. All contribute to
a rich musical heritage, and are a continuing tradition very much
alive alongside the enormous output of modern movie songs and
pop music.
India is a land where a modern division between ‘art’ and
‘craft’ doesn’t really exist. Traditional crafts are still valued and
flourish, providing many with a livelihood. Villages are rich
sources of artistic skill, often displayed by women. A common
custom is decorating the threshold of the home each morning
with geometric and floral mandalas painstakingly made out of
coloured chalk powder. These, known as rangoli in the north and
kolam in the south, protect the house from the evil eye and are
especially popular at New Year.
As every visitor discovers, the subcontinent is a shopper’s para-
dise, offering an extraordinary array of very reasonably priced goods:
delicately embroidered pashmeena shawls and soft silk carpets from

80
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
Kashmir; marble boxes inlaid with semi-precious stones by descen-
dants of craftsmen who worked on the Taj Mahal in Agra; printed
cotton fabrics, silver jewellery and vivid tribal textiles set with mir-
rors from Rajasthan and Gujarat; fine statuettes of the Hindu deities
in bronze from Tanjore or soft soapstone from Orissa; sparkling gem-
stones—sapphires, agates, topaz, emeralds, garnets—exquisitely set in
gold from Jaipur; silks of breathtaking beauty from Varanasi or
Kanchipuram; intricately carved items in fragrant sandalwood from
Mysore; elegant furniture in rosewood and teak from Tamil Nadu.
The list goes on and on. But always buy something when you see
it rather than assuming you will find it elsewhere—you won’t!
Nowadays, credit cards are accepted at all large stores; packaging
and shipping can be safely and easily included. 
Probably the most pleasurable way to absorb India’s history is
to eat it. But say ‘Indian food’ and people automatically think of
‘curry’ (actually, there is no such dish; the word simply means any
dish with gravy) and ‘chilli’ (which is not indigenous to India but
was brought by the Portuguese from the New World). In fact, food
is no exception to the golden rule of diversity that applies to all
things Indian, and there is no need to expect to set one’s palate on
fire. Each individual cook will chose from perhaps 40 major spices—
most mild and fragrant rather than fiery—and several dozen other
seasonings to create a subtly unique taste each time. 
Religion also comes into the picture: most Hindus do not eat
beef or pork, while Muslims will eat beef but not pork. Region, too,
Left, top: Flowers are central to Hindu religious offerings and celebrations.
Left, bottom: A Sikh merchant in Chandni Chowk sells garlands of
marigolds, the most popular flower. Opposite: Marigolds being arranged for
a ceremony at the Rajvilas resort, Jaipur.


82
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
Clockwise from left: A pichangeti, a ceremonial dagger from Coorg in Karnataka; jewellery designed by
the Gem Palace, Jaipur; a handbag decorated with mirrorwork at Ravissant, an Indian luxury retailer; a
Delhi fashion shop.

83
A R T S
A N D
C R A F T S

84
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
is an important factor in the Indian diet. In the north where more
meat is eaten, much of the cuisine has been influenced by Persian
and Afghan tastes and the Mughlai dishes that use fruits, nuts and
hung cheese (paneer) to flavour a variety of mutton and chicken
dishes. Punjabis, above all, enjoy chicken, especially when it is
baked in clay ovens (tandoori) or chopped into succulently seasoned
nuggets (tikka). Bengalis love fish, which they curry with lemon,
tamarind and a host of spices. People from the hottest state, mid-
India’s Andhra Pradesh, relish burningly ‘hot’ food, even eating raw
onions and chillies as a salad! 
Kerala, in the largely vegetarian south, uses soothing, creamy
coconut ubiquitously. Neighbouring Tamil Nadu consumes moun-
tains of rice. Her rice-flour crepes (dosas) and steamed dumplings
(idlis) aren’t found in the wheat-eating north, which also enjoys
food—mushrooms, saffron, large breads—unavailable elsewhere. 
Refined Indian teas such as Assam and Darjeeling—introduced
commercially by the British—are of course famous all over the world.
On the street, though, northern Indians prefer to boil tea, milk and
sugar together into a deliciously syrupy soup called chai. The south’s
favourite tipple is the local coffee, an aromatic yet mild bean grown
particularly around Mysore. 
The cooking medium will vary from household to household:
clarified butter (ghee) for those who can afford it, and for others
coconut, mustard, or sesame oil. Even the plate will vary: banana
leaves in the south, metal trays with little dishes (thali) in the north
and west, china for the westernized. In addition to the host of trop-
ical fruits (the rainy season mango is most prized), one fairly uni-
versal ascept of Indian cuisine is that there are always three sorts of
dessert: sweet, sweeter and sweetest!

85
A R T S
A N D
C R A F T S
Traditional and contemporary dishes from southern India.
Clockwise from opposite: Masala dosa, rice-flour crepes common in the south; a selection of breads, from
naan to parathas; a silver thali dinner; paneer shashlik; an assorted dessert platter.

Visiting India
“There is no happiness for him who does not travel, Rohita!
Thus have we heard. Living in the society of men, even the
best man becomes a sinner…Therefore wander!
The feet of the wanderer are like a flower, his soul is grow-
ing and reaping the fruit; and all his sins are destroyed by
his fatigues in wandering. Therefore wander!
‘The fortune of him who is sitting, sits; it rises when
he rises; it sleeps when he sleeps; it moves when he moves.
Therefore wander!”
—Indra, King of the Gods, urges a life of travel on the young man Rohita
in the Aitareya Brahmana, a text from c. 1000 BC.

A
trip to India is such a kaleidoscope of rich impressions and intense experiences that it is not easy to single out what lingers most in the
mind. Perhaps it is the fine-looking people, their friendliness and gentle patience, or the brilliant yet shy smiles of a dozen immaculately
turned-out schoolchildren jammed into a cycle rickshaw on their way to school. It may be those timeless times spent relaxing in a converted
rice barge on the tranquil backwaters of Kerala; or enjoying the softening dusk—what the Indians call the ‘hour of the cow-dust’—on the lawn
of your hotel, under scented cascades of cerise and orange bougainvillea, while turbaned staff provide courteous service without a trace of ser-
vility. Or it may be the very different experience of wandering through the bustling bazaars and browsing in those little shops, each one
crammed like an Aladdin’s cave with hidden bargains. 

88
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S

89
V I S I T I N G
I N D I A
Opposite: The striking Trident Hilton Hotel in Gurgaon, close to Delhi’s airport, was designed by Thai architect Mathar
‘Lek’ Bunnag. It features a minimal interpretation of courts, lakes and gopurams.
Above: A suite with a semi-private swimming pool at the Oberoi Udaivilas on the southern shore of Lake Pichola,
Udaipur.

90
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
Right: Coloured glass windows face the sunrise in the Kush Mahal suite at
the famous Lake Palace Hotel.
Above: The Lake Palace Hotel launch ferries guests to and from the landing
stage.The hotel was originally built as a summer palace, the Jag Niwas, on an
artificial island in the middle of the lake.

91
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S

92
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
Clockwise from top left: Rajvilas, one of the Oberoi group, in Jaipur; the main entrance of the Trident Hilton,
Gurgaon, seen over the reflecting pool; one of the many corner retreats of the restored Fort Devi Garh, near
Udaipur; Devi Garh seen from its swimming pool. Devi Garh was built in the Aravali hills during the eighteenth
century as the fort palace of the principality of Delwara.

93
V I S I T I N G
I N D I A
Clockwise from top left: One of the royal suites at the Rambagh Palace, the premier hotel of Jaipur; the Polo bar at
the Rambagh Palace; a completely modernised suite in the imaginatively restored Devi Garh; one of Devi Garh’s
secluded tower rooms arranged for a private dinner.

94
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S

95
V I S I T I N G
I N D I A
For some the memory will be of that wedding party, where
the women—hung with gold and gliding along like stately
galleons with the stiff rustle of fine new silk—invited you to join
the celebration; for others it may be that temple festival when a
cow decorated with vermilion and marigolds led a procession of
anarchic musicians and dancing devotees covered only by their
long, matted hair and ochre loincloths. 
Whatever your memories, they will confirm the fact that
India is incorrigibly various. There is not one India but myriads,
happily co-existing, with people doing their own thing within a
loose framework of broad rules. Here there is no boring standard-
isation, no fixed stereotype. Whatever statement is made about
the place, the opposite is also true: India delights in providing a
host of exceptions to every rule. So those who wish to understand
the country must bring an open mind and an ability to be flexi-
ble, for India will be relentless in her demands for both. But the
rewards are well worth it. India is like nowhere else; a living
dream in which everything is possible. Once you have visited
her, your life will never be the same, and she will have cast her
spell on you forever.
Luxury tented accommodation at Vanyavilas on the edge of the
Ranthambore Tiger Reserve. A far cry from the concept of simply camping,
these tents are fitted to five-star standards.

96
I N D I A: L A N D
O F
L I V I N G
T R A D I T I O N S
SELECTED FURTHER READING
Freedom at Midnight. Larry Collins & Dominique Lapierre. London: HarperCollins,
1997.
The Hindu Temple. George Michel. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988.
India: A History. John Keay. London: HarperCollins Publishers, 2001.
India Modern. Michael Freeman. Singapore: Periplus Editions, 2005.
India: A Wounded Civilization. V. S. Naipaul. London: Picador, 2002.
Indian Art. Vidya Dehejia. London: Phaidon, 1998.
Introduction to Indian Architecture. Bindia Thapar, Surat Kumar Manto, and Suparna
Bhalla. Singapore: Periplus Editions, 2005.
Lonely Planet India. Sarina Singh, et al. London: Lonely Planet Publications, 2007.
A Passage to India. E. M. Forster. London: Penguin Books, 1998.
Plain Tales from the Raj. Charles Allen (ed). London: Abacus, 1988.
The Ramayana. R. K. Narayan. London: Penguin, 2006.
The Rough Guide to India. Nick Edwards, et al. London: Rough Guides, 2005.
Slowly Down the Ganges. Eric Newby. London: Picador, 1983.



