INDOOR LIGHTING  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Basic DIY skills are needed to install the new wiring. 
Connecting things up takes electrical skills and technical 
knowledge, so if you are in any doubt, employ an electrician.
  
 
 
Always ensure that the power supply is switched off before 
starting any work on your home's lighting circuits. It is not 
sufficient to turn off individual light switches. These 
instructions comply with the requirements of the current IEE 
wiring regulations. 
  
 
 
Get more from your indoor lighting by replacing old lights, 
installing some extra ones and putting in a dimmer switch or 
two. 
  
Many homes still have only the most basic indoor lighting, 
with a central pendant lamp-holder or some other type of 
ceiling-mounted light fitting in each room, plus a plugged-in 
table lamp or two for extra task or background lighting.  
  
Putting up new light fittings in place of what you have can 
make a big difference to the way a room looks. So can 
adding extra lights and replacing existing on-off switches 
with dimmer switches. 
 
2  - Check out your system  
Before you start changing the light fittings you already have,
or planning where to install new ones, take a little time to 
examine your lighting-circuit wiring so you are aware of 
what is involved in working on it. Turn off the power to each 
circuit at the fuse box or consumer unit, then unscrew the 
cover on one or two ceiling roses. 
 
 
 
Modern ceiling roses have a 
bank of terminals on their 
baseplates, and there will be 
at least two and probably 
three cables present (1). The 
circuit cable loops into and 
out of each rose in turn, 
terminating at the last rose o
the circuit. A switch cable is 
wired into each rose and run
down to the switch that 
controls it. This is known as 
loop-in wiring.  
f 
s 
 
 
 
Older roses have just one cable present, and are supplied 
from a junction box close by in the ceiling void into which 

the switch cable is also connected. This is known as 
junction-box wiring.  
 
 
 
You may find that some modern roses have only one cable 
present; they are also supplied from a junction box, usually 
to save on long cable runs if the rose and its switch are a 
long way apart.  
 
 
Make sure that the lighting circuit cable has an earth core. 
The circuits in older houses were wired up using cable with 
no earth core, and one will have to be added if this is found 
to be the case - a job for a professional electrician. If you 
find old cable with rubber sheathing, do not touch it. It is 
probably brittle and dangerous, and needs replacing - again 
by an electrician. 
 
3  - Replace a ceiling rose  
Ceiling roses and their pendant lampholders discolour in 
time, as does the flex linking them. It is a simple job to 
replace an old rose with a smart new one. 
 
 
 
You can buy complete pendant sets with the flex and 
lampholder already connected up. Alternatively, you could 
consider fitting a plug-in rose (called a luminaire support 
coupler or LSC). With this type, you can unplug the flex and 
lampholder from the rose for cleaning or when you are 
redecorating the room.  
 
 
 
With the power off, unscrew the cover of the rose you want 
to replace. If you have loop-in wiring and more than one 
cable is present, identify the switch cable; it is the one with 
its black core running to the same terminal as the brown flex
core. Mark its sheath with an S and wrap some red PVC tape 
round its black core to show that it is live. Then disconnect 
the pendant flex from the rose terminals and set it aside.  
 
 
 
Disconnect the cable cores from their terminals. Undo the 
screws securing the rose to the ceiling and take it down. 
Press out one of the weakened areas (called knockouts) 
from the baseplate of the new rose or LSC, feed the cables 
through it and screw it to the ceiling.  
 
 
 
Reconnect the cable cores to the terminals on the new 
baseplate. These will probably be labelled for identification. 
Connect all the red cores to the terminal marked LOOP. 
Connect the switch cable's black core to the terminal marked
LINE, and the other black cores to the terminal marked N. 
All the earth cores, which should be covered with 
green/yellow PVC sleeving, go to the earth terminal. 
 
 
 

The pendant flex will already be connected to the baseplate 
of a pendant set, so screw up the rose cover. Insert the LSC 
plug in its baseplate and fit its cover.  
 
4  - Install a new light fitting  
You may want to put up a new light fitting in place of a 
ceiling rose. What this involves depends on whether you 
have loop-in or junction-box wiring, and on whether the new 
light fitting has an internal terminal block or is connected to 
the circuit wiring with a short flex tail. 
 
 
 
Turn off the power and disconnect the old rose, as described 
previously. Label the switch cable.  
 
 
 
If you have junction-box wiring and the new light fitting has 
a terminal block (most fluorescent fittings, for example), 
feed the cable through the entry point in the baseplate and 
screw the baseplate to the ceiling. Then connect the cable to 
the terminal block and fit the bulb or tube. Add the diffuser 
and restore the power. 
 
 
 
If the new light fitting has a 
flex tail, you have to use 
insulated strip connectors to 
link this to the circuit wiring. 
The connection must be 
made inside an enclosure 
which is formed by recessing 
a round conduit box into the 
ceiling and then mounting th
light fitting immediately 
below it (3). You will need 
access to the ceiling void to 
do this - easy if there is a lo
above, but involving lifting
floorboards otherwise. 
e 
ft 
 
 
 
 
Draw the cable(s) that supplied the old rose up into the 
ceiling void, out of harm's way. The rose was probably 
screwed to a joist, so push a bradawl through the ceiling 
from above to indicate where it is.  
 
 
 
Then hold the conduit box (you need the type with rear 
knockouts but no spout) against the ceiling from below, 
clear of the joist position, and draw a line round it. Insert 
the tip of your padsaw in the cable hole, cut out to the line 
and then saw carefully round it. Remove the waste.  
 
 
 
Remove a knockout from the base of the conduit box, and 

push it up into the hole so its rim is flush with the ceiling. If 
it is a loose fit, hold it temporarily in place with masking 
tape. Then gain access to the ceiling void. Cut a piece of 
wood or board to length to fit between the joists above the 
conduit box, and screw batten scraps to each end of it. Rest 
it on top of the conduit box and drive screws through the 
battens into the joist sides. 
 
 
 
Go downstairs and screw the box to the underside of the 
board from below. Then drill a 18mm diameter hole up 
through the knockout you removed earlier to create an entry
point for the cable(s).  
 
 
 
Feed the cable(s) down 
through the hole and into the 
conduit box (4).  
 
 
 
If only one cable is present, 
you need three strip 
connectors to link it to the 
flex tail from the light fitting. 
Connect the red cable core t
the brown flex core, black to 
blue and earth (green-and
yellow) to earth (5).  
o 
-
 
 
 
If more than one cable is present, indicating loop-in wiring, 
then four connectors will be needed to allow the connections 
in the original rose to be reproduced. 
 
 
 

(6). Start by connecting all 
the cable earth cores to 
connector 1, the black core o
the switch cable to conn
2, the other black cores to 
connector 3 and all the red 
cores to connector 4. Connect
in the flex next, taking the
earth core to connector 1,
brown to connector 2 and th
blue to connector 3.  
f
ector 
 
 the
e 
 
 
 
With the connections made, all that remains is to attach the 
light fitting to the ceiling. If it has a baseplate with screw 
holes at 51mm centres, you can secure it to the threaded 
lugs at each side of the conduit box with M4 (4mm) machine 
screws. Otherwise, use woodscrews long enough to pass 
through the ceiling and into the board that supports the 
conduit box.  
 
5  - Extend a lighting circuit  
If you want a ceiling light at a new position, you will have to 
extend the lighting circuit with a spur cable to supply it, so 
once again you will need access to the ceiling void. That will 
enable you to decide where to make the connection into the 
existing circuit. You can connect your spur to the circuit in 
several ways, but the most straightforward is to use a four-
terminal junction box connected into the circuit cable at a 
convenient point.  
 
 
 
Turn the power off, locate the lighting-circuit cable and cut 
it. Remove some sheath from each cut cable end, strip the 
cores and reconnect them to the new junction box.  
 
 
 
Install the new light fitting 
and its switch (7). Then run a
cable back from each 
component to the new 
junction box. 
 
 
 
 

Connect the cores to the box 
terminals as shown to 
complete the wiring (8), 
screw the box to a joist and 
fit its cover. Restore the 
power and test the operation 
of the light.  
 
6  - Fit a dimmer swich 
Dimmer switches allow you to control the brightness of your 
lights, from full on down to the barest glimmer, so they offer 
you the chance to create subtle mood-lighting effects. You 
can fit them in place of the existing plateswitches, but there 
are a couple of points you must check before you buy. 
 
 
 
First find out the wattage of the light (or lights) the dimmer 
switch will be controlling. Each switch has a maximum and 
minimum wattage rating, so you need to choose one that 
can handle your wattage. 
 
 
 
Next check whether the plateswitch you are replacing has 
one or two switches (called gangs in the trade), so you can 
buy a one-gang or two-gang dimmer as required.  
 
 
 
Lastly, with the power off, undo the fixing screws holding the
plateswitch you are replacing to its mounting box. Lift the 
switch away gently so you can measure its depth. Some 
dimmers need a box 25mm deep, while many plateswitches 
fit on shallower boxes. Buy a dimmer to suit the box depth. 
 
 
 
To fit the new dimmer s
disconnect the switch cable 
cores from the terminals o
the old plateswitch. Th
follow the instructions with 
the dimmer switch to 
reconnect them to the correct
terminals (9).  
witch, 
n 
en 
 

 
 
 
If the dimmer switch has a metallic faceplate and is on a 
flush metal mounting box, you must link the earth terminals 
on each component with a so-called flying earth. Take a 
short length of earth core from a cable offcut, cover it with 
PVC sleeving and connect it to the two terminals. Then fold 
the cable neatly back into the mounting box and attach the 
faceplate to it.  
 

