

Infinity Ethical Hacking
Learn basic to advance hacks   
Arthur S Sapp

© Copyright 2020 - All rights reserved.
The contents of this book may not be reproduced, duplicated or transmitted without direct written
permission from the author.
Under no circumstances will any legal responsibility or blame be held against the publisher for any
reparation, damages, or monetary loss due to the information herein, either directly or indirectly. 
Legal Notice:
This book is copyright protected.  This is only for personal use. You cannot amend, distribute, sell, use,
quote or paraphrase any part of the content within this book without the consent of the author. 
Disclaimer Notice:
Please note the information contained within this document is for educational and entertainment
purposes only. Every attempt has been made to provide accurate, up to date and reliable information.
No warranties of any kind are expressed or implied. Readers acknowledge that the author is not
engaging in the rendering of legal, financial, medical or professional advice. The content of this book
has been derived from various sources. Please consult a licensed professional before attempting any
techniques outlined in this book.
By reading this document, the reader agrees that under no circumstances are is the author responsible
for any losses, direct or indirect, which are incurred as a result of the use of information contained
within this document, including, but not limited to, —errors, omissions, or inaccuracies.

Table of Contents
INFINITY ETHICAL HACKING
Learn basic to advance hacks
INTRODUCTION
Who is this book intended for?
The difference between ethical hacking and cracking
The Hacker Ethic
CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS ETHICAL HACKING?
What is ethical hacking?
The need for ethical hackers
What is the difference between ethical hacking and cracking?
Roles and responsibilities of an ethical hacker
CHAPTER 2: HACKING AS A CAREER
The different types of ethical hacking
Black Box Ethical hacking
White Box Ethical hacking
Gray Box Ethical Hacking
The History of White Hat Hacking
CHAPTER 3: MAKING MONEY FREELANCE
What is freelancing?
The pros and cons of going freelance
Benefits
Cons
Start freelancing
I have experience, now what?
I have no experience, what should I do?
Premiums
CHAPTER 4: THE THREE HATS
Black hats
Zero Day vulnerability?
Black Hat Hacker Example
White hats
White Hat Hacker Example
Gray hats
Gray Hat Hacker Example

CHAPTER 5: ETHICAL HACKING EXPLAINED
The evolution of hacking
Examples: mischief or criminal?
What does it mean to be an ethical hacker?
Responsibilities of an Ethical Hacker
Hacker Ethics and Code of Conduct
CHAPTER 6: SCAN YOUR SYSTEM
Port Scan
Network scan
Vulnerability scan
Live system check
War Dialing
Ping
Check ports and their status
CHAPTER 7: PENETRATION TESTS
The purpose of penetration testing
Responsibilities for Cloud Pen testing
How often should you perform penetration tests?
Penetration test tools
Penetration Testing Strategies
Penetration testing of cloud-based applications
Step 1: Make sure you understand how the cloud provider policy works
Step 2: Come in with a plan
Step 3: Choose which tools you will use
Step 4: Observe the answer
Step 5: Find and remove vulnerabilities
General advice on Cloud Pen Testing
How can local security and cloud security be compared?
CHAPTER 8: MOST COMMON SECURITY TOOLS
SolarWinds Log and Event Manager
Screenshot of SolarWinds Log and Event Manager
SolarWinds Network Configuration Manager
SolarWinds User Device Tracker
Wireshark
Nessus Professional
Sniffing
TCP dump
Kismet
Nikto
OpenVAS
OSSEC
Nexpose

GFI LanGuard
Security tools for the cloud
Bitglass
Skyhigh Networks
NetsCheap
CipherCloud
Okta
Cloud Penetration Testing from the customer's point of view
The responsibilities of consumers and suppliers
Penetration testing Depends on the Cloud Service Model
IaaS model
PaaS model
SaaS model
Things to remember as a customer of Cloud Penetration Testing
CHAPTER 9: WHAT DO I NEED TO KNOW
The nature of the work
What is behind the surface of the track? What do you usually do?
What are the general assumptions people make about work?
How many hours a day do you work?
Are there any tips and shortcuts that can help you get to work?
Can you do things to differentiate yourself from the rest of the white hats?
What about the job is the worst and how do you deal with it?
Where is the pleasure in work? What makes it so attractive?
Customers and general advice
Is there anything you want your customers to know before seeking your help?
How much can you earn with this work?
How do you progress in this area?
What do customers tend to be over or undervalued?
What is the most important thing to remember?
CONCLUSION

Introduction
Let's think back to just over 10 years ago. The entire area of IT security was
basically unknown. In the 1990s, there were hardly any professionals who
could say they were working in cyber security, and even fewer knew what the
area was going to be.
Security was essentially just anti-virus software. You know, that pesky pop-
up that yells at you every time you try to get a file from the Internet. Sure,
packet filtering routers and similar technologies were also popular, but it
wasn't really considered important.
At the time, the concept of a hacker was more like the hacker memes we have
today. It was mostly from movies Hollywood made ... or just referred to
someone who got a low score while playing golf.
It was ignored. Nobody really saw hacking as a threat. After all, what could
be won at that time? It was mainly seen as an annoying triviality that pops up
every now and then. Today we understand that it is a huge threat that can
affect large multi-billion dollar companies and even our governments.
It was ignored and at the time it was clear why. Unfortunately, later on, the
entire IT industry would feel the impact hackers could leave behind. Today,
the number of IT system security professionals worldwide is more than 61
thousand. This is not without reason. In fact, the cyber security field is not
only growing, but growing faster than the already growing technology
industry according to the ISC. There are now more security companies than
anyone to remember and trust me, most of them doing work far more
important than just an antivirus.
Cyber security has even crept into the mainstream, with countless people
authorizing things through their firewalls and using VPNs every day to watch
videos not available at their location.
There are so many ways to address security issues that it can be a real
headache to think about it. Oh well, even considering the alternatives of a
single program is enough to give you migraines from the sheer amount of
competition out there.
The world has changed enormously since the 1990s. I mean, remember the
last day you spent without using an electronic device. Chances are you don't
even remember that. So, what does all this change bring to your home? For
your computer? Does this mean that every time your computer, phone or
other smart device is turned on, you are pushed into a dangerous world?

Well, that's pretty much what it means, because each of those changes led to
the world and the criminals changing into it to meet the new environment as
well. In the digital world, you will find a playground filled with mines that
only need a single touch to detonate, if they even need to. Even the simplest
things can cause quite a few problems for you.
If you ever connect to the internet without a decent firewall, chances are your
system will be hacked in minutes.
Whenever you open a modest email from friends or family, there is always a
chance that the email will open a back door to your system. This means that a
hacker needs very little time to access even the most private parts of your
computer.
If you use your Internet Messaging program to download and run a file, don't
be surprised if your desktop turns into a virus hot zone.
Even when you browse trusted websites, you are completely open to hacker
attacks. When this happens, your sensitive files are at risk of being taken or
deleted. Unfortunately, the fear of being targeted by an online drive-by is
often more than a fear and you can be attacked completely out of the blue. It
is not uncommon.
More often than not, people like to spread the dangers of cyber terrorism.
However, the fear, uncertainty and doubt that people generally feel when it
comes to this topic is anything but unjustified. People are often blind to the
probability of a digital catastrophe. Organized crime and terrorism have their
finger everywhere, including in the digital world. Multiple organized terrorist
cells are often raided. When their computers are found, most of what is on
them is cyber hacking plans and similar files that show how they would
attack the infrastructure of the United States.
You may remember August 14, 2003. This was the day when the greatest
power outage in United States history occurred. About 20 percent of the U.S.
population was without power for more than 12 hours. It is very easy to make
yourself believe the most light-hearted story and say that some trees have
fallen or strong winds have damaged part of the network. While this
explanation may be correct, consider this: 3 days before the power outage,
the Microsoft Blaster worm was released on the Internet. This worm is
known as one of the most dangerous and volatile worms ever created. While
this may have been a coincidence, one can only be skeptical.
You might think that all fear and severity caused by cyber terrorism is not
justified. You might think that since nothing has happened so far, nothing

will happen. But think about this: no one expected 9-11 to happen. Everyone
knew there was a security risk when it came to airport security and terrorism,
but nothing was done about it.
Skepticism is understandable and welcome, since skepticism is never bad.
But you have to trust me when I say that cyber terrorism is a very dangerous
but probable thing. You have to trust the media when they panic about minor
cyber attacks because that's how it all starts.
You have to be careful with this. A hacker is like a burglar. They try to keep
an eye on your safety until they can point to a place where they can enter
your safe space and grab your valuables. Every second of the day, there are
hacker groups and organized criminals who dig for your safety. You should
never let them succeed. No one should ever sit back and look at someone else
who is dear to him and desecrating his safe space. Help yourself by learning
more about this and use the resources available to you to protect yourself as
much as possible.
While increasing your security seems like something out of movies, I can
assure you that you can do this quite easily. It's more about what you think
than anything. You can compare it with sports or studying. As long as you
are adamant and have a schedule where you do certain things, it will quickly
become part of your life. If you don't integrate it into your daily schedule,
you'll quickly start to forget about it and find excuses for not doing it.
Security is a process and not a goal. So it is important that you make it part of
your routine and soon you will be able to do it without thinking about it.
However, if you avoid this, you will be hit sooner or later. The best thing to
do for yourself right now is to educate yourself and gain some knowledge on
the subject. You cannot protect yourself from something you do not
understand, and you must protect yourself from it. It is not your right to
protect yourself, but your duty. Getting to know something that can be
dangerous to you is the best thing you can do to protect yourself. If you fill in
the gaps in your knowledge, you can prepare for most things.
What is well known and clear to see is that you should always keep up to
protect yourself from malicious users everywhere. This is where the know-
how in this book comes in and saves the day. It offers you a way to
implement the technology currently available to us and the knowledge
gathered over the years to keep your systems safe for a while. Keeping your
system safe is impossible unless you get into the mind of the malicious user
and use the knowledge you gain. See what tools they use and use the same

tools to see the weaknesses in your system that they might see if they were
aimed at you. Unless you do this, any other assessment of how secure your
system is can be very inaccurate.
Ethical hacking involves many different legal and safe activities. Systems
around the world need to be improved and made safer. Activities include, but
are not limited to, white hatacking, vulnerability testing and penetration
testing. While the benefits of this type of activity are relatively hard to see, if
you look at it a little more it becomes clear as a day. The only way to
improve and keep up with the changing times is to improve yourself. This is
done by testing your system and improving the results you get from the tests.
The book mainly covers what it means to be an ethical hacker and how to do
it correctly to find effective countermeasures and close any back doors that
your system might have to keep out malicious hackers.
Who is this book intended for?
First of all, it is important to emphasize that if you choose to use the
knowledge in this book only for malicious activities, you are to blame. No
one else associated with you to acquire the knowledge is not to blame, nor are
they liable for the way you use the knowledge. The contents of this book can
be used by both white hat hackers (ethical hackers) and black hat hackers
(crackers). The book looks so closely at the cracker mentality that it becomes
a good source of study for crackers themselves. The methods in the book can
be used in two ways. The responsibility for the correct use of the knowledge
lies entirely with you. You should always use it in authorized ways.
To be an ethical hacker, focus your efforts on detecting vulnerabilities that
may have been overlooked and finding ways to fill those holes. Whatever test
you run on your system, it will help you manage and improve your system, as
well as any other system you could do this for. Computer security is nothing
to scoff at. It is an issue that should always be taken seriously.
The same can be said if you do this for another. Your goal is to protect their
system from malicious users and close the gaps that seem most problematic.
If you read this book carefully and get all the knowledge, you are always in
your A-game when it comes to computer security. You will feel self-
sufficient in that regard and you will also enjoy the honor of being a helpful
person to anyone concerned about the safety of computers. No matter what
system we're talking about and how far that system is, there will always be
hundreds, if not thousands, of ways to crack it.
This book helps you understand the following:

● The results of several important and impactful case studies made by
different experts in the field
● Various hacking attacks widely used in the squatting community and all the
nuances underneath
● The countermeasures you can take to protect yourself
To be prepared for the tasks ahead and to hack your systems properly, you
need to learn the information in Part 1 of the book. There is an old saying that
says, "If you don't plan, you plan to fail." This is especially true for hacking,
especially when it comes to the ethical part of it. There are several steps you
must take before you can start working. You must first get permission from
the owner of the system and develop a general game plan on how you will
handle it. Some may look at the information in this book and say it was
created to turn script kiddies, people who use automated tools to crack
systems with little to no technical knowledge, into actual hackers. However,
this is incorrect. The knowledge presented in this book is provided to you for
ethical purposes. You should use it to hack your own systems or the systems
you are allowed to hack to make the system safer and the information on the
system more secure.
There are some chapters you can skip in this book. For example, if you are
not using a Windows operating system, there is no point in reading the
chapters describing how to use them.
The book goes into the explanation, assuming a few things:
● You have an average understanding of concepts and terms related to
information, computer and network security
● You can distinguish ethical hackers from crackers
● You have a computer and a network to which you can apply these
techniques
● You can access the Internet and get the tools that may be needed for some
tasks
● The owner of the system has given you permission to use the methods and
techniques contained in the book.
The book is divided into seven parts. You should get to know the format well
as you may have to jump from one part to another. Each of these chapters
gives you different methods and techniques that will help you improve your
ethical hacking skills.
The difference between ethical hacking and cracking
There has been a lot of controversy about the term 'hacker' for a long time.

The general population automatically assumes that a hacker is someone who
does the work unethically and tries to hack systems for their own gain.
However, this was not always the case.
Before hacking became a widespread criminal activity, the word 'hacker' had
a very positive meaning. It was used for the best of the best when it comes to
programming. Linus Torvalds' will was declared a hacker. This image of the
word changed very quickly when cybercrime outbreaks began. The media
took it upon themselves to clarify the events while obscuring the names of the
best programmers of the time. The programming community was outraged by
this and many ardent debates arose on this topic. Many influential names
from both communities came up to give their input. But unfortunately it was
all for nothing. The media-pushed story was already widely accepted by the
public and it was too late to change it. The word 'hacking' was labeled
negative. This was not helped by the cracking community that enforced the
story that hacking is strictly a malicious activity. The people in the squatting
community like to carry the title of "hacker" with great pride. This is seen as
an insult by the programming community, as a hacker should be a title given
only to those who have shown great programming expertise.
Several parallels must be drawn in the discussion. Although the cracker
subculture is part of the programming community, the programming
community strives to suppress and expose all efforts of the cracker
subculture. This is where the term "cracker" came from. The programming
community sees crackers as the most dangerous and horrifying individuals.
To prevent as many people as possible from using the term 'hacker' for these
individuals, they have taken it upon themselves to find a new term to replace
it in the story. This is where the term "cracker" comes into play. After the
term was coined and widely accepted by programmers, it was immediately
pushed into the media. Great efforts have been made to clarify the difference.
While it initially looked like it was going somewhere and there was
something on the horizon, it eventually fell into the water. The media was
adamant to push their story and, moreover, people from the squatting
community called themselves hackers.
Programmers generally use this differentiation and call malicious hackers
crackers. Some people outside the community also adhere to it, but the
majority of the public was already so affected that the damage is irreversible.
However, it is important to distinguish. It is imperative that we never forget it
because there are big names like the aforementioned Linus Torvalds whose

names have always been associated with the term "hacker".
What you need to keep in mind is that hacking is just like any other trade.
There is always a parallel between drawn and locksmithing. Why? Because
the main principles of the two are fairly similar. Hackers try to find
weaknesses in the system, but this is legal if done with good intentions and
with the permission of the system owner. Lock picking is considered highly
illegal and is a crime in itself, but a locksmith must do it from time to time to
meet the needs of their customers. Imagine being trapped outside your own
home and leaving the keys on the inside. You don't really want to break the
door or damage your windows, so call a locksmith to help break into your
own house, no matter how funny it sounds. Hacking works on a similar
principle. While the act itself can be illegal, you always want the help of an
experienced hacker when working on improving the security of your system.
The fact is that, to be precise, hackers with a white hat are needed for today's
industry. Many companies and organizations offer classes and payrolls for
experienced hackers. Why? A computer system is like an organism. You
build immunity by getting sick. The situation is comparable to computer
systems. The only way to really improve your security is to go through an
attack. A weakness becomes very apparent as soon as someone takes
advantage of it. Today, many companies hire skilled hackers to improve the
security of their systems. Most hacking attacks take place in a pattern. If you
attack your system and modify your system to prevent such an attack in the
future, it will be able to prevent or at least slow down all attacks of the same
kind. However, only the most skilled people are hired for these jobs. You
wouldn't want an inept doctor to treat your illnesses. Therefore, you don't
want an inept hacker to mess around with the intricacies of your system. The
individuals who do this work are usually considered hackers by the entire
programming community. This is the most respectable thing you can do with
your hacking skills as it takes a lot of expertise and is done for a good cause.
When talking about the different types of hackers, it is important to note that
there are categories based on the legality and legitimacy of their activities,
not the level of skill they possess. Based on this, we have the following
categories:
White Hats - White hat hackers are hackers who want to be well-meaning
programmers. They work to keep systems safe. They find weaknesses in the
system and find ways to remove them. The line of work that white hats have
is usually very well paid and they are considered one of the most valuable

technological assets. The work of white hat hackers is not illegal. White hat
hackers have permission from the owner when working on a system.
Black hats - Black hat hackers are your typical crackers. Their work is
usually fueled by malicious intent and selfishness. They work to crack a
system to find data that they or someone else may want. This is considered
very illegal and is the reason that the word "hacker" has such negative
connotations. They do the same thing as white hats, but for evil reasons and
without the owner's permission. There is a subgroup of black hats called
script kiddies. No one in the community likes script kiddies, not even black
hats themselves. Why? Because script kiddies have almost no working line
skills and use scripts in advance to do all the work.
Gray Hats - Gray hat hackers fall somewhere in the middle of the spectrum.
Their activities are illegal, but they do not steal or destroy the data, but do it
for sports. They usually contact the owner of the system they have cracked to
provide them with a solution to the vulnerability.
The Hacker Ethic
There are two rules that make the difference between crackers and actual
hackers. The two rules have been made regarding the legality and legitimacy
of the hacking process. These are the following:
Sharing information is good for everyone. Every hacker has a duty to share
his knowledge. They do this by writing open source code and helping people
improve their systems as much as possible.
● Using someone's knowledge to crack systems for fun and to practice is
okay as long as no illegal activities are done through this activity.
These principles are widely used, but not by everyone. Most hackers work
under the first ethics by writing open-source software. This is taken a step
further by some more extreme individuals who believe that all information
should be available to everyone. The GNU Project supports this philosophy
and believes that any form of control over information should be considered
bad.
The second ethic is usually considered a bit more controversial because there
are those who believe that any kind of squatting should be considered
immoral and illegal. What distinguishes gray hats from black hats is the fact
that they don't use their expertise to destroy or steal information. This is why
they are considered somewhat benign in the community. There are different
courtesy rules among hackers. As soon as a gray hat hacker enters someone's
system, he should always contact the owner of the system himself to tell them

how the attack was conducted and how to protect the system from similar
attacks.
Almost all hackers are willing to share their knowledge and skills about this.
This is the most reliable way in which the two ethics manifest. There are
huge networks that work as places where the community can come together
and where individuals can exchange experiences and tools, as well as
techniques and tips.
Chapter 1: What is ethical hacking?
Cyber criminals are one of the biggest problems anyone can face in the
digital world. There was a time when hackers weren't taken so seriously, but
things have changed dramatically in recent years. In India, for example, there
are many companies that pay hefty sums of money to hackers to protect some
of their sensitive and valuable information. In 2013, it was reported that in
that year alone, $ 4 billion was lost by Indian companies as a result of cyber
attacks.
As the business world evolves and becomes more technologically dependent,
many companies have been forced to enter the digital ecosystem and use the
technologies the ecosystem offers to function more efficiently. The need for
more efficient ways to protect information is growing in prominence because
of the threat of increasingly intensive and harmful security breaches. All
these changes made clear the shortage of talented people in the information
security sector.
Nasscom reported that the need for white hats was much greater than the
number of white hats they had in 2015. There were 15,000 certified ethical
hackers in India, compared to the 77,000 that were really needed.
What is ethical hacking?
Ethical hacking is the use of hacking techniques to help systems protect the
important information stored on it. This is a new competition in IT
programming that is gaining more and more recognition. In this industry,
people work to hack security systems and identify weaknesses and find a way
to fix them.
The techniques used by white hats and black hats are very similar and usually
the same. The difference is that white hats must make improvements to these
techniques to keep up with the malicious counterparts in the box. Companies
that use security systems and work with large amounts of sensitive
information hire white hat hackers to prevent malicious persons from

accessing the information stored on the system. It is the job of a white hat
hacker to hack the employer's system to locate the parts of the system that are
at risk and fix the holes. The first step every white hat takes is called
penetration test. This is a way to find vulnerabilities in systems. It is an easy
way to assess the strength of the system.
Ethical hacking includes many services. Some of these are:
● Application testing: detects the flaws in a system
● Remote or war: test modem connections
Local network tests: works to analyze the work of protocols and devices in
the system.
● Wireless security: checks the overall security of the entire framework.
● System hardening: strengthens the system and fixes the holes in the system
● Stolen laptop: This is done through an employee's PC that has access to a
little information. It checks the personal information stored in software.
● Social engineering: uses the hacker's personality to access a system.
The need for ethical hackers
As I have said a few times, cybercrime is becoming increasingly important.
Crackers are becoming more and more sophisticated. They also gain access
to more and more funding because of the many malicious organizations that
want to steal information from important sources.
Every day, companies need to improve their own systems to keep up with
advances in hacking tactics and techniques. Hackers are increasingly finding
hidden vulnerabilities in computers, so to protect your system you should
always improve your security. This is the same for any company that
processes highly sensitive information. White hats are usually well-trained
professionals working on improving these systems.
Some traditional companies have a problem when it comes to understanding
white hat hacking. The banks in India have often faced vicious hack attacks
that have cost them a lot of money. Their lack of confidence in the benefits of
ethical hacking led to their miniscule defense against cybercrime.
There is malware called "darkhotel" that affects hotels and various other parts
of the industry. This proved that the industry was lagging behind when it
comes to cyber security. The malware itself was used to collect information
about people interested in the hotels using the hotel's wireless access.
The squatter community is constantly growing when it comes to tools and
techniques. New types of malware, worms and viruses are created every day.
As a result, companies are increasingly aware of the benefits of ethical

hacking and how it can help protect their networks.
The bottom line is that owning a business today is just as risky as it could be
because of the number of malicious users who have access to so many
different tools. Therefore, every system must be tested regularly to keep up
with the times. There is a holistic approach involved in the assessment of a
system due to the complexity of the field of computer and network security.
There are many interactions and operations involved in any security system,
and some of them can be very vulnerable. Ethical hackers are the best people
for this. It is individuals with the ability and know-how that can help anyone
refine their system.
What is the difference between ethical hacking and
cracking?
As I've said a few times, the techniques all hackers use are similar, if not the
same. The tools and techniques used are universally accepted by all people
engaged in this activity. The only difference between ethical hackers and
others is why they do what they do. Crackers or black hats are fed for their
own selfish and evil reasons such as profit or harassment. The efforts of
white hats are made to prevent black hats from taking advantage of systems.
There are several other things that can help you distinguish black hats from
white hats:
The purpose of the activity: While it is true that white hats use all the
techniques developed by black hats, they do this to help a person or company.
This is done to determine how a black hat would approach the system to
detect and help fix defects.
Legality: The main distinction between ethical hackers and crackers is the
fact that while they do the same thing in the same way, only one side is
legally acceptable. White hats have the permission of the system owner
before doing it, while black hats break the law by doing it without the owner's
knowledge.
Ownership: White hats are hired by several companies to help them improve
their systems. Black hats are not owned by the system and they are not
employed by anyone who does.
Roles and responsibilities of an ethical hacker
The ethical side of hacking is not easy. While white hats are often highly
regarded in the programming community, as well as among entrepreneurs,
many still consider them criminals. The activity itself is considered immoral
by many. Many white hats prefer not to have the "hacker" connotation next to

their name because of the responses they can get.
To keep their practices legal and prevent others from perceiving them as
criminals, white hat hackers must be well aware of their responsibilities and
adhere to the guidelines. The following rules are some of the most important
for white hat hackers:
● An ethical hacker is always expected to seek the permission of the owner of
the system before starting it. You will need owner approval for any activity
you do on the system and you are expected to provide the owner with the
information obtained through your activities.
● Once the hacker has analyzed the system, he must report his findings and
plans to the owner before taking action.
● The hacker must inform the owner of what was found during the search.
● The hacker is expected to keep his findings and activities confidential. Due
to the nature of ethical hacking that promotes the security of a system, the
hacker should not disclose the information to anyone else.
● Remove all found vulnerabilities after finding them to prevent black hats
from entering the system without permission.
To be successful in the industry you need a certain set of skills. The
knowledge that a white hat hacker must possess is both broad and deep. It
must cover different parts of the computer technology field and must be very
detailed. Some of the skills required are:
● Detailed Programming Knowledge - Any professional working in the
software development and application security lifecycle is required to possess
this knowledge.
● Scripting Knowledge - This type of knowledge is important for anyone
working on host-based attacks and network-based attacks.
● Network skills - most threats to the system come from networks. Because
of this, you need to know which devices are connected to the network and
how they handle them.
● Knowledge of different platforms used on different types of devices
Knowledge of the use of hacking tools and techniques available on the
market
● Knowledge of servers and search engines
Chapter 2: Hacking as a career
It's safe to say that identifying yourself as a hacker will turn a few heads and
give you some unpleasant looks because people who don't know the

difference between black hats and white hats immediately assume what
you're doing is very illegal. Whatever you do, whether it's helping a military
department to improve the security of the classified information, or hacking a
school's database to see what loopholes can be exploited by unauthorized
users to accessing the data, your efforts will usually be disapproved to some
extent by others. People usually assume that you work as part of an
underground society of vandals and do not consider it a valid career choice.
This is anything but true. Hacking can make a career like no other. In order to
work properly as a certified ethical hacker, you will need to go through a lot
of preparatory work and training. A diploma or certificate in the field of
computer security is not always mandatory, but it is nice to have. What you
need is extensive knowledge of the subject. Knowing how computers work
and interact is the most important part when looking for a job. Many movies
and TV shows like to view hacking as enchanting. They never show
everything that comes in the box. Experience and knowledge are great deals
when it comes to hacking, which is sometimes easily overlooked.
With that in mind, if you've already done the learning yourself using your
systems, this way of working can be more challenging than it initially
seemed.
If you had practiced with your own equipment, the next logical step is
freelancing, where you can gain some more experience and some support for
your activities. However, as you might expect, hacker freelancing isn't
exactly the most stable position ever, so you could experience some lows
when it comes to finance. It's a great way to get more experience and some
money. It's also a great way to build an impressive resume. Freelancing is
usually a great place to start.
After gaining a significant amount of experience, you should start sending
job applications to tech companies to see if your experience is needed. You
can submit applications to many large companies. This is smart because they
tend to pay more for these services. However, there are many smaller
companies that are happy to hire you and are willing to pay a little more for
your services if you are good enough. Always keep your sights open as you
can find work in this industry if you have the skills.
Being an ethical hacker is quite a challenging task because a true white
hatacker needs to know everything about systems and networks. This is why
certain organizations have started issuing certifications that support talented
hackers when it comes to work. Aspiring ethical hackers have been looking

for such certifications as evidence of skill. There are several certifications
that provide some major benefits. Some of these benefits include:
● Hackers with these certifications have the necessary knowledge to build
and maintain security systems. If you are good in this field, you are a great
asset to any organization that would like to hire you.
● Hackers with these certifications are more likely to receive higher salaries.
A certified ethical hacker can hope for a salary of $ 90,000.
● It validates your efforts and makes it easier for you to get a job with
companies and makes you stand out among your colleagues.
● Most organizations prefer certified individuals when it comes to system
security because of the growing needs of the field.
● Start-up companies look for certified persons. These companies pay a
pretty penny for individuals who do this work.
The different types of ethical hacking
When it comes to ethical hacking, there are different types of practices used.
Due to the wide variety of possible cyber attacks, every company wants to
test as many possibilities as possible. This is why they employ individuals
with different levels of knowledge. These are the so-called boxes. There are
three types.
Black Box Ethical hacking
Black box ethical hackers know nothing about the organization whose
systems they are trying to enter. These people don't focus on a particular part
of the system or a particular method. They use all the tools at their disposal to
crack the system. The attacker has no focus because he has no information
about the organization he is attacking.
White Box Ethical hacking
White box ethical hackers are concerned with how much time and money
goes into a job. When an ethical hacker starts working on a system with a
white box, they know everything about the organization. They are used to
mimic an attack that can be carried out by someone near or within the
company. These attacks target the specific parts of the system to strengthen
them. The disadvantage of this method is that the hacker will attack the
already known vulnerabilities and possibly overlook other vulnerabilities.
White box ethical hackers usually work with teams of different people, from
Human Resources, Upper Management and Technical Support Management.
Gray Box Ethical Hacking
Hacking gray boxes is somewhere in between the previous two. It combines

the two attacks. It has a certain amount of information about the company,
but that information may change from time to time. It has the same drawback
of white box ethical hacking because of the obvious vulnerabilities.
The History of White Hat Hacking
Ethical hacking is not something of the new era. It has existed under different
names for a long time. The first documented case of ethical hacking occurred
when the United States Air Force conducted a so-called security assessment
of their systems. The Multics operating system has been tested to see if it can
be used to store secret files and documents. During this test, Multics was
determined to be better than the other options available to them, but it was
still lacking and had many vulnerabilities when it comes to security that
could be exploited on the cracker side with little effort. The test was made as
realistic as possible because they thought this is the only way to get accurate
results that can be considered evidence. The tests ranged from simple
information collection to full attacks that endangered the entire systems.
Since then, there have been a few more reports from the United States
military conducting these types of activities.
Until 1981, white hat hacking was not known as a term to many people, but it
was then that The New York Times introduced and labeled the term as a
positive form of hacking tradition. There was an employee in the National
CSS who wrote password cracker software. When he decided to release this
software, he was outraged. The company was not angry at the existence of
the software, but at the fact that it was hiding the existence of the software. In
the reprimand, the NCSS stated that the company finds and encourages the
fact that employees who find security flaws are beneficial to the company.
Dun Farmer and Wietse Venma were the first to see the potential of white hat
hacking. They were the people who turned it into a technique that can be used
to assess the security of a system and improve it later. They pointed out that
after a certain amount of time, once they have collected a certain amount of
information, they can invade a system and do a great deal of damage if they
choose to. Speaking about what can be done through white-hat hacking, they
gave several examples of how information can be collected and used and how
to use this knowledge to prevent attacks. They made an application of all the
tools they used during their research and made them available for download
to anyone who might be interested. The program is called the Security
Administrator Tool for Analyzing Networks, also known as SATAN. The
program received a lot of media attention in 1992.

Chapter 3: Making money freelance
Ethical hacking is a huge field. The number of available jobs is huge, leading
to them paying more and more as time goes on, as there aren't enough ethical
hackers to fulfill all of these functions at all times.
In my opinion, freelancing is the best way to make money from ethical
hacking. In this chapter we discuss the pros and cons of freelance work, how
well you can earn and how to become a freelancer.
What is freelancing?
Freelancing is in fact becoming a company yourself. Although you don't have
to act as CEO or something, it does serve to paint a good picture. A
freelancer is actually a one-man business. You have to be your own
marketing, your own PR, your own accountant and your own employee. This
takes a lot of effort, so if you are someone who is satisfied with a normal, 9-5
job, I would not recommend going the freelance route. On the other hand, if
you are someone who wants to do their very best, reach the top of the field
and bring in ridiculous amounts, this area is for you.
Freelancing basically means giving up the traditional concept of employment
and becoming some sort of full-time contractor. You have to choose your
own customers and find them yourself. This can be quite difficult for
beginners, although we've listed some great ways below.
As a freelancer, you can also dictate your own hours, which is great. If you
are an early riser you can start work at sunrise but if you are a late owl no one
will judge you to start your working day at 4am. This also means that you
don't have to do all your work at once and can segment your work so that you
only work for the time that you are actually productive.
You also only get paid for the things you do, so make sure to include this in
your hourly rate. It's not uncommon for freelancers to be in an area that
usually pays $ 20 an hour to charge $ 30 an hour or higher rates. Freelancers
are usually considered to be more competent than internal employees as well,
so make sure your knowledge reflects this.
Finally, freelancing means giving up any concept of job security. Customers
will come and go like the wind, but if you can keep a steady stream of them
you will earn much more than your internal counterpart.
The pros and cons of going freelance
Let's see what you get when you first become a freelancer, right?
Benefits

First of all, you get freedom in more ways than one. The most important are
location and time. You can work anywhere you want. This is the cause of the
"digital nomad" lifestyle. That's where you leave a constant physical location
and simply travel the world with your freelance income supporting you.
This is a great way of life, and many people have taken it heartily because it
is so comfortable to know that you literally can always switch locations and
go elsewhere. Having the freedom to go on an adventure whenever you want
is extremely exciting.
On the other hand, this also has many more everyday uses. Did your day ever
get off to a bad start because your morning rides were messy or annoying?
Well that will never happen again because your commuting ... does not exist!
You just get out of bed ... wait a minute, you just lie IN your bed and work.
This kind of freedom is generally not available to everyone except the
wealthiest in society, but freelancing makes it quite easy.
Other than that, work often digs into your time when you don't want to. This
means, for example, you wanted to go out with a friend at 9am, but you
couldn't because of work. If you were a freelancer, you wouldn't have this
problem as you can move all your work later in the day and still go out with
your friend. This also means that if you really had an awful day (for example,
someone broke up with you), you can take a day off from work if you make
up for it later.
This is also great for productivity, as everyone has several hours during the
day when they consider themselves productive. Instead of trying to fit into
the working hours of a company, you can choose yourself.
The second reason why you should consider freelancing is money. Successful
freelancers make a LOT more money than their counterparts on their desk.
For example, some of the most successful freelance ethical hackers rake in
over $ 500,000 a year. Let that number collapse. On the other hand, it's not
that the main ethical hackers in companies don't make much money, but that's
usually not even half.
This of course has some caveats. If you join the FBI, you're likely to get
offers that will put any freelancer to shame, but to get started with the FBI
you should have had a huge portfolio of freelancers beforehand.
For this reason, if all you are looking for is money, I would recommend that
you consider freelancing much more strongly than working at an agency.
The third reason to go freelance is, well, fun. Don't take me now as one of
those people who enjoy all the work, but if you are a freelancer you can pick

your chances.
Do you know that feeling when your boss assigns you a task you really hate,
and you have to do it, even if you'd rather double that time, just work on
something else? Well, as a freelancer, you don't have to do it. If there is a
specific area of ethical hacking that you really don't like, you can just avoid it
and never interact with it again in your life.
This freedom also allows you to take on bigger and better challenges. You
don't have to wait for your boss to trust you with a task he thinks is beyond
your means. Just take it and give it a try! In the worst case, you fail to meet
customer expectations and your reputation is temporarily hit.
Cons
The first drawback to freelancing is, well, freedom. But wait, you say, didn't
you say freedom was a pro? It is, if you can bear it. It can be extremely easy
to fall into the trap of not working enough because you are not bound by a
contract, location or the like.
This often leads to 'freelancers', people who are actually unemployed and
have kept their last job and have held freelancers next to it hoping to make it
sound better. After all, without anything to commit to, it can be very easy to
fly too close to the sun.
The second pitfall (relatively similar to the first) that many fall into is late
assignments. Starting with the first time you say, "Oh yes, this is getting
late", everything will continue from now on. From one assignment to another.
This can often happen even without annoying customers, but doing last
minute things is generally a bad idea, if only because of the stress it causes.
The stress itself often causes problems that cascade, meaning if you're a little
stressed one day, you're pretty stressed the next, and you get a meltdown
afterward.
Now the third is to find customers. Finding customers is ... difficult,
especially for those just starting out. If you are in a higher class country (UK,
US, Russia, etc.), you may find that most entry level jobs in your field are
paid below rate. While most freelancers earn more than their counterparts on
their desks, this relationship is rocking when it comes to entry-level positions.
After all, an entry-level job can usually be done just as well by someone from
India (with a low average wage) and someone from the US. Fortunately,
when it comes to ethical hacking, there are far more jobs than freelancers.
This means that this kind of amortization of freelance rates does not actually
take place.

On the other hand, even if there are so many jobs, that does not mean that
reaching customers is not difficult and they are not selective. Finding your
very first freelance job is always very difficult, so I would recommend that
you start working at a desk first, at least until you get wet in the industry.
This is because people generally rely on experience when it comes to finding
customers. Freelancers will want to work with people who are connected to
their former clients, and their former clients will look for experienced
freelancers. As a general rule of thumb, experience is king in the freelancing
world.
This brings us to another disadvantage of freelancing. Being your own boss is
surprisingly difficult. You must be able to create your own website and you
must advertise yourself. You should pay attention to both SEO and your
skills in the field in which you work. Although freelancing is a job with very
free hours, it is in a sense a 24/7 job in the sense that you never really stop
working for a while.
Start freelancing
Now, assuming you've passed the pros and cons of freelancing and decided to
start, what should you do? (If you've decided it's not for you, feel free to skip
this part.)
Now I want to split this into two parts. In one I recommend a path to
someone who already has IT experience, while in the other I aim the text at a
complete beginner.
I have experience, now what?
If you have experience now, you have an edge over almost everyone who
doesn't. The first thing to do is create a website.
A website? Shouldn't a resume be enough? Although yes, most office
functions only require a resume, but keep in mind that you will compete
directly with other people. This means every point you've earned in the
league looks great. You also present less as an employee and more as a
business partner, and what kind of business partner does no website have?
The first question you should ask yourself is, "Do I have close contacts?"
Chances are, if you've worked in the IT industry, you know quite a few
people with websites. With most IT professionals, this may even be the bulk
of the people you know. If this is the case then it's okay you have some
potential customers there. Get in touch with all these people one by one and
check if they are having trouble finding a cybersecurity professional.
If someone says yes, great! You have your first performance, so make sure to

nail it completely. If you do, they will definitely recommend you to their
friends. This is the most important part of freelancing: creating a network of
useful contacts that can be customers when you get into trouble. Make sure
that all of your past employers / clients know what you are currently working
on, and tell them to recommend you if someone they know has cyber security
issues.
This is great because it:
● Build your reputation. You will become much better known in your field if
even people who are not involved in cyber security know your name. In
addition, having people who are willing to guarantee your quality is an
excellent sign for future customers.
● It builds a consistent clientele. After you get a few successful gigs, chances
are that customers will automatically pour in. Word of mouth is spreading
rapidly in technical circles, and few professional cybersecurity professionals
exist.
So, what if your past clients don't give you gigs? Or are they just not
enthusiastic enough to recommend you to their acquaintances? In that case,
go to social media and job sites like Indeed.
There are countless posts for external / freelance cybersecurity experts and
ethical hackers on these sites. Make sure you use it optimally. Put "ethical
hacker", "penetration tester" or "cyber security expert" in your bio. Other
than that, make sure to use Linkedin as it is very popular with hiring
managers, and sometimes even a well-crafted profile is enough to get you a
few potential customers.
Indeed, it's generally best for long-term remote positions, but it's not bad for
freelancers either. Keep in mind that Indeed is a numbers game. Many of the
listings are fake or outdated, so make sure to apply for tons.
If none of these have worked, then it's time to head over to a collected site.
This would be a site like UpWork or Freelancer, these are sites designed to
promote job bidding among freelancers.
In general, I would advise against using these sites, as they typically hand out
lower rates than individually found customers. On the other hand, if you have
a good portfolio of experience, you quickly pass the beginner level jobs (of
which there are many) and move on to jobs that are actually well paid.
I have no experience, what should I do?
If you've just entered the world of ethical hacking and you don't have any
experience to talk about, don't despair. After all, you have a solid foundation

of knowledge and a drive to succeed!
In this case, I would advise that someone have your website made for you.
Chances are, you either don't know enough to do it yourself, or you lose
yourself to paralysis of options. If you feel you know enough and are decisive
enough to do it right, at least do it yourself. On the other hand, hiring a
professional is always a good idea.
Once you're done with that, I recommend having a few portfolio pieces. It
can be practice work you've done in college, or just things you did to mess
around for fun, but the important thing is that it's something you can show to
potential customers.
At that point, head to one of the freelance collection sites like UpWork or
Freelancer (of these two I'd recommend UpWork because it seems more
professional) and hunt for gigs. Don't be afraid if you're only accepted for
low-paying gigs, as these sites are notorious for their reputation and
experience. Make sure you always move up. Each of your customers should
pay better than your last one.
After gaining a lot of experience on one of these sites, come back here and
apply the advice in "I have experience, now what?" section.
Premiums
In both cases (with experience or not), premiums are a solid, albeit extremely
difficult, way to make money. Premiums are mainly aimed at people with
experience, but there have been cases where they have been obtained by
people with less experience.
A premium is when a company decides it wants to test its cyber security, and
then has everyone try it. If a white hat manages to crack a company's defense,
they receive a so-called 'premium'. So essentially you would pretend to be a
malicious cracker trying to get into the company's systems, and if you
succeed you will get money. Sounds great right?
The problem with bounties, however, is that for less skilled hackers, they
often have more hassle than it's worth. After all, those worth doing are
usually taken by the top 5% of hackers worldwide, rather than the average joe
of the ethical hacking world.
Chapter 4: The Three Hats
Wait, hats? Yes, oddly enough, hackers are actually separated from all things
in the world by hats. As we have already explored, this not only means that
someone is a hacker, but not that they are involved in illegal activity or

anything like that. You will find that most people, online or otherwise, refer
to hackers under one of three labels. These are white, gray and black hat. The
gray hat is sometimes considered a specific subset of black. These are terms
created to define different hackers based on what they do, and we briefly
discussed them all in the intro.
Likewise, it can be quite difficult to define 'hacker' since the technical usage
of the term is quite different from the way it is used in most pop cultures.
That said, we can definitely say that a hacker is someone who uses a hole in a
digital system to find ways to take advantage of it and take personal
advantage of it. In the case of white-hat hackers, this profit would be either
money provided by the company that hired them or the satisfaction of
knowing they did something good.
So, what exactly are the three hats of hackers and what do they do?
Black hats
Black hat hackers, commonly referred to as 'black hats', are those hackers
who are most common in pop culture, TV shows and movies. This is the type
of hacker you think of when you hear the word hacker. Black hat hackers are
those who break the law, but also break into a computer's security to pursue a
selfish agenda. This can range from stealing credit card numbers to stealing
entire identities from people.
In other cases, this just happens out of anger, so a black hat hacker can create
a botnet purely to create DDOS websites they are not too fond of.
Black hats not only fit the stereotype that hackers are criminals, they are also
the reason for their existence. They are in fact the PC equivalent of highly
skilled robbers. It's not hard to see why other hacker groups don't generally
love black hats because they humiliate the names of the others.
Black hats are often those hats that find zero-day vulnerabilities in the
security of a site or company and then sell them to other organizations, or just
use them for their own selfish agendas.
Zero Day vulnerability?
A zero-day is an error in a particular piece of hardware, software or firmware
that is unknown to one of the parties that would otherwise have the task of
resolving the error. The term itself can refer to the vulnerability itself, or to an
attack that takes 0 days between discovering the vulnerability and attacking.
When a zero-day vulnerability is made public, it will be known as an n-day or
one-day vulnerability, both of which are equally dangerous.
Usually, when such an error is detected, the person who detected it takes this

error to the company whose software is faulty. Occasionally, they publicly
announce the error in case they cannot reach the company themselves. This is
usually done to patch that hole.
After some time, the company that created the program can usually fix it and
distribute the patch for it. Sometimes this means that the product needs to be
delayed a bit, but after all, isn't it worth doing that if it means the company is
saving a lot of money? Even if the vulnerability is made public, it can often
take a while for black hats to actually take advantage of it. In these scenarios
it is a race between the black hats and the white hats.
On the other hand, it is sometimes a black hat that is the first to discover the
vulnerability. If not known in advance, the white hats at the company have no
idea that the exploit even exists before being used against them. Usually,
these companies will use ethical hackers to find such zero-day vulnerabilities
so that they can be remedied before their product comes on the market.
Security researchers are working with information providers who will often
agree not to share zero-day vulnerability information until allowed. For
example, Google's own Project Zero suggests that if you discover a
vulnerability as a non-company employee, you should wait at least 90 days
before making the vulnerability public. On the other hand, if the vulnerability
is something very critical, Google suggests that you only have to wait about 7
days to see if the company will close the gaping hole they accidentally left
open. On the other hand, if the vulnerability is already being exploited, shoot
away!
Black Hat Hacker Example
As in the opening scenes of a movie with Daniel Craig, all the way back in
1994, Vladimir Levin used his laptop in his St. Petersburg apartment to carry
out the first internet bank robbery in history.
He deposited $ 10 million from accounts of various Citibank customers to
various accounts that he owned around the world. Fortunately, this robbery
didn't go so well for Levin. Just three years later, he was captured and jailed.
Of the $ 10 million he stole, $ 400,000 has never been found. The way Levin
did this was actually incredibly simple. He simply hacked customer phone
calls, jotted down their account details, then just went and gave their money
to themselves.
White hats
Hey, this is us! White hat hackers, also known as ethical hackers, are the
opposite of black hat hackers. They are also experts in compromising

computer security systems, so much so that many of them were black hats
and reformed in the past. These are the hackers who can be black hats, but
prefer to use their skills and knowledge for good, and for ethical purposes
rather than their own selfish motivations (although you could argue that
pursuing good is selfish on themselves).
Most white hats are used by companies to try to "simulate" a black hat, so
they will try to hack into an organization's security systems as best they can.
The organization then authorizes the white hat hackers to use their knowledge
of security systems to compromise the entire organization. Does this sound
like something a black hat would do? Exactly. They need to simulate exactly
what a black hat hacker would do so they can know if they can stop them
before doing significant damage to the company. A white hat hacker's attacks
are generally used to improve the organization's defenses against cyber
attacks. Usually these two things are done by the same people, but some
companies have white hat hackers and cybersecurity professionals separated.
The method of pretending to be a black hat hacker to access a company's
confidential files to help them with their system is known as penetration
testing.
You will find that white hat hackers who find vulnerabilities in securities
would rather disclose it to the developer of the program, rather than fulfill
their own selfish desires.
If you, as an ethical hacker, accidentally find a vulnerability, it is your moral
obligation to report it to the developer. This allows them to patch their
product before a black hat hacker can get in and completely ruin it.
It's also worth noting that, as we mentioned earlier, some organizations pay
premiums even for anonymous white hats that are good enough to get into
their system. By doing this, they ensure they are protected from black hats
that may have entered their ranks as white hats and have reached a wider
audience.
White Hat Hacker Example
Kevin Mitnick is the face of the ethical hacking movement these days, but
that wasn't always the case. Many even speculate that the reason for his fame
and his skills is due to the fact that his hat was not always exactly the whitest
of them all.
26 years ago, in 1995, Mitnick was caught by police for a notable arrest. He
had undertaken a range of hacking activities that lasted more than two years.
It was all completely illegal. Some of his exploits were truly enormous. For

example, during one of his escapades, he broke through in the security
systems of Digital Equipment Corp. Once inside, he decided to copy and
copy everything there was.
After serving his prison sentence, he was given some supervised release, but
before his time was up, Mitnick had returned to his old way of doing things.
Before his sentence was served, he was even given access to the Pacific Bell
voicemail computers. He is thought to have entered illegally in several other
places using methods such as password interception, although this has never
really been confirmed.
He was given a whopping 46 months and 22 on top of that for violating the
time when he was supposed to be under surveillance. This was the end of his
career as a black hat hacker.
After serving his sentence in 2000, Mitnick decided that he would become a
white hat hacker. He chose to become a paid consultant, and he did. Fortune
500 companies and even the FBI flocked to Mitnick for help. After all, he
had a wealth of talents and knowledge to share. Crowds of people have come
to him over the years to learn from the experience he had. The knowledge
and ideas he possessed were then transferred to his very popular public
speaking and writing work.
Mitnick even taught classes himself, leading social engineering classes with
the same knowledge as before. These were essential skills that we still need
today. Even today, Mitnick is busy with penetration testing, although it is
now for some of the world's most successful and powerful companies.
Gray hats
Nothing in life is black or white. Ahead, that funny joke actually very well
reflects hacking. In fact, as in life, there is always a gray area between white
and black in the hacking world.
As you might have guessed, a gray hat hacker sits in the awkward place
between a black hat hacker and a white hat. The gray hat hacker doesn't
exactly work for his own gain, or even to do damage, but they sometimes
commit crimes and do things that others deem unethical. At other times, they
do something that is illegal but at the same time ethical.
Let's try to explain this. A black hat hacker is the kind of person who gets
into a computer system without getting someone's permission and then steals
the data in it to gain a personal advantage or destroy the system. A white hat
would ask for permission, they wouldn't test the system's security until after
they received it, and they wouldn't do anything about it other than inform the

organization about the vulnerability and how to fix it.
On the other hand, a gray hat hacker usually wouldn't do these things.
Although they didn't do it for malicious purposes, they still broke into a
system without permission. At one end of the spectrum, a gray hat hacker
would just do this for fun, and then they're much closer to black hat than
white hat. On the other hand, they may have done it to help the organization
even without permission, in which case they would be much closer to white
hat.
When a hacker with a gray hat discovers a gaping vulnerability, it is hard to
guess what he would do. Anything between simply doing nothing and
immediately notifying the company would be possible. On the other hand, the
`` average '' answer, I think, publicly reveals the flaw so the company has
time to fix it, but also doesn't bother contacting them directly.
It's worth noting that all of these things fall into the water when done for
personal gain. In that case, this falls under the behavior of black hats. Even if
the disclosure later causes chaos (because a black hat found it) or helps the
company (because a white hat found it), that doesn't change the gray hat.
Gray Hat Hacker Example
In August 2013, Khalil Shreateh was an unemployed computer security
expert. He decided that he would hack Mark Zuckerberg's Facebook page.
De, Mark Zuckerberg. Surprisingly, he was successful. Facebook's CEO was
forced to face something that Khalil had been telling them about for some
time.
The truth was, Khalil had discovered a bug that allowed people to post on
almost any page without their permission. He tried unsuccessfully to inform
Facebook about this. After repeatedly hearing that this was not a bug, Khalil
took matters into his own hands.
Khalil hacked the CEO's page and pointed out how much of a problem this
bug could be. After all, malicious spammers can use it for a variety of things,
and that's just the surface of potential abuses this could have.
After this happened, Facebook finally decided to fix this problem, which
could have caused them millions of losses. Unfortunately, Khalil was not
compensated for his work from Facebook's White Hat program for violating
their policies to find the problem.
In addition to knowing what the terms mean, it is important to note that
people can be multiple hats and that the terms can be used for behavior, not
just people. For example, someone can do both penetration tests for one

company, while maliciously hacking another. This would make them both a
black and a white hat hacker.
Behavior is much easier to understand when explained. In fact, ask yourself,
"If someone did this every day, what kind of hacker would he consider?" And
you have your answer to what kind of hacker they are.
Chapter 5: Ethical hacking explained
When it comes to security, being a hacker is one of the most commonly used
terms. It appears everywhere, and even the entertainment industry and many
authors often use it in their movies, books, TV shows and other media forms.
Therefore, the word "hacker" is usually seen as a bad profession and always
associated with dark or real criminal activity. So when people hear that
someone is involved in hacking, they immediately see that person as
someone who has no good intentions. They are usually presented as
"operators from the shadows," even antisocial. On the other hand, they are
also seen as a social activist. This label became especially popular after a few
things like WikiLeaks. Many hackers were involved in obtaining many
important documents from governments, politicians and companies that
showed information that was very different from the information given to the
public. Organized groups such as Anonymous or Lizard Squad have also had
a huge impact on the hacking experience in recent years.
The evolution of hacking
At first, hacking appeared out of curiosity. Technology enthusiasts wanted to
know how systems worked and what they could do with them. Today we also
have many of those who like to experiment, adjust and improve original
designs. In the early 1970s, hackers were actually people who could be found
in their homes by taking apart radios, early computers, and other devices of
the era and figuring out how they worked. These kinds of individuals
followed the advancement of technology. Later, in the 1980s, when the PC
was the best technology, hackers moved into that environment and began to
engage in even more suspicious activity, often maliciously. The reason for
this was also the fact that the attacks could hit more systems, as more and
more people had PCs. When the internet became a thing in the 1990s, all the
connected systems were also interconnected. The result was clear: curiosity
mixed with bad intentions was now available worldwide, and as it was easier
to hack different computer systems, more and more hackers appeared.
In the early 21st century, computers were no longer the only devices that

could be hacked. Meanwhile, we have purchased other technologies such as
smartphones, Bluetooth devices, tablets and many other things that hackers
can target. It is very easy. Technology is not only evolving, but also hackers.
So if the system is complicated, the hacker's attack will be more difficult to
escape. And when the Internet became part of everything we do, different
types of data became easier to access. The Internet attacks of the early
hackers in the 1990s were mostly linked to website defacements, and many of
these cyberspace attacks turned into jokes, sometimes funny and interesting,
but sometimes very serious, even criminal. More aggressive attacks started to
take place, such as hacking websites of different governments, or something
you're probably more familiar with - hacking movie websites that resulted in
many pirate websites that are active even today.
As we mentioned, cyberspace attacks became increasingly common and
malicious from the early 2000s. In addition, these attacks progressed quickly.
Back then there were hacking activities classified as advances. Many of these
hackers had criminal motives, and while we can't say there is a standard
rating for them, we'll put them into several categories:
● There were hackers who used their skills to manipulate stock prices, which
caused many financial complications
Some of them have hacked people's personal information, stealing identity
● One of the most common hacker attacks was related to credit card theft or
cyber space vandalism
● As we mentioned earlier, piracy was also very common and at one point
even popular
● The last, but not the least, type of hacking attack that usually came from the
early 2000s was a denial of service and service attacks.
As you know, most financial transactions have been made online in recent
decades, which is an enticing field for scammers. But not only that, the
openness of mobile phones, laptops, tablets and similar devices that we use
on a daily basis has also increased space and how all kinds of information can
be stolen. An increasing number of internet users, users of various gadgets
and similar software products that connect people and their devices in
multiple ways has increased the number of interested people to acquire some
of it.
All these mischievous activities over the years have led to new laws in almost
every country in the world. These laws stem from the need to take control of
criminal activity in cyber space. Although the number of hackers on websites

decreased, organized cyber crime increased.
Examples: mischief or criminal?
Hacking is by no means a phenomenon that has appeared overnight. It existed
in various forms and evolved all the way from the 1960s. However, it was
never tackled as a criminal activity at first. We'll look at some cases that will
take a closer look at some of the attacks, and generic examples that have
gradually changed that picture.
One of the most famous hacker groups in the world, called "Anonymous",
appeared in 2003. They were responsible for a series of attacks against
government websites and other networks. They also hacked many news
agencies and other organizations. These multiple successful invaders made
them one of the most active cyber-organized groups ever. Interestingly, they
are still active and committed to attacking high-profile targets.
A new computer virus was discovered in the mid-2000s. The name of this
virus was Stuxnet, and it had a specific design that only attacked systems
connected to uranium production. The unique feature of this program was the
fact that it ignored other systems and attacked only if the above requirements
were met.
Another interesting case is the case of a young Russian hacker named
Kristina Vladimirovna Scechinskaya who was involved in a plot to defraud
some of the largest banks in Britain and the United States. It all started in
2009 when she used the famous "Trojan horse" virus to open thousands of
accounts while attacking others. The total amount of money she managed to
steal in the scam was $ 3 billion. She was called the sexiest hacker in the
world, which helped break the hackers' stereotype as antisocial creatures
living in the basement and so on.
All of these cases are some of the most famous high profile hacking incidents
that have occurred even though some of them may not have received as much
media attention. In fact, many of the cyber crime cases that appear in the
news remain unresolved, but many others have had a huge impact on various
industries, but never reached the latest news or were prosecuted for cyber
crime.
Now that we have reviewed some concrete incidents, we will list some of the
other activities that are considered cybercrime. We call them generic
examples, but keep in mind that these are not the only ones. Many other
forms can be considered illegal.
● Access services or resources that you do not have permission to use. This is

usually called stealing usernames and passwords. In some cases, obtaining
this information without permission is considered a cyber crime, even if you
do not use it or as accounts of friends or family members.
● There is a form of digital offense called network intrusion that is also
considered a cyber crime. In essence, as with ordinary offenses, this means
that you went somewhere without permission to enter (or in this case,
access). So in case someone gets access to a system or group of systems
without permission, we can say that the person violated the network and
thereby committed cybercrime. However, some network intrusions can take
place without using hacker tools. Sometimes logging in to guest accounts
without prior permission can be seen as cyber crime.
● One of the most complex yet simplest forms of hacking is to go after the
most vulnerable element in the system - people. This type of cybercrime is
known as social engineering, and we say it can be simple because the person
is a much more accessible part of the system than any other, and it's easier to
deal with. However, people can provide clues that are difficult to understand,
whether spoken or not, making it difficult for the hacker to get the
information they need.
● The issue of posting or sending illegal material has generally become
difficult to address, especially in the past decade. Social media received a lot
of attention and many other internet-related services increased in use and
popularity. This allowed many illegal materials to move from one place to
another in the shortest possible time, allowing it to spread very quickly
● Fraud is also common, especially on the internet, and is also considered a
cyber crime. Like the original term, fraud in cyberspace also means that a
party or parties have usually been misled for financial gain or harm.
What does it mean to be an ethical hacker?
All the things we mentioned earlier in this chapter referred to hackers in
general. The real goal, however, is to learn how to be an ethical hacker and
explore the skills you should have.
Ethical hackers are people who are usually employed by organizations to test
their security. They usually work through direct employment or through
temporary contracts. The key is that they use the same skills as all other
hackers, but there is one big difference: they are allowed to attack the system
directly from the system owner. In addition, an ethical hacker means that you
reveal the weaknesses of the system you have evaluated (because every
system in the world has them) only to the owner and no one else. In addition,

organizations or individuals hiring ethical hackers use very strict contracts
that specify which parts of the system are authorized for an attack and which
are prohibited. The role of an ethical hacker also depends on the job to which
he or she is entitled, ie the needs of the employer. Today, some organizations
have permanent staff teams and their job is to conduct ethical hacking
activities.
Hackers can be divided into 5 categories. Keep in mind that this format may
vary, but we can say these are the most common:
● The first category is also referred to as "Script Kiddies". These hackers
usually have no training or do, but very limited. They know how to use just
some of the basic hacking tools and techniques, and since they are not
competent enough, they may sometimes not fully understand their activities
or the consequences of their work.
● The second category concerns hackers known as "White Hat hackers".
They attack the computer system, but they are the good guys, which means
they don't harm their work. These types of hackers are usually ethical
hackers, but they can also be pentesters.
● "Gray Hat Hackers" are the third hacker category. As their name suggests,
they are between good and bad, but their final decision is to choose the right
side. Still, these types of hackers struggle to gain trust because they can be
suspicious.
● The fourth category we mention in this section is referred to as the "Black
Hat Hackers". This category refers to the hackers we mentioned earlier in this
chapter. These people usually work on the 'other side' of the law and are
usually associated with criminal activities.
● Last but not least are the "Suicide hackers". They are called that because
their goal is to prove the point, which is why they want to take out their
target. These hackers don't have to worry about getting caught, because their
goal is not to hide, but to prove, so that they are easier to find.
Responsibilities of an Ethical Hacker
The most important thing that an ethical hacker should learn and never forget
is that he or she should always have permission for any kind of system attack.
The ethical code that you as an ethical hacker must implement in every task
says that no network or system should be tested or targeted if you do not own
it or if you do not have permission to do so. Otherwise, you may be found
guilty of multiple crimes that may have occurred in the meantime. First, it
can hurt your career, and second, if it's something really serious, it can even

threaten your freedom.
The smartest thing is to get a contract from your employer the moment you
test or attack the required target. The contract is a written authorization, but
you should keep in mind that you should only examine the parts of the
system specified in that contract. So, if your employer wants to give you
permission to hack additional parts of the system or remove authorization for
some, he should first change the contract and you shouldn't continue working
until you get the new permit. Note that the only thing that distinguishes an
ethical hacker from the cyber criminal is the contract. Therefore, you should
always pay special attention to the vocabulary related to privacy and
confidentiality issues, as it often happens that you come across intimate
information from your client, both business and personal.
That's one more reason why your contract should include who you can talk to
about the things you found while researching the system and who are
forbidden from hearing updates from you. In general, customers usually want
to be the only people who know everything you eventually find out.
An organization known as the EC Council (International Council of
Electronic Commerce Consultants) is one of the most important organizations
when it comes to regulating these issues. According to them, an ethical
hacker should keep all information obtained on the job private and treat it as
confidential. This is indicated in particular for the customer's personal
information, which means that you are not allowed to transfer, give, sell,
collect or do any of the customer's information, such as social security
number, etc. -mail address, home address, unique identification, name, and so
on. The only way you can give this type of information to a third party is by
having written permission from your employer (client).
While some may argue about the distinction between hackers and ethical
hackers, the division is quite simple: hackers are separated by their intentions.
This means that those who plan to harm and use their skills to access data
without permission are labeled as black hats, while those who work with their
client's permission are considered white hat hackers. Naming these two
categories of "the bad" and "the good" can be controversial, so we'll try to
follow these expressions in the following way:
● Black hats usually operate outside the law, which means they do not have
permission from the person called "the customer" to consent to their
activities.
On the contrary, white hats have permission and permission from the person

called “client” and they even keep the information they have between client
and white hats only.
Gray hats, on the other hand, enter both areas and use both types of action in
different periods.
Hacktivists are a category of hackers that we have not mentioned before.
They belong to the movement known as Hacktivism, which refers to actions
hackers use to influence the general public by promoting a particular political
agenda. So far, hacktivists have been involved with agencies, large
companies and governments.
Hacker Ethics and Code of Conduct
Like any other profession, hacking has its Code of Conduct that establishes
rules that can help customers (individuals or organizations) evaluate whether
the person who interacts with their networks and computer systems is
generally reliable. The organization that implemented this Code has already
been identified in the previous sections and is known as the EC Council.
Obtaining a CEH reference from the EC Council means that you fully
understand the expectations you must meet. We've provided some parts of the
code, so make sure you read it and get familiar with it.
● Information you gain during your professional work should be kept
confidential and private (especially personal information)
● Unless you have your customer's permission, you may not give, transfer or
sell the customer's home address, name or other unique identifying
information.
● You must protect the intellectual property, yours and others, by using skills
that you have acquired yourself so that all benefits go to the original creator.
● Be sure to disclose to authorized personnel any danger that you suspect
may be from the Internet community, electronic transactions, or other
hardware and software indicators.
● Make sure that the services you provide are within your area of expertise so
that you work honestly while aware of any limitations that may be a result of
your education or experience.
● You may only work on projects for which you are qualified and carry out
tasks that match your training, education and work experience skills.
● You must not knowingly use software that has been obtained illegally or
has been stored unethically.
● You may not participate in financial practices that may be considered
misleading, such as double billing, bribery, etc.

● Make sure you use the customer's property properly, without exceeding the
limits set in your contract.
● You must disclose a potential conflict of interest to all parties involved,
especially if that conflict cannot be avoided.
● Make sure that you manage the entire project you are working on,
including promotion and risk disclosure activities.
Chapter 6: Scan your system
There are several ways to scan your computer. However, it is important to
understand that different scans pursue different types of data and thus yield
different results. Therefore, you need to take a closer look at the scan before
starting such a process. Scans generally share a similar theme based on the
premise that the goal is to collect information about one or more hosts. But if
you dig deeper, you will see some differences along the way. Each scan
provides different feedback on the type of data it gains, so each scan is
valuable in its own way. To avoid complications, we use simple
categorization and say that there are three categories and they all have their
specific characteristics.
Port Scan
The first category we will mention is the port scan. This is a process of
carefully sending packets or messages to the computer you are targeting. The
purpose of this scan is to collect data and these probes are usually connected
to the number of ports or types less than or equal to 1024. If this technique is
applied carefully, there are many things you can learn about the possibilities a
system that you scan offers for the entire network. You may even find
differences between systems such as domain controllers, web servers, mail
servers, and so on during the process. One of the most commonly used gate
scanners is known as the Fyodor card. Port scanning is one of the most
commonly used scan types and it is common for other people to assume that
you are talking about port scanning by calling the term "scan".
Network scan
Network scan is the second scan category we will mention. It is specially
designed to find all hosts that are 'live' on a particular network, which means
that this scan will find all hosts that are currently running through the system.
It will identify which systems may be targeted or find hosts that can continue

scanning. These types of scans are also known as ping sweeps and they can
scan the range of IPs very quickly and then determine if a host is enabled on
the address. The most common example of a network scan is Angry IP, but
many more are used to achieve the same goal.
Vulnerability scan
The third category is known as a vulnerability scan and is used to find all the
weaknesses of the intended system. The most common reason to use this type
of scan is if the customer wants proactive measures, especially if there is any
doubt that someone could attack them. The purpose of those who want a
vulnerability scan is to deliberately understand the situation about potential
issues and act on them as quickly as possible. Classic vulnerability scans
receive information about access points, hosts, ports (especially those
opened); it analyzes the response of all services, generates reports and
classifies any threats as a very important function. They are popular with
large companies because they can be used to find easy access to the system.
The two most commonly used vulnerability scanners are Rapid7 Nexpose
and Tenable Nessus. In addition, there are many specialized scanners on the
market and the best known are Nikto, Burp Suite, WebInspect, etc.
To avoid potential misunderstandings that may arise for an ethical hacker,
you need to know the difference between penetration testing and
vulnerability. First of all, a vulnerability scan aims to identify the weaknesses
of a host or a network, but it does not take advantage of the weaknesses it
encounters. On the other hand, penetration tests go a step further and can not
only find the same weaknesses, but also use them with the aim of figuring out
how far an attacker could go if they found them.
You probably wonder what kind of information yields a penetration test. The
answer cannot be easy; nevertheless, some general assumptions can be made.
When scanning a system, it is very likely that you will encounter many
different data sets. We can list them as follows to make it easier for you:
● Live hosts of the network
● Architecture of the system
● Opened and closed ports and information that the host has about the
operating system (or more systems)
● Running processes on the host system
● Type of weaknesses of the system and their level
● Patches that have the target system
● Information about the presence of firewalls

● Routers and their addresses along with other information
If you take a closer look, it is clear why many people define scanning as a
kind of information gathering process that can be used by real attackers. If
you are creative and competent enough, you can perform a successful scan.
However, if you run into a roadblock while scanning, your skills should come
in and see what your next move will be. Keep in mind that once you have
gathered information, it will take some time to analyze it, and that also
depends on how good you are at reading the results the scan gave you. The
more knowledge you have, the easier it is to decipher results.
Live system check
Let's start by finding the goals you would research and research. Please note
that although you have obtained information about the range of IP or IPs
owned by your customer (individual or organization), this does not mean that
each of those IP addresses has a host connected to it. The first thing to do if
you want to make meaningful progress is to find out which "pulses" are real
and which are not, and therefore which IPs have hosts. The question is, how
are you going to check if there are live systems in the environment that you
target? The answer is actually quite simple. This can be done in many ways.
Still, the ones most commonly used are port scanning, war dialing, pinging,
and wardriving. Each of these techniques has its own value because they all
provide certain information that is unique to their designs. Once you learn
about them, you will understand how they work and what differences they
have, and it will be easier to implement the one you need more for a
penetration test.
War Dialing
War dialing is an old but convenient way to scan the system. It was virtually
unchanged from the 1980s and the reason why it is still used today is because
it has proven to be one of the most reliable and useful tools for information
gathering. In practice, this technique is quite simple compared to other scan
forms. War dialing works on the principle of dialing a block with different
phone numbers while using standard modems. Once the scan has dialed the
numbers, it can determine the locations of the systems to which their modem
is also connected and accept those connections. At first glance, it may seem
like an old-fashioned mechanism, but it's more than useful on multiple levels.
Most importantly, modems are still widely used because they are affordable
and have good phone lines that are basically everywhere.
One of the reasons modems are still in use today is that they back up the

existing technologies. So if other connectivity options fail, telephone lines are
available to avoid major outages. For businesses, it's a good deal because it's
affordable and provides some sort of security in case something really big
happens.
So the next question is what happens when you find a modem. First, you
should be familiar with the devices that are often connected to modems
today. For example, PBXs (Private Branch Exchanges) are often linked to
non-digital modes. These types of modems are good for different types of
mischief from an attacker. However, some modems have firewalls or fax
machines, routers, and so on. So when attackers gain access through a
firewall, the environment of the device is not protected for long. Pivot points
should be considered when opening the system. Pivot points are systems that
are compromised and then used to attack other systems, making their
environment unsafe. Over the years, many programs have been created as
war dialing programs. The best known are:v
Tone Loc, a program based on the search for dial tones by choosing random
numbers that are within the reach of an attacker. This program can also
search for a modem's carrier frequency. Input is required with area codes and
number ranges that an attacker wants to call.
PhoneSweep from Niksun, a program that represents one of the few options
commercially available on the market.
THC-SCAN ADOS, a program based on dialing telephone numbers with
modems and searches for a carrier frequency of that modem.
Ping
Another commonly used scanning tool is ping. Ping is used to determine the
connectivity of a network by determining whether the remote host is up or
down. While it is quite a simple feature, it is still very efficient for the initial
scanning process. Ping is based on Internet Control Message Protocol
(ICMP) messages, which is why this type of scanning is also known as an
ICMP scan. It is simple. One system sends an echo (in this case an ICMP
echo) to another system and if it is alive it will reply by sending another
ICMP echo as a reply. When the initial system receives this response, it
confirms that the target is live or up.
Ping not only tells you if the target is alive, but it also gets information about
the speed of target packets and TTL (time to live) data. To use ping in
Windows, just enter the following prompt: ping or ping. The Linux versions
use the same command, but the command constantly pings the target unless

you press ctrl + c to stop the process.
While you can use ping to access host names and IP addresses, we
recommend that you ping by IP address instead of host name technique,
because inactive host name can mean DNS problem instead of unavailable
system. Note that if you have a pinging system, you will ping it and receive
no response, although you know the target system is working, the target
system may have a disabled ping service. If that's true, you won't receive a
response from that type of system at all.
Check ports and their status
When you locate the network's live systems, the next step is to look at the
hosts again. The goal is to determine if they have open ports or not.
Generally, zoom in on any live host you've found before and examine the
ports to determine if any of them are open. However, at this stage you can
only see if there are any open or closed gates, but there's nothing you can do
about that because that advanced feature is in some more advanced sections.
Remember that knowing the gates and gate scans is one of the essential skills
for ethical hacking and when you research different types of gate scans out
there you will know in which situations you prefer one over the other. Pay
attention to details, because at the end of the day, studying is the best way to
improve your skills.
Chapter 7: Penetration Tests
Penetration testing, also known as pen testing, is one of the main activities of
ethical hackers. A penetration test is also referred to as a white hat attack
because it is performed by a white hat hacker to help a system owner. It is a
process of detecting vulnerabilities in applications, networks, and systems
that could potentially be exploited by malicious users attempting to enter the
system. The process can be performed manually, but it can also be automated
by using other applications. However you do it, the goal of the process
always remains the same. First, gather as much information about the target
as possible before starting the test. This boils down to finding access points
and trying to break into the system, as well as collecting the findings in one
document.
No matter how you approach the process, the goal always remains the same:
to find weaknesses in the security of a system. This is usually done digitally,
but can also be in the physical part of computer security. As you know, there

are hacking methods that use the staff to get into the system. Penetration tests
can be used to test how many employees are aware of the security policy and
how quickly an organization can recognize a threat.
After identifying the exploitable weaknesses of a system, the ethical hacker
notifies the organization's IT and network system managers. Based on this,
these experts can take measures to help protect their systems and deploy the
necessary resources.
The purpose of penetration testing
The main purpose of a penetration test is to find out if the system contains
vulnerabilities that can be exploited to destabilize the system's security, to see
if the security is up to standard and to test how well employees of a company
know the security issues. This is done to determine how the organization
would be affected by a potential intrusion and how the vulnerabilities can be
remedied.
This can also lead to bugs in a company's security policy being discovered.
For example, some companies have a lot of policies regarding detecting and
preventing a hacking attack, but don't know how to remove the hacker.
Responsibilities for Cloud Pen testing
In some networks, you may find different combinations of on-premises
systems and cloud systems. This means that the responsibilities for pen
testing vary between different networks.
We have already mentioned how important reports are in penetration testing.
They will usually give the company a lot of useful insight into their security
system and help them prioritize the improvements to the security system they
had planned. These reports give app developers the incentive to create safer
applications. By understanding how hackers get into their applications, the
developers can further educate them on how to make their future projects
more secure so that similar vulnerabilities never reappear.
How often should you perform penetration tests?
Usually companies do this regularly. This is usually done once a year. The
more often they perform penetration tests, the more efficient the work of
security and IT management becomes. In addition to the regularly performed
penetration tests, companies also do when:
- The company adds a new infrastructure or application to their system
- The company is making major changes to their system
- The company is adding new offices in a different location
- The company is adding new security patches

- The company changes its security policy
However, you should realize that penetration tests are not the same for every
company. How the pen test works depends on many factors, such as:
● How big is the company? The greater the presence of a company, the more
likely it is to be attacked by a hacker because they have more attack
approaches and more juicy payouts.
● How much money can the company give for penetration testing? Smaller
companies can't always afford to do them annually, because the process can
cost quite a bit of money. Only the more lucrative companies do it annually,
while the smaller ones do it every two years.
What does the law say? In some industries, there are laws that oblige
companies to perform security duties.
● Some companies have their infrastructure in the cloud. Sometimes these
companies cannot perform their own penetration tests and the responsibility
lies with the provider itself.
Every company has different needs when it comes to penetration testing. This
is why white hat hackers have to be very flexible when it comes to
penetration testing, because their efforts will be more efficient if the
penetration tests they do are tailored to the company they work for. After
each penetration test, it is recommended to perform a number of follow-up
tests to ensure that the results are noted in the penetration tests that are yet to
come.
Penetration test tools
Penetration tests can be automated due to the number of tools available today.
These tools are typically used by pentesters to quickly scan the system for
common vulnerabilities. They are used to scan code to find malicious
components that can be used to break the system. They find vulnerabilities in
the system by examining encryption techniques and hard-coded values.
Penetration Testing Strategies
Whenever a white hat hacker approaches a penetration test, he should always
determine the scope in which he will operate. This usually tells the tester
which parts of the system to access, as well as which tools and techniques to
use while working. This helps in allocating resources and manpower more
efficiently while performing a penetration test.
If a company-hired penetration tester gains access to the system because they
found an employee's password in plain sight, it tells the security team that the
employee's security practices are missing and shows where improvements

need to be made.
There are many strategies that penetration testers use relatively often:
● Targeted testing
The company's IT team is usually responsible for targeted testing. For this
they work together with the penetration testers. This approach is also referred
to as the "lights on" approach because everyone has access to the results and
performance of this test.
● External testing
External testing is done to find weak spots in the parts of the system that are
visible from the outside. This includes firewalls, web servers, email servers
and domain names. The purpose of this type of penetration test is to find out
if that part of the system can be used to access the deeper parts of the system
and how far the hacker can get during that attack.
● Internal testing
An attack that runs during internal testing begins behind the firewall and is
done by a user with standard access rights. This is usually done to see to what
extent damage can be done by a company employee who has malicious
intent.
● Blind testing
Blind testing has this name because the information available to the tester is
very limited because it was created to determine what kind of path a true
attacker would travel quickly. These testers are used to mimic a real total
attack that a malicious person would commit from outside the company and
are given almost nothing but the name of the company hiring them. These
types of tests can take quite a bit of time due to the time the hacker needs to
find where they can access the system, making it a pretty penny.
● Double blind
This is a step forward on the blind test. The double blind test is a type of test
in which only a few people within the organization know that the test is being
performed. Employees are not told where or when the attack will take place
or who will carry it out. This type of testing is very useful because it provides
a very useful insight into the security monitoring of the organization, as well
as the efficiency with which the employees perform the instructed
procedures.
● Test black box
This penetration test requires that the tester have no information about the
target. It is another variant of the blind test. The tester is instructed to behave

like a real attacker and must find his own entry point and deduce which
techniques and tools to use for the task.
● Test white box
White box testing gives testers a good understanding of the important
information about the company's system they hired to attack. This
information can go anywhere from the IP addresses to the source code and
infrastructure diagrams. The information provided can be flexible depending
on the needs of the company.
It is important for any penetration test team to use different types of tests to
find any weaknesses they can find. This, in turn, tells them which types of
attacks can do the most damage to the system.
Using different pen testing strategies helps pentest teams focus on the
systems they want and understand the types of attacks that are most
threatening.
Penetration testing of cloud-based applications
As I mentioned earlier, with the growth of cloud storage, many companies
have moved their infrastructure from on-premise to cloud storage. Because of
the way cloud itself worked, white hat hackers had to develop new techniques
and discover some new and interesting angles when approaching penetration
testing. The problem with applications running in the cloud is the fact that
there are several obstacles when it comes to pen testing. When you want to
check the security of the application, both legal and technical issues can arise.
Here's how, as a beginner, to approach white hat hacking on cloud.
Step 1: Make sure you understand how the cloud provider
policy works
As we know, there are private and public clouds. We will focus on the public
side today as they have their own policies when it comes to penetration
testing. A white hat hacker should always wait for the provider's confirmation
before performing the test. This places many limitations on what can be done
as part of the process. To be precise, when you want to test an application
running in a public cloud, you have to do a lot of research into what
techniques are recommended and allowed by the provider. If you don't follow
the procedures set up by the provider, you can get a lot of problems. For
example, your test can sometimes seem like a real attack, which can lead to
your account being closed permanently.
Every deviation in a cloud is noticed by the provider, who is constantly
looking for deviations. Sometimes someone will call you to check what's

going on. More often, however, you are faced with a series of automated
procedures that shut down the system if your actions are viewed as an attack.
This can lead to several bad things, such as the fact that all your cloud-stored
systems and data go offline and you have to explain a lot to your provider
before they bring it back online.
Another thing that can happen if you do your penetration tests irresponsibly
is that you risk influencing other users. You may always load resources used
by other users during pen testing. This is a problem with public clouds, as
there are always multiple active users, so not the entire system can be
assigned to one user. This can also lead to outrage at the provider. They may
call you in a not so friendly way or just close your account.
Long story short, there are rules when you want to snoop around in public
clouds. You should keep in mind the legal requirements along with all the
procedures and policies the provider instructs you to do. If you don't do this,
you will get some headaches.
Step 2: Come in with a plan
When you want to perform a penetration test on a cloud, you have to submit a
plan. In your plan, you should cover the following:
● Application (s): Get to know APIs and user interfaces
● Data Access: Understand how the data will respond to the test
Network access: Understand how the data and application are protected by
the system
Virtualization: Make sure you measure how your workload is handled by
virtual machines
● Compliance: Get to know the regulations and laws you must observe when
performing the Penetration Test.
● Automation: Select which tools you want to use while performing the
penetration tests
● Approach: see which administrators you will involve in the pen test. There
are advantages to not notifying the administrators. This provides insight into
how administrators would react during an actual attack. This approach is
highly criticized by most administrators.
If you work in a team, plan the approach with the rest of the team and make
sure everyone follows every part of the plan. The entire team must ensure that
you do not deviate from it, as this could lead to all your efforts being wasted
because the administrator killed your access to the system.
Step 3: Choose which tools you will use

The market offers you many tools that can be used in penetration testing. In
the past, cloud pen tests were performed with on-premise tools. Recently,
however, many tools have been created that are used specifically for testing
cloud pens and will prove to be a cheaper option. Another advantage of these
tools is the fact that they leave a small hardware footprint.
What you need to know about these tools is the fact that they simulate actual
attacks. There are many automated processes that can detect vulnerabilities in
a system. Hackers have performed automated activities such as guessing
passwords and searching APIs to get into a system. It is your job to simulate
these activities.
Sometimes these tools cannot do everything you need them to do. Your last
resort is usually to write your own penetration system. This should always be
avoided as much as possible as it can bring you back quite a bit.
Step 4: Observe the answer
While performing a penetration test, you should pay close attention to:
● Human Response - When it comes to cloud penetration testing, always
keep track of how administrators and users will respond to your test. Many
will shut down the system immediately to prevent damage to the system.
Other administrators first try to diagnose the situation to identify the threat
and the solution to something similar. You should also keep a close eye on
how people respond to your customer provider.
● Automatic Response - The first thing to look at is how the system itself will
respond to your penetration test. The tea system will recognize you and
respond to you. These responses can range from blocking an IP address to
shutting down your entire system. Either way, you need to alert
administrators responsible for applications and security to see what actions
they have taken and what has happened in their areas.
Both answers must be documented. Once you document and consider your
findings, you will finally see where the weaknesses in the system are and
how secure the system is.
Step 5: Find and remove vulnerabilities
The end product of penetration testing is a list of vulnerabilities that the team
noted. There can be a lot of problems, while sometimes there are few or none.
If you don't find one, you may need to take another test to re-evaluate the
results from the previous one.
The vulnerabilities you may encounter in cloud application penetration
testing usually look like this:

Access to application data allowed with the xxxxx API.
● API access granted after 20 attempts.
● Password generator detected while accessing an application.
● Encryption does not comply with the regulations.
The problems will almost always differ depending on which application you
are testing and what type of test you have performed.
Don't forget that there are several layers to test. All components such as
network, storage system, database, etc. are all tested separately. The
problems, in turn, are also reported separately. You should always run a test
with all layers together to see how they interact. It is always wise to report
what happened in each layer.
You must keep your cloud provider involved every step of the way to avoid
any policy or legal issues that may arise from your penetration test. This also
helps you determine which approach is optimal and how it should be applied
to the different applications. Most providers have best practices that provide
the most accurate results on their networks.
General advice on Cloud Pen Testing
Another thing to keep in mind is who is on the penetration team. If you do
this in-house, you should always assume that not everything has been found.
Test teams that come from within the company usually leave some room for
oversight. They know too much about the applications from the start and may
always miss things they think are not worth looking at. White hat hackers are
the safer method, although a bit more expensive. They will search your
system more efficiently and in more detail.
Always check with your provider to see which practices are most efficient,
which applications to test, and requirements to be met with the pen test.
Using proven approaches is usually a good way to start.
Penetration tests are now more important than ever before. It's the only way
to make sure that the things you have in the cloud are as secure as possible to
accommodate as many users as possible.
Pen testing is not an option these days. It's the only way to prove that your
cloud-based applications and data are secure enough to enable maximum user
access with minimal risk.
How can local security and cloud security be compared?
This is a big question for many people. People often write off the cloud and
immediately assume that storing your data on servers within an office is the
safer option. This is usually the case because you own the hardware and

software when you store your data on location. However, this can be
disadvantageous because some of the best cloud providers can provide you
with a lot of security that you may not get on the spot.
To be clear, the cloud system is impressive in that it was created to give
99.99 percent durability and make everything available always available.
This kind of availability cannot be replicated locally due to the limitations of
the hardware and software available to you. To recreate these results would
require a huge investment and a large number of people.
Before you quickly decide which option to choose, there are many things to
consider. You need to consider your budget and the size of your security
team. If your answer seems to be missing, remember that cloud providers
have large teams that will handle these things for you and have automated
systems that constantly protect the system. Long story short, cloud companies
have spent a lot of time and money creating their systems and it makes them
much more reliable.
Chapter 8: Most Common Security
Tools
The security tools market is as big as the field itself. Separating the hundreds
of different tools helps to break them down into different categories.
The first category is event managers. These tools respond to events that occur
on the networks you monitor. They analyze the logs on your systems to
detect these events.
Another handy tool is packet sniffers that allow you to decode packets while
digging into traffic to scan their cargo. Packet sniffers are used when you
delve deeper into security events that occur.
Intrusion Detection and Prevention Systems are another useful category of
tools. They may look like firewalls and antiviruses, but they differ greatly in
function. When it comes to this software, you should always consider them as
a perimeter around your network that is there to detect illicit activity.
Of course, not every tool can be categorized because of how specific they are
when it comes to function and design. However, they can be very useful for
many different situations.
It is very difficult to determine which tools are better than others in different
categories because of the different purposes they may have. Most of the tools
we are talking about are vastly different from each other and you can never

say that one is absolutely better than the other. This means it is difficult to
select tools for each different job, but here are some commonly used tools
that you should always keep in mind when taking on a job.
SolarWinds Log and Event Manager
You may have never heard of SolarWinds, but you should listen carefully
now. This company has created a huge amount of useful management tools
over a number of years. In the market for NetFlow collectors and analyzers,
the NetFlow Traffic Analyzer from SolarWinds is a popular tool. Another
great tool SolarWinds has given us is the Network Performance Monitor,
which is one of the best in the market for network monitoring SNMP tools. In
short, what you need to know about SolarWinds is that they offer a wide
variety of free tools that you can use for different tasks and that they can
fulfill many different roles that you may be trying to fulfill yourself. Network
and system administrators are often grateful to SolarWinds for being a great
source of useful tools.
Screenshot of SolarWinds Log and Event Manager
Speaking of SolarWinds, it's hard to ignore some of their biggest bits of
software. If you're looking for network security tools, you'll want to check
out the LEM, short for Log and Event Manager. This is an easy choice if you
are looking for a security and event management system that is very beginner
friendly. This is the tool you want to start with. In the entry-level SIEM
market, this is arguably the most competitive option. When dealing with
SolarWinds, you can expect to get everything every base system would have
and something more. The SolarWinds LEM has a great log management
function and runs on an impressive engine.
The LEM also offers you impressive response functions. It detects threats in
real time and is very reliable in what it does. The tool works great when
trying to protect yourself from zero-day exploits and threats that you don't
know about, as it is not based on signature creation. Behavior is what this
tool is looking for. You rarely need to update it. One of the best assets of the
LEM is the dashboard. The system is very simple and makes quick work of
finding anomalies and reporting them.
If you want to buy the SolarWinds LEM, you must be ready to pay $ 4,585. If
you are unsure of the purchase, there is always the 30-day trial that the
company offers.
SolarWinds Network Configuration Manager
The LEM isn't the only impressive piece of software that SolarWinds can

boast. They have several other tools that focus on network security. One is
their Network Configuration Manager, which is used to monitor your
equipment and ensure everything is configured based on certain standards.
What it does for your safety is that it detects unauthorized changes to your
system. This is useful because these changes can be a good sign of an
upcoming attack.
The main function of this software is to help you recover by restoring your
system to the latest authorized configurations. It also highlights the changes
and saves the information in a configuration file. Another thing it helps you
with is compliance. It helps you pass audits because of the standardized
reports it creates on the job.
The Network Configuration Manager has a price of $ 2,895. The price may
change depending on the managed nodes you select. This software, like the
previous one, comes with a 30-day trial if you're not sure you want to buy it.
SolarWinds User Device Tracker
This is another one of the great tools that SolarWinds offers. It is a great tool
that everyone who works in computer security should have. It tracks endpoint
devices and users to improve your safety. You can use it to identify which
ports are being used and which are available.
This tool is great in situations where you expect an attack with a specific
target. The tools help you by identifying the user with suspicious activity.
The searches performed through this software are based on username, IP /
MAC addresses and host names. The search can go a little deeper and even
go as far as to scan earlier connections of the suspect.
The starting price of the User Device Tracker starts at US $ 1,895. It changes
again based on how many ports the system has to track. Like the previous
programs, it also comes with a 30-day trial period.
Wireshark
Speaking of Wireshark, it would be insulting to say that it is just a security
tool. This tool is very popular and is used. It is acclaimed as one of the best
capture and analysis packages. This tool is used to thoroughly analyze
network traffic. It can capture and decrypt any package so you can inspect the
data it contains.
Wireshark has built a great reputation. Due to the quality of the service it
offers, it has pretty much become the standard for the other tools on the
market. The competition always tries to emulate it as much as possible. Many
administrators use the Wireshark to check the recordings obtained through

other software. This has been done so many times that the newer versions of
the software allow you to run a capture file when setting up that you already
have to go through traffic immediately. Where the tool excels most is the
filters that come with it. They are a great addition as they help you pinpoint
the exact data that is relevant to you.
The software is difficult to get used to. There are courses that last several
days and provide instructions on how to use them. Nevertheless, it is worth
learning how to use Wireshark. It is an extremely valuable tool for any
administrator. The tool is free and can be used on most operating systems.
You can get one yourself on the official website.
Nessus Professional
Among solutions for identifying malware, problems and vulnerabilities, the
Nessus Professional is one of the most widely used. Millions of professionals
use the Nessus Professional because of the outside view it offers them. It also
gives you great insight into how to improve the security of your system.
The Nessus Professional offers one of the broadest coverage when it comes
to threats. It uses a lot of impressive intelligence and is very easy to use. The
software is also updated quite often which means that you will never have
problems with previously unseen problems. It has quite a comprehensive
package when it comes to vulnerability scanning.
If you want to use the services of the Nessus Professional, you have to pay $
2,190 per year. If you are not sure about the investment, you can use the 7-
day trial period.
Sniffing
Among open source IDSs, Snort stands out among the best. This intrusion
detection system was created in 1998. It became the property of the Cisco
system in 2013. Snort entered the Open Source Hall of Fame in 2009. This
means it has been recognized as one of the best open source software ever.
This speaks volumes.
There are three modes in the snort: sniffer, packet logger and network
intrusion detection. The sniffer mode is the basic mode and the main function
is to read network packets and display their content. The package logger is
quite similar, except that the scanned packages are logged on the disk. The
most interesting mode is the intrusion detection mode. It analyzes traffic
according to the instructions of a rule set set by you. Based on what kind of
threat it has found, you can go through different lines of action.
Snort can find many different types of cracks in the system that could be a

sign of a possible attack that may take place in the future. Snort has a website
where you can download it.
TCP dump
If you were ever interested in which packet sniffer was the first, look no
further than Tcpdump. The first release of the software was in 1987. Since
then it has been regularly updated and maintained. However, the core of the
software has always remained the same. Most Unix-like systems come with
pre-installed TCP dump because it is the default tool for those operating
systems.
The standard way of working for the TCP dump is to capture the traffic in
landfills on the screen. You may notice that this is quite similar to the sniffer
mode we talked about earlier. DUmps can be piped to capture specific files
for further analysis, similar to the packer logger mode. Wireshark is usually
used in conjunction with TCP dump.
The greatest strength of the TCP dump is the fact that it easily captures filters
and uses various Unix commands to make work much shorter and easier. If
you have a good knowledge of the Unix-like systems, dealing with traffic and
capturing the specific parts you are interested in will not be a problem.
Kismet
A lot can be said about Kismet. It is a burglary detection system, packet
sniffer and network detector in one. The preferred function is when working
on a LAN. It works with most wireless cards and can pass through many
different types of traffic. This tool is compatible with Linux, OS X,
OpenBSD, NetBSD and FreeBSD. The Kismet has very limited support for
Windows systems because very few network adapters support Kismet's
monitoring mode.
This software is licensed under the Gnu GPL license. The way it differs from
other wireless network detectors lies in the fact that the work is done
passively. It does not use logable packets, but directly detects the presence of
access points. It also makes connections between them. Of the open-source
tools for wireless network monitoring, this is the most widely used.
Nikto
Nikto is another piece of excellent open-source software. It is one of the most
popular web server scanners. Its main function is to run web servers through
a myriad of tests to find traces of thousands of different programs that can
threaten your security. It can work with different versions of many different
servers. It checks server configurations and checks for system anomalies.

Nikto is designed for speed rather than stealth. It will test a web server as
soon as possible, but its passage will appear in log files and be detected by
intrusion detection and prevention systems.
Nikto is licensed under the GNU GPL. It can be downloaded from GitHub
from home.
OpenVAS
The OpenVAS, also known as the Open Vulnerability Assessment System, is
a set of tools that provide many comprehensive vulnerability scans. Most of
the system's components are open source and the software is completely free.
OpenVAS has two main components. The first part of the software is the
scanner. As the name suggests, it is responsible for scanning the computers.
The manager is the second part. The manager works as a controller for the
scanner and works with the results of the scans. The Network Vulnerability
Tests database is an additional component that you can add to the software to
make it more efficient. You can download the software from two software:
the Greenborne Security Feed and Greenborne Community Feed. The latter is
free while the former is paid.
OSSEC
OSSEC stands for Open Source SECurity. It is a host-based program used for
intrusion detection. This type of detection system differs from the network-
based counterparts in that the host itself runs the program. Trend Micro owns
OSSEC. In terms of IT security, this name carries quite a bit of weight.
The primary use of this software is in Unix-like software where the work is
devoted to configuration and file scanning. It also sees some use on Windows
systems where it keeps an eye on the registry. The tool alerts you via the
console or email when something suspicious is detected.
OSSEC has a relatively major drawback, just like any other host-based IDS.
You must install a new copy on every device you want to protect. This is
somewhat mitigated by the fact that the information can be directed to a
centralized console.
OSSEC is also licensed under the GNU GPL. If you want to use it, you can
download it from the website.
OSSEC is also distributed under the GNU GPL license and can be
downloaded from its own website.
Nexpose
Nexpose is another common tool. It was created by Rapid7 and is used to
manage vulnerabilities. It does everything a vulnerability manager can. It

complies with the so-called lifecycle of the vulnerability manager. This
means that the software handles all phases involved in the process.
When it comes to the features it comes with, it's a complete whole. The
software has many interesting features, such as the virtual scan option and
dynamic detection. It can scan many different types of environments and can
handle a number of IP addresses. It is software under development and is
constantly growing.
There are two versions of the product you can get. There is a community
edition that has far fewer features than the full commercial versions, prices
start at $ 2,000 a year. If you have any questions about the software or would
like to download Nexpose, please visit the official website.
GFI LanGuard
The GFI LanGuard is acclaimed as an excellent IT security tool for
companies. This tool was created to assist you with network scanning and
automatic patching. It also helps you meet compliance standards. This
software is compatible with most operating systems.
GFI LanGuard has a very intuitive dashboard that also helps identify viruses.
It also works with web browsers. Another strength of the software is the fact
that it works with a wide variety of devices.
If you are looking for the GFI LanGuard, you will find that there are many
different options when it comes to additional features. The price is flexible
and is renewed annually. If you are unsure about purchasing the software,
you can try the trial version first.
Security tools for the cloud
As I mentioned earlier, cloud has become a popular option when it comes to
storing software and data because it is a very efficient and secure method of
keeping your digital valuables safe. The cloud has lower costs, easier
scalability and extra mobility. These prospects are driving many companies
to move their data from on-premises to the cloud. This, in turn, made hackers
more and more inclined to devise new methods of attack systems to crack
clouds. This is why many providers like Dropbox and Evernote give you
many different policies that are slowly taking over the business world.
However, the cloud has its own flaws. There have been issues regarding data
privacy and residence. Of course, these problems are not enough for people
to leave the cloud. This is why the importance of cloud-related security has
increased as users and providers are always trying to find ways to mitigate
some of the risks.

If you want to put your business in the cloud, there are a few tools you should
always keep in mind when you want to keep your data safe. Before you start
talking about it, however, you should first know what Shadow IT is.
The term Shadow IT refers to all systems or services used on the data of the
organization without the approval of the organization. Shadow IT is nothing
new, but it started to become a growing problem due to the rise of the
popularity of the cloud.
This makes it more difficult for companies to keep their data safe because
policies are more difficult to implement.
Three of the following five tools are aimed at reducing the security risks you
may encounter when dealing with cloud computing.
Bitglass
Bitglass is not yet complete and is still in the beta phase. It protects your
company's data. Bitglass can be used on both computers and mobile devices.
It aims to maintain the visibility of your data and reduce the risk of that data
being lost on the device or in the cloud itself.
Bitglass covers different types of security due to the amount combined in this
package. If we talk about what it can do for cloud applications, Bitglass can
do several things. It can detect the usage of the applications and encrypt the
data you have uploaded to the cloud.
Another great advantage of Bitglass is the fact that it can track your data no
matter where it is located on the internet. This means that you have a view of
the data no matter where it goes and in whose hands it is. It also reduces a
great risk when it comes to compromised data due to device loss. Bitglass has
the ability to wipe a device with your data without the need to take additional
steps.
Skyhigh Networks
Skylight Networks uses logs from firewalls and proxies that already exist to
analyze and secure your cloud applications. It tracks the use of the
applications from both authorized and unauthorized sources.
You can adjust the risk assessment to ensure that the results are what you
want to see about your system, without additional unnecessary information.
Another great advantage of Skyhigh is detecting inconsistencies in your
system and data breaches.
The last notable feature of the Skyhigh Networks is that it has 3-click
security. This means that the policy can apply across the cloud and give you
direct access to applications without using device agents or VPNs. In

addition, you can use Skyhigh to encrypt and protect data.
NetsCheap
Nets Goedkoop is specially made for shade IT. It can monitor cloud apps and
detect anomalies in your network. It monitors a wide range of different
activities on your network and provides you with comprehensive reports on
your analyzes and the information collected.
It helps you ask business and security questions to discover vulnerabilities in
your system.
Another great feature of the Nets Goedkoop is its enforcement of policies that
allow you to keep an eye on your employees as they interact with
applications in the cloud, while stopping any activity you may consider
unwanted. It allows the worker to increase their productivity without
compromising your safety.
CipherCloud
CipherCloud aims to encrypt and tokenize your data to secure your cloud.
Unlike the previous few tools, it doesn't focus on shadow IT. Rather, it makes
known areas of the cloud as secure as possible.
CipherCloud is quite specific due to the fact that the data you upload is
encrypted during upload and decrypted during download. Your corporate
network retains the encryption keys used during the process. This means that
any unauthorized user simply gets a batch of unreadable text instead of useful
data.
CipherCloud can also detect malware and prevent data loss. There are several
builds for the CipherCloud that are specifically specialized to help specific
systems, while there are several that work with any application in the cloud.
Okta
Okta is quite unique among these five cloud application solutions. The goal
of Okta is to ensure that there is a secure SSO, short for Single Sign-On, for
all applications your company owns. Okta can communicate with the most
used applications that you find in most companies.
Okta has many useful features that you will be thankful for, such as support
for mobile devices and multi-factor authentication.
The software provides you with detailed audit logs, which means you can
track your users' access to your cloud apps. Another great advantage is the
central control panel from which you can manage access policies across the
system. It also gives you the option of role-based management.
Cloud Penetration Testing from the customer's point of

view
When it comes to on-site penetration testing, you usually assume that you
own all components and that all the tests you do are under your supervision
and with your approval. Penetration tests work slightly differently in the
cloud. The major drawback of the cloud is that consumers and providers
share the responsibility when it comes to computer security. Both groups are
eligible to perform penetration testing on the applications in the cloud. There
are two things to keep in mind when you want to do cloud penetration testing.
The first thing to consider is whether you are a consumer or a provider. The
other factor is the service model you selected.
The responsibilities of consumers and suppliers
Cloud providers have a wide variety of options when it comes to penetration
testing, even the most brutal like DDoS testing and red team testing. There is
a lot of competition when it comes to the cloud service market. There are
many giants who provide excellent service and the need to improve is
becoming more and more overwhelming.
Cloud users are increasingly interested in cyber security. They often
communicate with their providers to get more involved in the security
process and penetration testing.
Consumers themselves have much more limited access to applications and
penetration tests in the cloud. These restrictions depend heavily on the model
your cloud service provider uses.
Penetration testing Depends on the Cloud Service Model
There are three different cloud service models: SaaS (software as a service),
PaaS (platform as a service) and IaaS (infrastructure as a service). These
three models differ from each other in the division of responsibilities between
provider and consumer when it comes to cloud layers.
To understand these models, you first need to learn the eight layers of a
cloud:
● Facility (buildings).
● Network (both physical and virtual).
● Computers and storage (especially file storage and hardware provided by
CPU).
● Hypervisor (The hypervisor is used in virtualized environments. The task
of the hypervisor is to handle resource allocation between the machines in the
system.).
Operating system (OS) and virtual machine (VM) (these two are considered

to be the same layer due to the fact that when it comes to non-virtualized
environments, the execution of storage hardware is covered by the operating
system, while it is in virtualized environments) environments in which the
VM is responsible for this task.).
● Solution stack (uses databases and programming languages).
● Application (this layer is composed of the applications used by the users).
● Application Program Interface (API) or Graphical User Interface (GUI)
(consumers and customers use this layer to communicate with the system).
What you can do with the applications and penetration tests directly depends
on what kind of control you have over the layers. The different types of
models give you different degrees of control over the layers.
IaaS model
The IaaS model is specific in that control of the operating system and virtual
machine, as well as the higher cloud levels, lies with the user. The provider is
responsible for the connectivity of the hardware and the network. This means
that consumers are allowed to perform penetration tests on the API / GUI,
application, solution stack and the VM layers.
PaaS model
In the PaaS model, the provider provides all the software and hardware
necessary to run an application, while the consumer only implements the
application. This model gives the consumer fewer layers to deal with: the API
/ GUI and application layers to be precise.
SaaS model
The SaaS model is similar to the PaaS, allowing layers to be tested by the
consumer and what the provider provides. The scope of testing is limited to
the API / GUI layer. However, some providers using this model allow their
users to run their own applications independently of the system. These
applications can be tested by the consumer whenever they want.
Things to remember as a customer of Cloud Penetration
Testing
There are two golden rules when it comes to cloud penetration testing:
Always ask your provider if you want to perform a test
Perform penetration tests only on the layers you manage
Most providers have certain requirements that must be met before giving you
access to their systems. You will usually find this information on the

provider's website. If you create or test an unauthorized penetration test
without meeting the requirements, your account will be closed because the
provider must also ensure the security of the other users so that they cannot
take risks with suspicious activity.
A provider's job is not easy. They always have so many things to think about
and balance. They should always make sure that their customers' data is safe,
yet leave the interests of the customer unharmed because of the security
policies the provider might implement. The provider is not all-powerful, so
the penetration tests they can do must be done within their own domain. It's a
good thing that no cloud provider can access your data without your
permission, so you can be confident that your privacy is safe.
Chapter 9: What do I need to know
How do you get a job? What training and experience do you need?
To say that ethical hacking is a job like any other would be very wrong. It
does not require any kind of diploma or certification. Knowledge and
experience are all that matters in this industry. It doesn't matter how many
diplomas you have, the most important thing is your ingenuity and know-
how. The certificates are easy to obtain once you have proven yourself.
Do you need certifications or licenses?
You don't need certificates to be an ethical hacker. However, it's nice to have
them as they confirm your skill in the field. There are many different
certifications whose value depends on the job you are aiming for. You must
do your research when you are pursuing a certification. The most valuable
skills you can have in this area of work, other than the knowledge itself, are
perseverance, communication skills and problem solving.
The nature of the work
What is behind the surface of the track? What do you
usually do?
Doing this work will give you access to some very vulnerable systems. Once
you are in it, you will notice how much damage a well-placed attack can do
to the system and the company itself. You will see the connections they
shouldn't have, programs to be patched, if the software and hardware are
being used properly, and if the passwords stored on the system are safe. Each
network is just a mass of interconnected systems that are easier to crack than
it may seem at first. This is especially important with networks that take care
of your money or personal information. An important thing to keep in mind is

how informed you are. Social networks are a great place to discover new
news before it shows up in other media.
Most of the time you spend on this work is spent researching networks,
removing potential vulnerabilities, documenting the findings, and informing
your customers about them. Sometimes you feel like you are back in school
because of the enormous amount of reports you make as a hacker. The
reports should be informative and concise as this is the only insight your
customer has in their systems.
It is important that the customer is involved in every step. Although the
process is very open, the client can get lost in all the intricacies of the process
because of the technical knowledge required to understand them.
What are the general assumptions people make about
work?
People often associate the word "hacker" with malicious people who engage
in illegal activities. However, as I have said many times, this is not true.
Hackers are people who like to research how new tools and software can be
used to solve problems and open new attack routes. The malicious
individuals who use their knowledge to hurt people or steal money and
information are not hackers. These individuals are just criminals and nothing
more. The hacking community hates to identify as 'ethical hackers' because of
the reputation criminals have given them. The term "cracker" was always a
possibility when it came to criminal hackers, but it is often overlooked.
Some people like to watch the hacking process and see it as a magician's
achievement. On the contrary, hacking is a well-thought-out process that
aims to systematically go through a system to improve a network or system.
Despite what some people think, hackers are nothing but people who have a
good understanding of how systems work. Computers will always only do
what they are told and nothing else.
Another wrong assumption that people like to make is that every test that a
white hat performs is the same. Unfortunately, this field is hardly explored
and penetration testing is relatively unknown as a term for most people.
There are many different penetration tests, each of which has a different skill
requirement.
How many hours a day do you work?
The amount of time you need to spend each day doing hard work depends on
the type of activity you participate in. If a high-end company hires you to
perform a penetration test, you will have to work 8-10 hours a day. Each task

can take up to 10 weeks. If you only look around vulnerabilities in the system
or network, the amount of time you will spend on them depends on you.
If you receive a call from a company to help them recover from a security
breach, your hours may go through the roof. All-nighters are nothing out of
the ordinary for people in this industry. Stopping an attack to further damage
the system is not an easy task, especially since it is your responsibility to
manage the damage and help the company get back into action.
Are there any tips and shortcuts that can help you get to
work?
Make sure you always keep up with the news. New methods are always
emerging and you may find someone who has found an easier way to do
something that interests you. Always keep a record of your exploits and the
information you have collected to keep track of what you have done. By
doing this, you can avoid feeling bad about wasting time or not seeing the
solution in time.
Always remember that there is no such thing as too much communication. A
hacker has never been fired because a customer has given too much
information about the system. You will rarely find a customer who will
instruct you to give less information. In general, customers are eager to be
informed about what is happening on their system, no matter how minuscule,
and they will appreciate the work you do to communicate that information in
an understandable way.
Can you do things to differentiate yourself from the rest
of the white hats?
Companies have a common misconception that the job of an ethical hacker is
simply to scan the system to find a vulnerability and that nothing is wrong.
However, this is not true. A white hat hacker's job is much more extensive
and deep. They will always try to find out why the program is vulnerable and
how that vulnerability could be exploited by a malicious person, as well as
the actual amount of damage a successful black hat hacker can cause.
Finding vulnerabilities in a network is quite easy. Most of the work a hacker
has to do comes from analyzing what the vulnerability means to the system.
You may want to know what the hacker can and wants to do by using that
vulnerability and how the vulnerability affects other parts of the system. It
can also help you figure out how a criminal hacker gets into the system,
preventing a similar attack from being effective.

What about the job is the worst and how do you deal with
it?
There are few things that can turn you away, such as specific customers. You
can sometimes be hired by people who aren't really interested in what's going
on in their system and are just looking to do it. Another type of client that
will cause a lot of stress is the indifferent type. Some companies are not
always happy to hire a white hat hacker to help them, thinking that repairing
the damage left by the hacker will always be much cheaper than hiring a
professional to help them. help improve the security of their networks. On the
other hand, the more reluctant customers can hire a white hat hacker purely
for fear of their system being compromised. This can be compared to when
your car starts making strange noises. You go to a mechanic as soon as
possible to see if something is wrong.
Some customers may be concerned that a white hat hacker's services may
cost a pretty penny. This is not always the only concern, as people looking
for services are often people who rely on their IT skills as a job. If you
discover many vulnerabilities and problems, you can make the person look
bad.
The best thing to do in such situations is just keep up the good work. Always
do your best and make sure to report everything you find, as well as what it
can mean for the network. Remember that you are not responsible for
protecting the system yourself. That responsibility lies with the customer
himself. The best thing to do is hope they will do it well themselves.
Where is the pleasure in work? What makes it so
attractive?
It is difficult to determine exactly what is best about the job. Some people are
very happy that they are doing something that would be illegal if the situation
were different. People often joke about how they think like a criminal after a
while. This is true in most cases and can be a fun way to approach work.
There are many interesting people in the sector. You will always have fun
exchanging knowledge and stories from work with them, and possibly
making new friends as well.
However, what gives you the most satisfaction in the job is the fact that you
have a huge impact on someone's life. You help them not only feel safer, but
also be safer. You influence someone's life in a very good way and it can be
very rewarding in itself. To be honest, the wages are pretty good too.

Customers and general advice
Is there anything you want your customers to know
before seeking your help?
There are several things that customers often have to consider. The first, and
perhaps the most important thing to remember about white hat hackers is the
fact that they are not superheroes. They are unable to solve all your problems
simply by diving in. Sometimes customers think that once you get into their
system you will make it completely safe and they can work worry-free.
However, this is wishful thinking.
While many white hat hackers would like to make it work that way, the
reality is a bit more difficult to swallow. It is important that every customer is
realistic. It is up to them to decide which parts of the system are most
important and what types of risks are acceptable when it comes to protecting
them. It is impossible to create a completely impenetrable system. There is
always that one vulnerability you can't see or a new technique that you
couldn't possibly explain. This means that the work of a white hat hacker is
not done when they find a way to prevent a possible attack. They should
always assess the situation to see what can be done to prevent a successful
attack from getting out of hand.
No one can protect themselves from a threat they don't know exists.
Therefore, there are a few steps you can take to help the hacker you hired
ensure they did everything possible to keep your system safe. Before a hacker
performs a penetration test, always give him as much important information
about the system as possible.
The penetration test is designed to find a part of your system that is
vulnerable to attack and to show how much it can affect the system itself.
Nobody likes it when their money is gone or their sensitive personal
information is missing, so you should always act quickly to resolve the
vulnerability once the hacker discovers it.
Something all customers should know is that the penetration test is the easy
part. Learning from your mistakes and running your business in a safer way
is the hard part.
How much can you earn with this work?
Well, the first thing to note is that your expectations will usually be met as
long as they are reasonable. The second thing worth noting is that hacking is
similar to other work when it comes to how much hard work is rewarded. If
you work hard enough and get good enough, you earn a pretty penny. If you

want to work for a large amount immediately after obtaining a certification or
extensive knowledge in the field, you can get started yourself. Businesses can
be pretty brutal when it comes to the amount of work they do to you. You
may have to travel a lot and work long hours. Some hackers often say that
sleep is a luxury right now. If you're striving to keep a significant amount of
money flowing into your pocket while working in a healthy way, you may
need to gain years of experience in IT and computer security.
How do you progress in this area?
Well, this question is interesting. It usually depends on the individual we are
talking about. You will gain new knowledge every day, regardless of which
key area you work in. While these skills usually differ from one line of work
to another, gaining experience is the key to progress. While you can do well
with exams and get nice certificates this can help you but the most important
thing you can have is skill while working.
There is another way to stand out from the people you work with.
Conferences are held annually. If you do interesting research and demonstrate
its usefulness, your name can gain a little weight to toss around. The more
you engage in these conferences, the more likely your name will be
mentioned.
What do customers tend to be over or undervalued?
In most cases, customers do not see how valuable they are to the process
itself. They like to think that a good hacker is all you need to keep the bad
people away. However, this is not true as the customer has to do most of the
work to protect himself. People also tend to make excuses as to why they will
never be hacked. They like to say that their company is too small or that they
don't have any valuable information anyone would want. This all changes
quite quickly once their systems are actually hacked.
Another common mistake companies make is when they compare themselves
to other companies. Some conversations in the boardroom often come down
to this. They feel like they are wasting money if they spend more on security
than any other similar company.
However, what people often overestimate are compliance standards. People
like to think that if you meet these standards, your system is completely safe
and there can be nothing wrong when a hacker tries to get into it. What you
need to know about compliance standards is that they are not representative
of the performance needed to keep your system safe. They are a rough outline
of the bare minimum not to be fined. To be really safe, you have to go for

miles and go beyond what the compliance standards prescribe.
What is the most important thing to remember?
You have to put your heart and soul into it. This is a market that continues to
grow and is hungry for individuals interested in playing around with systems
and seeing what is tapping them and how they can keep tapping.
Make sure you enjoy the learning process. If it seems like it is difficult to
learn the skills you have known over and over, then some of the less
glamorous parts of the job will definitely bore you. However, you should
never stop hoping. It's easy to find a specific job that is fun for you and
makes you feel fulfilled.
Conclusion
White hat hacking is not something new. In fact, it has been here for a long
time, either under different names or without a name at all. There has been a
lot of controversy around white hat hacking for a long time. Since cybercrime
has become a common practice among criminals, the word 'hacker' has
steadily gained a malicious reputation. Due to the extent to which computer
technology has evolved in a relatively short time, it makes sense that
information is moved from a physical form to a digital form. There are many
criminal organizations that value information above all else, so it makes sense
that they always find new ways to invade systems. This means that it is more
important than ever to have secure systems. Valuable data such as passwords
that we use every day is something very valuable and we must protect it.
White hat hacking came as a not-so-obvious solution for finding new ways to
protect our systems. Think of a system as if it were human. When someone
gets sick, their body gets weaker and they take some damage. However, if the
body gets through the disease in the long term, it will be more resistant to the
disease in the future. The same goes for injuries. If you break a bone in one
place multiple times over a period of time, the new tissue that will replace the
damage will be more resilient than ever before. White hat hacking works on a
similar principle. To ensure that your system is safe, you should remove as
many vulnerabilities as possible. It is difficult to say where these
vulnerabilities are if not exploited. However, you can't really wait for an
attack to take place to discover the vulnerability and hope for the best. Once a
malicious hacker invades your system, there's no telling how far they will go
or what they will do. Still, it was necessary to have a method that would help

organizations keep their systems up to date with the latest hacking tools and
techniques to create countermeasures.
White hat hacking is the only real way to do this. Making the system less
vulnerable to a hacker attack is exposing it to danger. This is not something
you would expect someone to do because it is an extremely precise and
delicate process. The professionals you hire to do this for you must be
meticulous in their work and have extensive knowledge of computers.
The problem with a white hat hacker is that many people automatically
associate you with malicious people who perform the same activities as you,
but for different reasons. Calling a hacker isn't considered a bad thing
everywhere, though. People in the IT industry have a lot of respect for
certified white hat hackers because it means they are people with a huge
amount of knowledge in the field and use that knowledge to do good to other
people. The people who look at white hats as if they were criminals usually
don't know what white hats actually do and only focus on the hacker part of
the title. This is mainly why white hats don't show off the calling and prefer it
to their resumes.
However, white hat hackers are a force for good. They use the same methods
as crackers, but do so with the permission of the owner of the system they are
hacking and do so to improve the security of the system. The point is that
they are the opposite of black hat hackers because they make their job much
more difficult.
The area of hacking white hats is growing rapidly. This is in large part due to
the amount of cybercrime that has grown in recent decades, so there are
always companies out there looking for a good white hat hacker. They are
willing to pay a large amount of money but will save you time and energy as
it is more than a full time job. Fortunately, freelancing as a white hat hacker
is always an option. This path is slightly slower but will bring you to more
favorable results. As I said before, the job only requires knowledge and
experience, so hard work is key to success. If you can prove yourself in the
field, you rarely have your hands free. You can get several certificates to
prove your expertise in the field, but again this is not necessary because all
you have to do to get a good job is prove yourself to the employer. Then it is
smooth sailing.
The job may not be for everyone. Sometimes you may be stuck doing the
same thing for an extended period of time and that just isn't interesting for

some people. On the other hand, you will find the work extremely interesting
if you enjoy learning new things because new methods are constantly being
discovered. The work requires a great deal of flexibility because nothing you
do is done exactly by the textbook. Usually you just think like a cracker to
get into the system, but before that there is a stage where you have to
carefully collect data about the system. The fun part starts when you can
actually dig into the system. You will snoop around to find some weaknesses
and then follow a hack plan to determine what kind of damage a malicious
user can do from then on. During all this you will have to do what so many
people dread: make reports.
Reports are the main result of penetration testing because they are the direct
link between the employer and the hacker. The reports provide an overview
of what the vulnerabilities are, how they can be exploited and how they can
be remedied. A customer needs this information to determine what to do later
to ensure that the vulnerability is never misused by a malicious person.
Because it is a relatively new field, hacking holds great promise for creators
and explorers. People best known in the community are people who develop
tools and methods that help white hat hackers work more efficiently. Making
one of these tools takes a lot of money and time, so this is a task for only the
bravest and most skilled.
Always remember that no matter what the media tells you, not all hackers are
bad. There are those who use their technical knowledge to take advantage of
other people for their own benefit, but white hat efforts are committed to stop
this. There are many skilled individuals in the industry whose names speak
volumes themselves.
Today, white hat hacking has become a necessity if you want your systems to
stay safe. Hiring a white hat hacker can sometimes save you a pretty penny,
but it's worth it if you have sensitive or secret data you don't want to be stolen
or destroyed.
Some people underestimate the importance of computer security and say
things like, "It doesn't happen to me because I don't have useful data" or "The
chance is too small." These people realize the mistake when it's too late and
they've already been hacked. You should always keep an eye on the security
of your computer, because you never know what can happen and when you
can be attacked.
Always remember to stay safe while doing anything with your system. Your
data may not be valuable to a hacker, but it is valuable to you and you

shouldn't lose it.

