

An easy way to  
help your students 
learn, collaborate, 
and grow.
We are dedicated to supporting you from idea to outcome.
Personalized 
Experience
Students create their own study 
guide while they interact with 
course content and work on learning 
activities.
Flexible  
Course Design
Educators can quickly organize 
learning activities, manage student 
collaboration, and customize their 
course—giving them full control over 
content as well as the amount of 
interactivity among students.
Clear  
Path to Action
With visual reports, it’s easy for  
both students and educators to gauge 
problem areas and act on what’s  
most important.
  Assign activities and add your own materials
  Guide students through what’s important in the 
content
  Set up and monitor collaborative learning groups
  Assess learner engagement
  Gain immediate insights to help inform teaching
  Instantly know what you need to work on
  Create a personal study plan
  Assess progress along the way
  Participate in class discussions
  Remember what you have learned because you have 
made deeper connections to the content
*OTUSVDUPS#FOFGJUT
4UVEFOU#FOFGJUT
JOUFSBDUJWFFUFYUCPPLCZFBTJMZBTTJHOJOHTQFDJGJD


Case 1-1  Opening Case     iii
Information
Technology 
for Management
Digital Strategies for Insight, Action, 
and Sustainable Performance
10th 
Edition
EFRAIM TURBAN
LINDA VOLONINO, Canisius College
GREGORY R. WOOD, Canisius College
Contributing authors:
JANICE C. SIPIOR, Villanova University
GUY H. GESSNER, Canisius College

VP & EXECUTIVE PUBLISHER: 
Don Fowley
EXECUTIVE EDITOR: 
Beth Lang Golub
SPONSORING EDITOR: 
Mary O’Sullivan
PROJECT EDITOR: 
Ellen Keohane
ASSOCIATE EDITOR: 
Christina Volpe
MARKETING MANAGER: 
Margaret Barrett
MARKETING ASSISTANT: 
Elisa Wong
SENIOR CONTENT MANAGER: 
Ellinor Wagner
SENIOR PRODUCTION EDITOR: 
Ken Santor
SENIOR PHOTO EDITOR: 
Lisa Gee
DESIGNER: 
Kristine Carney
COVER DESIGNER 
Wendy Lai
COVER IMAGE 
© Ajgul/Shutterstock
This book was set by Aptara, Inc. Cover and text printed and bound by Courier Kendallville.
This book is printed on acid free paper.
Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. has been a valued source of knowledge and understanding for more than 200 years, helping people 
around the world meet their needs and fulfill their aspirations. Our company is built on a foundation of principles that include responsibility to 
the communities we serve and where we live and work. In 2008, we launched a Corporate Citizenship Initiative, a global effort to address the 
environmental, social, economic, and ethical challenges we face in our business. Among the issues we are addressing are carbon impact, paper 
specifications and procurement, ethical conduct within our business and among our vendors, and community and charitable support. For more 
information, please visit our website: www.wiley.com/go/citizenship.
Copyright © 2015, 2013, 2011, 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as 
permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or 
authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 
01923, website www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, (201)748-6011, fax (201)748-6008, website http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Evaluation copies are provided to qualified academics and professionals for review purposes only, for use in their courses during the next 
academic year. These copies are licensed and may not be sold or transferred to a third party. Upon completion of the review period, please 
return the evaluation copy to Wiley. Return instructions and a free of charge return mailing label are available at www.wiley.com/go/returnlabel. If you 
have chosen to adopt this textbook for use in your course, please accept this book as your complimentary desk copy. Outside of the 
United States, please contact your local sales representative.
ISBN 978-1-118-89778-2
BRV ISBN 978-1-118-99429-0
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

BRIEF CONTENTS
 1  Doing Business in Digital Times  1
 2  Data Governance and IT Architecture Support Long-Term 
Performance  33
 3 Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management  70
 4 Networks for Efficient Operations and Sustainability  110
 5 Cybersecurity and Risk Management  141
 6  Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation 
Technology  181
 7 Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics  221
 8 Retail, E-commerce, and Mobile Commerce Technology  264
 9 Effective and Efficient Business Functions  297
10 Strategic Technology and Enterprise Systems  331
11 Data Visualization and Geographic Information Systems  367
12 IT Strategy and Balanced Scorecard  389
13 Project Management and SDLC  412
14 Ethical Risks and Responsibilities of IT Innovations  438
Glossary  G-1
Organizational Index  O-1
Name Index   N-1
Subject Index   S-1
Part 1
Part 2
Part 3
Part 4
Digital Technology 
Trends Transforming 
How Business Is Done 
Winning, Engaging, and 
Retaining Consumers 
with Technology
Optimizing Performance 
with Enterprise Systems 
and Analytics
Managing Business 
Relationships, Projects, 
and Codes of Ethics
v


CONTENTS
Part 1
Digital Technology Trends Transforming 
How Business Is Done 
1 Doing Business in Digital Times  1
Case 1.1, Opening Case: McCain Foods’s Success Factors: 
Dashboards, Innovation, and Ethics  2
1.1 Every Business Is a Digital Business  6
1.2 Business Process Management and Improvement  15
1.3 The Power of Competitive Advantage  19
1.4 Enterprise Technology Trends  25
1.5 How Your IT Expertise Adds Value to Your Performance 
and Career  27
Case 1.2, Business Case: Restaurant Creates Opportunities to 
Engage Customers  31
Case 1.3, Video Case: What Is the Value of Knowing More and 
Doing More?  32
2 Data Governance and IT Architecture Support 
Long-Term Performance  33
Case 2.1, Opening Case: Detoxing Dirty Data with Data 
Governance at Intel Security  34
2.1 Information Management  37
2.2 Enterprise Architecture and Data Governance  42
2.3 Information Systems: The Basics  47
2.4 Data Centers, Cloud Computing, and Virtualization  53
2.5 Cloud Services Add Agility  62
Case 2.2, Business Case: Data Chaos Creates Risk  67
Case 2.3, Video Case: Cloud Computing: Three Case Studies  69
3 Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and 
Records Management  70
Case 3.1, Opening Case: Coca-Cola Manages at the Point That 
Makes a Difference  71
3.1 Database Management Systems  75
3.2 Data Warehouse and Big Data Analytics  86
3.3 Data and Text Mining  96
3.4 Business Intelligence  99
3.5 Electronic Records Management  102
Case 3.2, Business Case: Financial Intelligence Fights Fraud  108
Case 3.3, Video Case: Hertz Finds Gold in Integrated Data  108
4 Networks for Efficient Operations and 
Sustainability  110
Case 4.1, Opening Case: Sony Builds an IPv6 Network to Fortify 
Competitive Edge  111
4.1 Data Networks, IP Addresses, and APIs  113
4.2 Wireless Networks and Mobile Infrastructure  123
4.3 Collaboration and Communication Technologies  127
4.4 Sustainability and Ethical Issues  130
Case 4.2, Business Case: Google Maps API for Business  139
Case 4.3, Video Case: Fresh Direct Connects for Success  140
5 Cybersecurity and Risk Management  141
Case 5.1, Opening Case: BlackPOS Malware Steals Target’s 
Customer Data  142
5.1 The Face and Future of Cyberthreats  144
5.2 Cyber Risk Management  152
5.3 Mobile, App, and Cloud Security  163
5.4 Defending Against Fraud  166
5.5 Compliance and Internal Control  169
Case 5.2, Business Case: Lax Security at LinkedIn Exposed  177
Case 5.3, Video Case: Botnets, Malware Security, and Capturing 
Cybercriminals  179
vii
Part 2
Winning, Engaging, and Retaining Consumers 
with Technology
6 Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and 
Recommendation Technology  181
Case 6.1, Opening Case: Nike Golf Drives Web Traffic with Search 
Engine Optimization  182
6.1 Using Search Technology for Business Success  186
6.2 Organic Search and Search Engine Optimization  198
6.3 Pay-Per-Click and Paid Search Strategies  203
6.4 A Search for Meaning—Semantic Technology   205
6.5 Recommendation Engines  209
Case 6.2, Business Case: Recommending Wine to Online 
Customers  217
Case 6.3, Video Case: Power Searching with Google  218
7 Social Networking, Engagement, and Social 
Metrics  221
Case 7.1, Opening Case: The Connected Generation Influences 
Banking Strategy  222
7.1 Web 2.0—The Social Web  225
7.2 Social Networking Services and Communities  235
7.3 Engaging Consumers with Blogs and 
Microblogs  245
7.4 Mashups, Social Metrics, and Monitoring 
Tools  250
7.5 Knowledge Sharing in the Social 
Workplace  255
Case 7.2, Business Case: Social Customer Service  259
Case 7.3, Video Case: Viral Marketing: Will It Blend?  261

8 Retail, E-commerce, and Mobile Commerce 
Technology  264
Case 8.1, Opening Case: Macy’s Races Ahead with Mobile Retail 
Strategies  265
8.1 Retailing Technology  268
8.2 Business to Consumer (B2C) E-commerce  271
8.3 Business to Business (B2B) E-commerce and 
E-procurement  277
8.4 Mobile Commerce  279
8.5 Mobile Transactions and Financial Services  286
Case 8.2, Business Case: Chegg’s Mobile Strategy  293
Case 8.3, Video Case: Searching with Pictures Using MVS  294
11.4 Geospatial Data and Geographic Information 
Systems  384
Case 11.2, Visualization Case: Are You Ready for Football?  387
Case 11.3, Video Case: The Beauty of Data Visualization  387
viii   Contents
Part 3
Optimizing Performance with Enterprise 
Systems and Analytics
9 Effective and Efficient Business Functions  297
Case 9.1, Opening Case: Ducati Redesigns Its Operations  299
9.1 Solving Business Challenges at All Management 
Levels  302
9.2 Manufacturing, Production, and Transportation 
Management Systems  306
9.3 Sales and Marketing Systems  312
9.4 Accounting, Finance, and Regulatory Systems  315
9.5 Human Resources Systems, Compliance, 
and Ethics  323
Case 9.2, Business Case: HSBC Combats Fraud in Split-second 
Decisions  329
Case 9.3, Video Case: United Rentals Optimizes Its Workforce with 
Human Capital Management  330
10 Strategic Technology and Enterprise 
Systems  331
Case 10.1, Opening Case: Strategic Technology Trend—
3D Printing  332
10.1 Enterprise Systems  337
10.2 Enterprise Social Platforms  341
10.3 Enterprise Resource Planning Systems  346
10.4 Supply Chain Management Systems  352
10.5 Customer Relationship Management Systems  358
Case 10.2, Business Case: Avon’s Failed SAP Implementation: 
Enterprise System Gone Wrong  364
Case 10.3, Video Case: Procter & Gamble: Creating Conversations 
in the Cloud with 4.8 Billion Consumers  365
11 Data Visualization and Geographic Information 
Systems  367
Case 11.1, Opening Case: Safeway and PepsiCo Apply Data 
Visualization to Supply Chain  369
11.1 Data Visualization and Learning  371
11.2 Enterprise Data Mashups  377
11.3 Digital Dashboards  380
Part 4
Managing Business Relationships, Projects, 
and Codes of Ethics
12 IT Strategy and Balanced Scorecard  389
Case 12.1, Opening Case: Intel’s IT Strategic Planning 
Process  390
12.1 IT Strategy and the Strategic Planning 
Process  392
12.2 Aligning IT with Business Strategy  397
12.3 Balanced Scorecard  400
12.4 IT Sourcing and Cloud Strategy  403
Case 12.2, Business Case: AstraZeneca Terminates $1.4B 
Outsourcing Contract with IBM  409
Case 12.3, Data Analysis: Third-Party versus Company-Owned 
Offshoring  410
13 Project Management and SDLC  412
Case 13.1, Opening Case: Keeping Your Project on Track, Knowing 
When It Is Doomed, and DIA Baggage System Failure  413
13.1 Project Management Concepts  417
13.2 Project Planning, Execution, and Budget   421
13.3 Project Monitoring, Control, and Closing  428
13.4 System Development Life Cycle  432
Case 13.2, Business Case: Steve Jobs’ Shared Vision Project 
Management Style  436
Case 13.3, Demo Case: Mavenlink Project Management and 
Planning Software  437
14 Ethical Risks and Responsibilities of IT 
Innovations  438
Case 14.1, Opening Case: Google Glass and Risk, Privacy, and 
Piracy Challenges  439
14.1 Privacy Paradox, Privacy, and Civil Rights  442
14.2 Responsible Conduct  448
14.3 Technology Addictions and the Emerging Trend of 
Focus Management  453
14.4 Six Technology Trends Transforming Business  454
Case 14.2, Business Case: Apple’s CarPlay Gets 
Intelligent  458
Case 14.3, Video Case: Vehicle-to-Vehicle Technology to Prevent 
Collisions  459
Glossary  G-1
Organizational Index  O-1
Name Index   N-1
Subject Index   S-1

Business strategy and operations are driven by data, digi-
tal technologies, and devices. Five years from now, we will 
look back upon today as the start of a new era in business 
and technology. Just like the way e-business started with 
the emergence of the Web, this new era is created by the 
convergence of social, mobile, big data, analytics, cloud, 
sensor, software-as-a-service, and data visualization tech-
nologies. These technologies enable real-time insights, 
business decisions, and actions. Examples of how they 
determine tomorrow’s business outcomes are:
• Insight. Combining the latest capabilities in big 
data analytics, reporting, collaboration, search, and 
machine-to-machine (M2M) communication helps 
enterprises build an agility advantage, cut costs, and 
achieve their visions. 
• Action. Fully leveraging real-time data about opera-
tions, supply chains, and customers enables managers 
to make decisions and take action in the moment. 
• Sustainable performance. Deploying cloud services, 
managing projects and sourcing agreements, respect-
ing privacy and the planet, and engaging customers 
across channels are now fundamental to sustaining 
business growth. 
• Business optimization. Embedding digital capability 
into products, services, machines, and business pro-
cesses optimizes business performance—and creates 
strategic weapons. 
In this tenth edition, students learn, explore, and analyze 
the three dimensions of business performance improve-
ment: digital technology, business processes, and people. 
What Is New in the Tenth 
Edition—and Why It Matters
Most Relevant Content. Prior to and during the writing 
process, we attended practitioner conferences and con-
sulted with managers who are hands-on users of leading 
technologies, vendors, and IT professionals to learn about 
their IT/business successes, challenges, experiences, and 
recommendations. For example, during an in-person 
interview with a Las Vegas pit boss, we learned how 
real-time monitoring and data analytics recommend 
the minimum bets in order to maximize revenue per 
minute at gaming tables. Experts outlined opportunities 
and strategies to leverage cloud services and big data 
PREFACE
to capture customer loyalty and wallet share and justify 
significant investments in leading IT. 
More Project Management with Templates. In response 
to reviewers’ requests, we have greatly increased cover-
age of project management and systems development 
lifecycle (SDLC). Students are given templates for writing 
a project business case, statement of work (SOW), and 
work breakdown structure (WBS). Rarely covered, but 
critical project management issues included in this edition 
are project post-mortem, responsibility matrix, go/no go 
decision factors, and the role of the user community.
New Technologies and Expanded Topics. New to this 
edition are 3D printing and bioprinting, project portfolio 
management, the privacy paradox, IPv6, outsource rela-
tionship management (ORM), and balanced scorecard. 
With more purchases and transactions starting online 
and attention being a scarce resource, students learn how 
search, semantic, and recommendation technologies func-
tion to improve revenue. The value of Internet of Things 
(IoT) has grown significantly as a result of the compound 
impact of connecting people, processes, data, and things. 
Easier to Grasp Concepts. A lot of effort went into mak-
ing learning easier and longer-lasting by outlining content 
with models and text graphics for each opening case (our 
version of infographics) as shown in Figure P-1—from the 
Chapter 12 opening case.
Engaging Students to 
Assure Learning
The tenth edition of Information Technology for 
Management engages students with up-to-date cover-
age of the most important IT trends today. Over the 
years, this IT textbook had distinguished itself with an 
emphasis on illustrating the use of cutting edge business 
technologies for achieving managerial goals and objec-
tives. The tenth edition continues this tradition with more 
hands-on activities and analyses.
 
Each chapter contains numerous case studies and 
real world examples illustrating how businesses increase 
productivity, improve efficiency, enhance communica-
tion and collaboration, and gain a competitive edge 
through the use of ITs. Faculty will appreciate a variety 
of options for reinforcing student learning, that include 
three Case Studies per chapter, including an opening 
case, a business case and a video case. 
ix

x   Preface
 
Throughout each chapter are various learning aids, 
which include the following: 
• Learning Outcomes are listed at the beginning of each 
chapter to help students focus their efforts and alert 
them to the important concepts that will be discussed.
• The Chapter Snapshot provides students with an over-
view of the chapter content. 
• IT at Work boxes spotlight real-world cases and inno-
vative uses of IT. 
• Definitions of Key Terms appear in the margins 
throughout the book. 
• Tech Note boxes explore topics such as “4G and 
5G Networks in 2018” and “Data transfers to main-
frames.” 
• Career Insight boxes highlight different jobs in the IT 
for management field.
At the end of each chapter are a variety of features 
designed to assure student learning: 
• Critical Thinking Questions are designed to facilitate 
student discussion. 
• Online and Interactive Exercises encourage students 
to explore additional topics. 
• Analyze and Decide questions help students apply IT 
concepts to business decisions.
Details of New and Enhanced 
Features of the Tenth Edition
The textbook consists of fourteen chapters organized 
into four parts. All chapters have new sections as well as 
updated sections, as shown in Table P-1.
Strategic
directional
statements
Strategic
plan
gic
egic
2. Technology & Business Outlook. A team of
    senior management, IT, and business unit
    representatives develop the two-to-five-year
    business outlook & technology outlook.
3. Current State Assessment & Gap Analysis.
    Analysis of the current state of IT, enterprise
    systems, & processes, which are compared with
    results of step 2 to identify gaps and necessary
    adjustments to IT investment plans.
4. Strategic Imperatives, Strategies, & Budget for
    Next Year. Develop next year’s priorities, road
    map, budget, & investment plan. Annual budget
    approved.
5. Governance Decisions & IT Road Map. The
    budget guides the governance process, including
    supplier selection and sourcing.
6. Balanced Scorecard Reviews.
    Performance is measured monthly.
1. Enterprise Vision. Senior management &
    leaders develop & communicate the enterprise’s
    two-to-five-year strategic vision & mission and
    identify the direction & focus for upcoming year.
Figure P-1 Model of Intel’s 
6-step IT strategic planning 
process, from Chapter 12.

Preface   xi  
TABLE P-1 
 Overview of New and Expanded IT Topics and Innovative Enterprises Discussed 
in the Chapters
Chapter
New and Expanded IT and Business Topics
Enterprises in a Wide 
Range of Industries
1: Doing Business in 
Digital Times
• Era of Mobile-Social-Cloud-Big Data
• Digital connectivity and convergence
•  Internet of Things (IoT), or machine-to-machine 
(M2M) technology
• Farm-to-fork traceability
• Business process management
• Near-fi eld communication (NFC)
• McCain Foods Ltd
• Zipcar
• Pei Wei Asian Diner
• Teradata
2: Data Governance and 
IT Architecture Support 
Long-Term Performance
• Data governance and quality
• Master data management (MDM)
• Cloud services
• Collaboration
• Virtualization and business continuity
•  software-, platform-, infrastructure-, and data-
as-a-service
• Intel Security
• Liberty Wines
• Unilever
•  Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center
3: Data Management, 
Big Data Analytics and 
Records Management
• Big data analytics and machine-generated data 
• Business intelligence (BI)
• Hadoop
• NoSQL systems
• Active data warehouse apps
• Compliance
• Coca-Cola
• Hertz
• First Wind
• Argo Corp.
• Wal-Mart
• McDonalds
• Infi nity Insurance
• Quicken Loans, Inc.
• U.S. military
• CarMax
4: Networks for Effi cient 
Operations and Sustain-
ability
• IPv6
• API
• 4G and 5G networks
• Net neutrality
• Location-aware technologies
• Climate change
• Mobile infrastructure
• Sustainable development
• Sony
• Google Maps
• Fresh Direct
• Apple
• Spotify
• Caterpillar, Inc.
5: Cyber Security and 
Risk Management 
• BYOD and social risks
•  Advanced persistent threats (APT), malware, 
and botnets
• IT governance
• Cloud security
• Fraud detection and prevention
• Target
• LinkedIn
• Boeing
6: Attracting Buyers with 
Search, Semantic and 
Recommendation 
Technology
• Search technology
• Search engine optimization (SEO)
• Google Analytics
• Paid search strategies
• Nike
• Netfl ix
• Wine.com
(continued)

xii   Preface
TABLE P-1 
 Overview of New and Expanded IT Topics and Innovative Enterprises Discussed 
in the Chapters (continued)
Chapter
New and Expanded IT and Business Topics
Enterprises in a Wide 
Range of Industries
7: Social Networking, 
Engagement and Social 
Metrics
• Social network services (SNS)
• Web 2.0 tools for business collaboration
• Crowdfunding
• Privacy
• Citibank
• American Express
• Facebook
• Twitter
• Cisco
8: Retail, E-commerce 
and Mobile Commerce 
Technology
• Innovation in traditional and web-based retail 
• Omni-channel retailing
• Visual search
• Mobile payment systems
• Macys
• Chegg
• Amazon
9: Effective and Effi cient 
Business Functions 
• Customer experience (CX)
•  eXtensible Business Reporting Language 
(XBRL)
• Order fulfi llment process
• Transportation management systems
• Computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM)
• SaaS
• TQM
• Auditing information systems
• Ducati Motor Holding
• HSBC
• SAS
• United Rentals
• First Choice Ski
10: Strategic Technology 
and Enterprise Systems
• 3D printing, additive manufacturing
• Enterprise social platforms
• Yammer, SharePoint, and Microsoft Cloud
• Avon
• Procter & Gamble
•  Organic Valley Family 
of Farms
•  Red Robin Gourmet 
Burgers, Inc.
• Salesforce.com
•  Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA)
•  U.S. Army Materiel 
Command (AMC)
• 1-800-Flowers
11: Data Visualization 
and Geographic Informa-
tion Systems
• Data visualization
• Mobile dashboards
• Geospatial data and geocoding
• Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
• Supply chain visibility
• Reporting tools; analytical tools
• Self-service mashup capabilities
• Safeway
• PepsiCo
• eBay
• Tableau
• Hartford Hospital
• General Motors (GM)
12: IT Strategy and 
Balanced Scorecard
• IT strategic planning process
• Value drivers
• Outsource relationship management (ORM)
• Service level agreements (SLAs)
• Outsourcing lifecycle
• Applications portfolio
• Intel
• AstraZeneca
• IBM
•  Commonwealth Bank of 
Australia (CBA)
(continued)

Preface   xiii  
TABLE P-1 
 Overview of New and Expanded IT Topics and Innovative Enterprises Discussed 
in the Chapters (continued)
Chapter
New and Expanded IT and Business Topics
Enterprises in a Wide 
Range of Industries
13: Project Management 
and SDLC
• Project management lifecycle
• Project Portfolio Management (PPM)
• Project business case
•  Project business case, statement of work (SOW), 
work breakdown structure (WBS), milestone 
schedule, and Gantt chart
• Triple constraint
• Critical path
• Systems feasibility studies
•  Denver International 
Airport
• U.S. Census
•  Mavenlink Project 
Management and Planning 
Software
14: Ethical Risks and 
Responsibilities of IT 
Innovations
• Privacy paradox
• Social recruitment and discrimination
• Responsible conduct
• Vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) technology
• Ethics of 3D printing and bioprinting
• Tech addictions
• Tech trends
• Google Glass
• Apple’s CarPlay
• SnapChat
• Target
Supplementary Materials
An extensive package of instructional materials is avail-
able to support this tenth edition. These materials are 
accessible from the book companion Web site at www.
wiley.com/college/turban. 
• Instructor’s Manual. The Instructor’s Manual presents 
objectives from the text with additional information 
to make them more appropriate and useful for the 
instructor. The manual also includes practical applica-
tions of concepts, case study elaboration, answers to 
end-of-chapter questions, questions for review, ques-
tions for discussion, and Internet exercises.
• Test Bank. The test bank contains over 1,000 ques-
tions and problems (about 75 per chapter) consisting 
of multiple-choice, short answer, fill-ins, and critical 
thinking/essay questions.
• Respondus Test Bank. This electronic test bank is 
a powerful tool for creating and managing exams 
that can be printed on paper or published directly 
to Blackboard, ANGEL, Desire2Learn, Moodle, and 
other learning systems. Exams can be created offline 
using a familiar Windows environment, or moved from 
one LMS to another.
• PowerPoint Presentation. A series of slides designed 
around the content of the text incorporates key points 
from the text and illustrations where appropriate.
E-book
Wiley E-Textbooks offer students the complete content of 
the printed textbook on the device of their preference—
computer, iPad, tablet, or smartphone—giving students 
the freedom to read or study anytime, anywhere. Students 
can search across content, take notes, and highlight key 
materials. For more information, go to www.wiley.com/
college/turban.
Acknowledgments
Many individuals participated in focus groups or review-
ers. Our sincere thanks to the following reviewers of the 
tenth edition who provided valuable feedback, insights, 
and suggestions that improved the quality of this text: 
Joni Adkins, Northwest Missouri State University 
Ahmad Al-Omari, Dakota State University 
Rigoberto Chinchilla, Eastern Illinois University 
Michael Donahue, Towson University 
Samuel Elko, Seton Hill University 
Robert Goble, Dallas Baptist University 
Eileen Griffin, Canisius College 
Binshan Lin, Louisiana State University in Shreveport 
Thomas MacMullen, Eastern Illinois University 
James Moore, Canisius College 
Beverly S. Motich, Messiah College 

xiv   Preface
Barin Nag, Towson University 
Luis A. Otero, Inter-American University of Puerto 
Rico, Metropolitan Campus 
John Pearson, Southern Illinois University 
Daniel Riding, Florida Institute of Technology 
Josie Schneider, Columbia Southern University 
Derek Sedlack, South University 
Eric Weinstein, The University of La Verne 
Patricia White, Columbia Southern University 
Gene A. Wright, University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee 
 
We are very thankful to our assistants, Samantha 
Palisano and Olena Azarova. Samantha devoted many 
hours of research, provided clerical support, and con-
tributed to the writing of Chapter 6. Olena assisted with 
research and development of graphics for Chapter 7. 
We are fortunate and thankful for the expert and encour-
aging leadership of Margaret Barrett, Beth Golub, Ellen 
Keohane, and Mary O’Sullivan. To them we extend our 
sincere thanks for your guidance, patience, humor, and 
support during the development of this most recent ver-
sion of the book. Finally, we wish to thank our families 
and colleagues for their encouragement, support, and 
understanding as we dedicated time and effort to cre-
ating this new edition of Information Technology for 
Management.
Linda Volonino
Greg Wood

Chapter Snapshot
Make no mistake. Businesses are experiencing a digital 
transformation as digital technology enables changes 
unimaginable a decade ago. High-performance organi-
zations are taking advantage of what is newly possible 
from innovations in mobile, social, cloud, big data, data 
analytics, and visualization technologies. These digital 
forces enable unprecedented levels of connectivity, or 
connectedness, as listed in Figure 1.1.
Think how much of your day you have your phone 
nearby—and how many times you check it. Nearly 
80 percent of people carry their phone for all but two 
hours of their day; and 25 per cent of 18- to 44-year-olds 
cannot remember not having their phone with them 
(Cooper, 2013).
As a business leader, you will want to know what 
steps to take to get a jump on the mobile, social, cloud, 
Doing Business 
in Digital Times
1
Chapter
1.  Describe the use of digital technology in every facet of 
business and how digital channels are being leveraged.
2.  Explain the types, sources, characteristics, and control 
of enterprise data, and what can be accomplished with 
near real time data.
3.  Identify the five forces of competitive advantage and 
evaluate how they are reinforced by IT.
4.  Describe enterprise technology trends and explain how 
they influence strategy and operations.
5.  Assess how IT adds value to your career path and per-
formance, and the positive outlook for IT management 
careers.
Learning Outcomes
1
Digital Technology Trends Transforming 
How Business Is Done
Part 1
Chapter Snapshot
Case 1.1 Opening Case: McCain Foods’ Success 
Factors—Dashboards, Innovation, and Ethics
1.1 Every Business Is a Digital Business
1.2  Business Process Management and 
Improvement
1.3 The Power of Competitive Advantage
1.4 Enterprise Technology Trends
1.5  How Your IT Expertise Adds Value to Your 
Performance and Career
Key Terms
Assuring Your Learning
• Discuss: Critical Thinking Questions
• Explore: Online and Interactive Exercises
•  Analyze & Decide: Apply IT Concepts 
to Business Decisions
Case 1.2 Business Case: Restaurant Creates 
Opportunities to Engage Customers
Case 1.3 Video Case: What Is the Value of 
Knowing More and Doing More?
References

big data, analytics, and visualization technologies that will move your businesses 
forward. Faced with opportunities and challenges, you need to know how to lever-
age them before or better than your competitors.
In this opening chapter, you read about the powerful impacts of digital technol-
ogy on management, business, government, entertainment, society, and those it will 
have on the future. You learn of the latest digital trends taking place across indus-
tries and organizations—small and medium businesses, multinational corporations, 
government agencies, the health-care industry, and nonprofits.
Big data are datasets whose 
size and speed are beyond 
the ability of typical database 
software tools to capture, 
store, manage, and analyze. 
Examples are machine-
generated data and social 
media texts.
Data analytics refers to the 
use of software and statistics 
to find meaningful insight 
in the data, or better under-
stand the data.
Data visualization (viz) tools 
make it easier to understand 
data at a glance by display-
ing data in summarized 
formats, such as dashboards 
and maps, and by enabling 
drill-down to the detailed 
data.
Figure 1.1 We are in 
the era of mobile-social-
cloud-big data that 
shape business strate-
gies and day-to-day 
operations.
CASE 1.1 OPENING CASE
McCain Foods’ Success Factors: Dashboards, Innovation, and Ethics
COMPANY OVERVIEW
You most likely have eaten McCain Foods products (Figure 1.2, Table 1.1). McCain 
is a market leader in the frozen food industry—producing one-third of the world’s 
supply of french fries. The company manufactures, distributes, and sells more than 
Figure 1.2 McCain Foods, 
Ltd. overview.
2
An estimated 15 billion
devices are connected to
the Internet—forecasted
to hit 50 billion by 2020
as more devices connect
via mobile networks.
Over 1 million websites
engage in Facebook
e-commerce.
Over 200 million social
media users are mobile
only, never accessing it
from a desktop or laptop.
Mobile use generates 30%
of Facebook’s ad revenue.
More data are collected in
a day now than existed in
the world 10 years ago.
Half of all data are in the
cloud and generated
by mobile and social
activities—known as big
data.
Sales offices in 110 countries
55 production plants on
6 continents
22,000 employees 
Global Reach
Good ethics is good
business.
Good food, better life.
Corporate Culture
Dashboards
Data analytics
Real time reporting systems 
Digital Technology
Frozen food manufacturer
Market leader in french
fries
Brand
McCain Foods, Ltd.

CASE 1.1     Opening Case     3  
TABLE 1.1 
Opening Case Overview
Company 
McCain Foods, Ltd. www.mccain.com
Industry 
 The global company manufactures, sells, and distributes frozen 
food products.
Product lines 
More than 100 oven-ready frozen food products
Digital technology 
 Dashboards are implemented throughout the organization 
from boardrooms to factory fl oors. Dashboards have drill-down 
capabilities.
Business challenges 
 The frozen food industry faced tough challenges from health 
and nutrition trends that are emphasizing fresh foods. Industry 
is highly competitive because it is expected to experience slow 
growth through 2018.
Taglines 
“Good food. Better life.” and “It’s all good.”
Figure 1.3 Frozen food is 
one of the most dynamic 
and largest sectors of the 
food industry.
100 oven-ready frozen foods—pizzas, appetizers, meals, and vegetables. McCain is 
a global business-to-business (B2B) manufacturer with 55 production facilities on 6 
continents. The company sells frozen foods to other businesses—wholesalers, retail-
ers, and restaurants from sales offices in 110 countries. McCain supplies frozen fries 
to Burger King and supermarket chains (Figure 1.3).
Business-to-business (B2B) 
commerce. The selling of 
products and services to 
other businesses.
Voisin/Phanie/SuperStock

4  Chapter 1     Doing Business in Digital Times
Food manufacturers must be able to trace all ingredients along their supply 
chain in case of contamination. Achieving end-to-end traceability is complex given 
the number of players in food supply chains. Several communication and tracking 
technologies make up McCain’s supply chain management (SCM) system to keep 
workers informed of actual and potential problems with food quality, inventory, 
and shipping as they occur. McCain’s SCM system ensures delivery of the best 
products possible at the best value to customers. In addition, the company strives 
to prevent food shortages worldwide by analyzing huge volumes of data to predict 
crop yields.
Supply chain. All businesses 
involved in the production 
and distribution of a product 
or service.
FROZEN FOOD 
INDUSTRY CHALLENGES
McCain Foods had to deal with three major challenges and threats:
1.  Drop in demand for frozen foods. McCain operated in an industry that was 
facing tougher competition. Health-conscious trends were shifting customer 
demand toward fresh food, which was slowing growth in the frozen foods 
market.
2.  Perishable inventory. Of all the types of manufacturing, food manufacturers face 
unique inventory management challenges and regulatory requirements. Their 
inventory of raw materials and fi nished goods can spoil, losing all their value, or 
food can become contaminated. Regulators require food manufacturers to able 
to do recalls quickly and effectively. Food recalls have destroyed brands and 
been fi nancially devastating.
3.  Technology-dependent. Food manufacturers face the pressures that are 
common to all manufacturers. They need information reporting systems and 
digital devices to manage and automate operations, track inventory, keep 
the right people informed, support decisions, and collaborate with business 
partners.
McCain Foods worked with Burger King (BK) to develop lower-calorie fries 
called Satisfries (Figure 1.4). These crinkle-cut fries have 30 percent less fat and 
20 percent fewer calories than BK’s classic fries. This food innovation has shaken 
up the fast-food industry and given BK an advantage with end-consumers who are 
demanding healthier options.
Figure 1.4 McCain Foods 
and Burger King jointly 
developed Satisfries—a 
french fry innovation with 
30 percent less fat and 
20 percent fewer calories 
than BK’s current fries and 
40 percent less fat and 
30 percent fewer calories 
than McDonald’s fries.
MCCAIN FOODS’ 
BUSINESS AND IT 
STRATEGIES
The McCain brothers, who founded the company, follow this simple philosophy: 
“Good ethics is good business.” McCain prides itself on the quality and conve-
nience of its products, which is reflected in the It’s All Good brand image. The It’s 
All Good branding effort was launched in 2010 after surveys found that customers 
were concerned about the quality and nutrition of frozen foods. Since then, many of 
products have been improved and manufactured in healthier versions.
Managing with Digital Technology McCain had integrated its diverse 
sources of data into a single environment for analysis. Insights gained from its data 
analytics helped improve manufacturing processes, innovation, and competitive 
advantage.
McCain Foods invested in data analytics and visualization technologies to 
maximize its capability to innovate and gain insights from its huge volumes of data. 
The company tracks, aggregates, and analyzes data from operations and business 
customers in order to identify opportunities for innovation in every area of the busi-
ness. The results of data analytics are made available across the organization—from 
© DustyPixel/iStockphoto

CASE 1.1     Opening Case     5  
Figure 1.5 Data visualizations 
of KPIs make them easy to 
understand at a glance.
executive boardrooms to the factory floors—on dashboards. Dashboards are data 
visualizations (data viz) that display the current status of key performance indica-
tors (KPIs) in easy-to-understand formats (Figure 1.5). KPIs are business metrics 
used to evaluate performance in terms of critical success factors, or strategic and 
operational goals.
Dashboards Create Productive Competition Among Factory Workers 
McCain implemented 22,000 reports and 3,000 personal reporting systems that 
include dashboards. Dashboards display summarized data graphically in a clear and 
concise way. By clicking a graph, the user can drill down to the detailed data. The 
dashboards reach most of McCain’s 18,000 employees worldwide.
Dashboards have created healthy competition that has led to better perfor-
mance. Ten-foot dashboards hang on factory walls of plants around the world. They 
are strategically placed near the cafeteria so employees can see the KPIs and per-
formance metrics of every plant. With this visibility, everyone can know in near real 
time exactly how well they are doing compared to other plants. The competition 
among factories has totally transformed the work environment—and organizational 
culture—in the plants and increased production performance.
Better Predictions, Better Results The CEO, other executives, and managers 
view their dashboards from mobile devices or computers. They are able to monitor 
operations in factories and farms around the globe. Dashboards keep management 
informed because they can discover answers to their own questions by drilling 
down. Data are used to forecast and predict crop yields—and ultimately combine 
weather and geopolitical data to predict and avoid food shortages. By integrating 
all of its data into one environment and making the results available in near real 
time to those who need it, the organization is increasing its bottom line and driving 
innovation.
© Delices/Shutterstock

6  Chapter 1     Doing Business in Digital Times
Questions
1.  All it takes is one compromised ingredient to contaminate food and 
to put human lives at risk. Delays in communicating contaminated food 
increase the health risk and fi nes for violating the Food Safety Mod-
ernization Act. How can the SCM system help McCain Foods reduce 
the risks related to low-quality or contaminated frozen foods reaching 
consumers?
2.  What three challenges or threats facing McCain Foods and what is the 
reason for each challenge or threat?
3.  How have dashboards on the factory fl oors impacted performance at 
McCain Foods?
4.  What might be the KPIs of a frozen food manufacturer such as McCain 
Foods?
5.  Explain how visibility about operations and performance created 
healthy competition among McCain’s factory workers.
6.  Being able to make reliable predictions can improve business perfor-
mance. Explain why.
Sources: Compiled from Smith (2013), Transparency Market Research (2013), and McCain Foods 
Teradata video (2013).
Digital business is a social, 
mobile, and Web-focused 
business.
Business model is how a 
business makes money. 
Digital business model 
defines how a business 
makes money digitally.
Customer experience (CX) 
is about building the digital 
infrastructure that allows cus-
tomers to do whatever they 
want to do, through whatever 
channel they choose to do it.
Today, a top concern of well-established corporations, global financial institutions, 
born-on-the-Web retailers, and government agencies is how to design their digital 
business models in order to:
• deliver an incredible customer experience;
• turn a profit;
• increase market share; and
• engage their employees.
In the digital (online) space, the customer experience (CX) must measure up 
to the very best the Web has to offer. Stakes are high for those who get it right—or 
get it wrong. Forrester research repeatedly confirms there is a strong relationship 
between the quality of a firm’s CX and loyalty, which in turn increases revenue 
(Schmidt-Subramanian et al., 2013).
This section introduces the most disruptive and valuable digital technologies, 
which you will continue to read about throughout this book.
1.1  Every Business Is a Digital Business
DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES 
OF THE 2010S—IN THE 
CLOUD, HANDHELD, 
AND WEARABLE
Consumers expect to interact with businesses anytime anywhere via mobile 
apps or social channels using technology they carry in their pockets. Mobile apps 
have changed how, when, and where work is done. Employees can be more produc-
tive when they work and collaborate effortlessly from their handheld or wearable 
devices.
Cloud Computing
Enterprises can acquire the latest apps and digital services as they are needed and 
without large upfront investments by switching from owning IT resources to cloud 
computing (Figure 1.6). Cloud computing ranges from storing your files in Dropbox 
to advanced cloud services. In short, with the cloud, resources no longer depend 
on buying that resource. For example, Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud, known as 
Cloud computing is a style 
of computing in which IT 
services are delivered on-
demand and accessible via 
the Internet. Common exam-
ples are Dropbox, Gmail, 
and Google Drive.
Food Safety Modernization 
Act (FSMA), signed into law 
in early 2011, requires all 
companies in food supply 
chains to be able to trace 
foods back to the point of 
origin (farm) and forward to 
the consumer’s plate (fork). 
The term for the effort is 
farm-to-fork traceability. 
Public health is the chief con-
cern, followed by potential 
liability and brand protection 
issues.

1.1     Every Business Is a Digital Business     7  
Figure 1.6 Cloud computing is an important evolution in data storage, software, apps, and 
delivery of IT services. An example is Apple iCloud—a cloud service used for online storage and 
synchronization of mail, media fi les, contacts, calendar, and more.
EC2, eliminates the need to invest in hardware up front, so companies can develop 
and deploy applications faster. EC2 enables companies to quickly add storage 
capacity as their computing requirements change. EC2 reduces the time it takes to 
acquire server space from weeks to minutes.
Machine-to-Machine Technology
Sensors can be embedded in most products. Objects that connect themselves to 
the Internet include cars, heart monitors, stoplights, and appliances. Sensors are 
designed to detect and react, such as Ford’s rain-sensing front wipers that use 
an advanced optical sensor to detect the intensity of rain or snowfall and adjust 
wiper speed accordingly. Machine-to-machine (M2M) technology enables sensor-
embedded products to share reliable real time data via radio signals. M2M and 
the Internet of Things (IoT) are widely used to automate business processes in 
industries ranging from transportation to health care. By adding sensors to trucks, 
turbines, roadways, utility meters, heart monitors, vending machines, and other 
equipment they sell, companies can track and manage their products remotely.
© DrAfter123/iStockphoto
© hanibaram/iStockphoto
Internet of things (IoT) 
refers to a set of capabilities 
enabled when physical things 
are connected to the Internet 
via sensors.
TECH NOTE 1.1 The Internet of Things
The phrase Internet of Things was coined by Kevin Ashton in 1999 while he was em-
ployed at Procter & Gamble. It refers to objects (e.g., cars, refrigerators, roadways) 
that can sense aspects of the physical world, such as movement, temperature, light-
ing, or the presence or absence of people or objects, and then either act on it or re-
port it. Instead of most data (text, audio, video) on the Internet being produced and 
used by people, more data are generated and used by machines communicating with 
other machines—or M2M, as you read at the start of this chapter. Smart devices use 
IP addresses and Internet technologies like Wi-Fi to communicate with each other 
or directly with the cloud. Recent advances in storage and computing power avail-
able via cloud computing are facilitating adoption of the IoT.
The IoT opens new frontiers for improving processes in retail, health care, 
manufacturing, energy, and oil and gas exploration. For instance, manufacturing 
processes with embedded sensors can be controlled more precisely or monitored 

8  Chapter 1     Doing Business in Digital Times
Big Data
There is no question that the increasing volume of data can be valuable, but only if 
they are processed and available when and where they are needed. The problem is 
that the amount, variety, structure, and speed of data being generated or collected 
by enterprises differ significantly from traditional data. Big data are what high-
volume, mostly text data are called. Big data stream in from multiple channels and 
sources, including:
• mobile devices and M2M sensors embedded in everything from airport 
runways to casino chips. Later in this chapter, you will read more about the 
Internet of Things.
• social content from texts, tweets, posts, blogs.
• clickstream data from the Web and Internet searches.
• video data and photos from retail and user-generated content.
• financial, medical, research, customer, and B2B transactions.
Big data are 80 to 90 per cent unstructured. Unstructured data do not have a pre-
dictable format like a credit card application form. Huge volumes of unstructured data 
flooding into an enterprise are too much for traditional technology to process and ana-
lyze quickly. Big data tend to be more time-sensitive than traditional (or small) data.
The exploding field of big data and analytics is called data science. Data sci-
ence involves managing and analyzing massive sets of data for purposes such as 
target marketing, trend analysis, and the creation of individually tailored products 
and services. Enterprises that want to take advantage of big data use real time data 
from tweets, sensors, and their big data sources to gain insights into their custom-
ers’ interests and preference, to create new products and services, and to respond 
to changes in usage patterns as they occur. Big data analytics has increased the 
demand for data scientists, as described in Career Insight 1.1.
for hazards and then take corrective action, which reduces injuries, damage, and 
costs. IoT combined with big data analytics can help manufacturers improve the 
effi ciency of their machinery and minimize energy consumption, which often is the 
manufacturing industry’s second-biggest expense.
The health sector is another area where IoT can help signifi cantly. For example, 
a person with a wearable device that carries all records of his health could be monitored 
constantly. This connectivity enables health services to take necessary measures for 
maintaining the wellbeing of the person.
Data Scientist
Big data, analytics tools, powerful networks, and greater 
processing power have contributed to growth of the 
field of data science. Enterprises need people who are 
capable of analyzing and finding insights in data cap-
tured from sensors, M2M apps, social media, wearable 
technology, medical testing, and so on. Demand for data 
scientists is outpacing the supply of talent. It is projected 
that the data scientist career option will grow 19 per 
cent by 2020—surpassed only by video game design-
ers. Talent scarcity has driven up salaries. According to 
CAREER INSIGHT 1 . 1  HOT CAREER

1.1     Every Business Is a Digital Business     9  
Glassdoor data (glassdoor.com, 2014), the median salary 
for data scientists in the United States is $117,500. By 
contrast, a business analyst earns an average of $61,000.
Profiles of Data Scientists at Facebook, LinkedIn, 
and Bitly
•  Facebook’s Jeff Hammerbacher. Jeff helped 
Facebook make sense out of huge volumes of user 
data when he joined the company in 2006. Facebook’s 
data science team analyzes the self-reported data on 
each user’s Facebook page in order to target ads 
based on things the user actually likes.
• LinkedIn’s DJ Patil. DJ worked at LinkedIn as 
chief data scientist. Many of the cool products on 
LinkedIn were built using data from self-reporting 
and machine learning.
• Bitly’s Hilary Mason. Hilary was chief scientist at 
Bitly, which offers URL shortening and redirec-
tion services with real time link tracking. Bitly sees 
behavior from billions of people a month by analyz-
ing tens of millions of links shared per day, which are 
clicked hundreds of millions times. The clickstreams 
generate an enormous amount of real time data. 
Using data analytics, Hillary and her team detected 
and solved business problems that were not evident.
Data Science Is Both an Art and a Science
In their 2012 Harvard Business Review article titled 
“Data Scientist: The Sexiest Job of the 21st Century,” 
authors Thomas Davenport and D. J. Patil define a data 
scientist as a “high-ranking professional with the train-
ing and curiosity to make discoveries in the world of big 
data” (Davenport & Patil, 2012). They described how 
data scientist Jonathan Goldman transformed LinkedIn 
after joining the company in 2006. At that time, LinkedIn 
had less than 8 million members. Goldman noticed that 
existing members were inviting their friends and col-
leagues to join, but they were not making connections 
with other members at the rate executives had expected. 
A LinkedIn manager said, “It was like arriving at a con-
ference reception and realizing you don’t know anyone. 
So you just stand in the corner sipping your drink—and 
you probably leave early.” Goldman began analyzing 
the data from user profiles and looked for patterns that 
to predict whose networks a given profile would land 
in. While most LinkedIn managers saw no value in 
Goldman’s work, Reid Hoffman, LinkedIn’s cofounder 
and CEO at the time, understood the power of analytics 
because of his experiences at PayPal. With Hoffman’s 
approval, Goldman applied data analytics to test what 
would happen if member were presented with names 
of other members they had not yet connected with, but 
seemed likely to know. He displayed the three best new 
matches for each member based on his or her LinkedIn 
profile. Within days, the click-through rate on those 
matches skyrocketed and things really took off. Thanks 
to this one feature, LinkedIn’s growth increased dra-
matically.
The LinkedIn example shows that good data sci-
entists do much more than simply try to solve obvious 
business problems. Creative and critical thinking are 
part of their job—that is, part analyst and part artist. 
They dig through incoming data with the goal of dis-
covering previously hidden insights that could lead to 
a competitive advantage or detect a business crisis in 
enough time to prevent it. Data scientists often need 
to evaluate and select those opportunities and threats 
that would be of greatest value to the enterprise or 
brand.
Sources: Kelly (2013), Lockhard & Wolf (2012), Davenport & Patil (2012), U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (2014).
SOCIAL-MOBILE-CLOUD 
MODEL
The relationship among social, mobile, and cloud technologies is shown in 
Figure 1.7. The cloud consists of huge data centers accessible via the Internet and 
forms the core by providing 24/7 access to storage, apps, and services. Handhelds 
and wearables, such as Google Glass, Pebble, and Sony Smartwatch (Figure 1.8), 
and their users form the edge. Social channels connect the core and edge. The 
SoMoClo integration creates the technical and services infrastructure needed for 
digital business. This infrastructure makes it possible to meet the expectations of 
employees, customers, and business partners given that almost everyone is con-
nected (social), everywhere they go (mobile), and has 24/7 access to data, apps, and 
other services (cloud).

10  Chapter 1     Doing Business in Digital Times
Here are three examples of their influence:
1.  Powerful social infl uences impact advertising and marketing: Connections and 
feedback via social networks have changed the balance of infl uence. Consum-
ers are more likely to trust tweets from ordinary people than recommendations 
made by celebrity endorsements. And, negative sentiments posted or tweeted 
can damage brands.
2.  Consumer devices go digital and offer new services. The Nike
 Fuel-
band wristband helps customers track their exercise activities and calories 
burned. The device links to a mobile app that lets users post their progress 
on Facebook.
3.  eBay’s move to cloud technology improves sellers’ and buyers’ experiences. 
The world’s largest online marketplace, eBay, moved its IT infrastructure to the 
cloud. With cloud computing, eBay is able to introduce new types of landing 
pages and customer experiences without the delay associated with having to buy 
additional computing resources.
The balance of power has shifted as business is increasingly driven by individu-
als for whom mobiles are an extension of their body and mind. They expect to use 
location-aware services, apps, alerts, social networks, and the latest digital capabili-
ties at work and outside work. To a growing extent, customer loyalty and revenue 
growth depend on a business’s ability to offer unique customer experiences that 
wow customers more than competitors can.
Figure 1.7 Model of the 
integration of cloud, mobile, 
and social technologies. The 
cloud forms the core. Mobile 
devices are the endpoints. 
Social networks create the 
connections.
© scanrail/iStockphoto

1.1     Every Business Is a Digital Business     11  
Figure 1.8 Strong interest in 
smart wearable technology 
refl ects growing consumer 
desire to be more digitally 
connected at all times using 
a collection of multiple 
devices. A smartwatch used 
at work, such as in a retail 
store, can provide shop fl oor 
staff with a screen to check 
stock availability.
DIGITAL BUSINESS 
MODELS
Business models are the ways enterprises generate revenue or sustain themselves. 
Digital business models define how businesses make money via digital technology. 
Companies that adopt digital business models are better positioned to take advan-
tage of business opportunities and survive, according to the Accenture Technology 
Vision 2013 report (Accenture, 2013). Figure 1.9 contains examples of new tech-
nologies that destroyed old business models and created new ones.
Figure 1.9 Digital business 
models refer to how 
companies engage their 
customers digitally to 
create value via websites, 
social channels, and mobile 
devices.
Bloomberg/Getty Images
Matthew Shaw/Getty Images
FILIP SINGER/EPA/Newscom
Location-aware technologies
track items through
production and delivery to
reduce wasted time and
inefficiency in supply chains
and other business-to-
business (B2B) transactions.
Twitter dominates the
reporting of news and events
as they are still happening.
Facebook became the most
powerful sharing network
in the world.
Smartphones, tablets, other
touch devices, and their apps
reshaped how organizations
interact with customers—and
how customers want
businesses to interact with
them.

12  Chapter 1     Doing Business in Digital Times
The ways in which market leaders are transitioning to digital business models 
include the following:
• Amazon gains a competitive edge with high-tech tech support. Amazon 
is well known for radically changing online shopping and e-book reading 
experiences. Amazon’s CEO Jeffrey Bezos set a new standard for tech sup-
port with MayDay (Figure 1.10). Within 15 seconds of touching the MayDay 
button on their Kindle Fire HDX tablet, customers get free, 24/7/365 tech 
support via video chat. MayDay works by integrating all customer data and 
instantly displaying the results to a tech agent when a customer presses the 
MayDay button. Plus, tech agents can control and write on a customer’s Fire 
screen. By circling and underlining various buttons on the display, it is dead 
simple for new Fire owners to become expert with their devices. Amazon’s 
objective is to educate the consumer rather than just fix the problem. In the 
highly competitive tablet wars, Amazon has successfully differentiated its 
tablet from those of big players like Apple, Samsung, and Asus (manufac-
turer of Google’s Nexus 7) with the MayDay button.
• NBA talent scouts rely on sports analytics and advanced scouting systems. 
NBA talent scouts used to crunch players’ stats, watch live player perfor-
mances, and review hours of tapes to create player profiles (Figure 1.11). 
Now software that tracks player performance has changed how basketball 
and soccer players are evaluated. For example, STATS’ SportVU tech-
nology is revolutionizing the way sports contests are viewed, understood, 
played, and enjoyed. SportVU uses six palm-sized digital cameras that 
track the movement of every player on the court, record ball movement 
25 times per second, and convert movements into statistics. SportVU 
produces real time and highly complex statistics to complement the tra-
ditional play-by-play. Predictive sport analytics can provide a 360-degree 
view of a player’s performance and help teams make trading decisions. 
Figure 1.10 MayDay video 
chat tech support.
Figure 1.11 Sports analytics 
and advanced scouting 
systems evaluate talent 
and performance for the 
NBA—offering teams a 
slight but critical competitive 
advantage.
AP Photo/Ted S. Warren
© Tribune Content/Agency LLC/Alamy

1.1     Every Business Is a Digital Business     13  
Sports analytics bring about small competitive advantages that can shift 
games and even playoff series.
• Dashboards keep casino floor staff informed of player demand. Competition 
in the gaming industry is fierce, particularly during bad economic condi-
tions. The use of manual spreadsheets and gut-feeling decisions did not lead 
to optimal results. Casino operators facing pressure to increase their bottom 
line have invested in analytic tools, such as Tangam’s Yield Management 
solution (TYM). TYM is used to increase the yield (profitability) of black-
jack, craps, and other table games played in the pit (Figure 1.12). The 
analysis and insights from real time apps are used to improve the gaming 
experience and comfort of players.
Figure 1.12 Casinos are 
improving the profi tability of 
table games by monitoring 
and analyzing betting in real 
time.
THE RECENT PAST AND 
NEAR FUTURE—2010S 
DECADE
We have seen great advances in digital technology since the start of this decade. 
Figure 1.13 shows releases by tech leaders that are shaping business and everyday 
life. Compare the role of your mobiles, apps, social media, and so on in your per-
sonal life and work in 2010 to how you use them today. You can expect greater 
changes going forward to the end of this decade with the expansion of no-touch 
interfaces, mobility, wearable technology, and the IoT.
Companies are looking for ways to take advantage of new opportunities in 
mobile, big data, social, and cloud services to optimize their business processes. 
The role of the IT function within the enterprise has changed significantly—and 
will evolve rapidly over the next five years. As you will read throughout this book, 
the IT function has taken on key strategic and operational roles that determine the 
enterprise’s success or failure.
© lisegagne/iStockphoto
Figure 1.13 Digital 
technology released 
since 2010.
• Google launched
    Android mobile
    OS to compete
    with iPhones 
    By 2014, became
    the first billion-user
    mobile OS
• App Store opened
    on July 10, 2008
    via an update to iTunes
    By mid-2011, over 15 billion apps
    downloaded from App Store
2008
• Apple  launched
   iPad
   100 million
   iPads sold
   in 2 years
2010
2011–2012
• No tough interfaces
   to communicate
   by simply gesturing
   or talking
   Microsoft’s Kinect for
   Windows Apple’s Siri
   Google’s Glass
• iWatch released
   integrates with
   iOS devices
2014

14  Chapter 1     Doing Business in Digital Times
More objects are being embedded with sensors and gaining 
the ability to communicate with the Internet. This communi-
cation improves business processes while reducing costs and 
risks. For example, sensors and network connections can be 
embedded in rental cars. Zipcar has pioneered the car rental 
by the hour business model. See Figure 1.14. Cars are leased 
for short time spans to registered members, making retail 
rental centers unnecessary. Traditional car rental agencies 
are starting to experiment with sensors so that each car’s use 
can be optimized to increase revenue.
When devices or products are embedded with sensors, 
companies can track their movements or monitor interac-
tions with them. Business models can be adjusted to take 
advantage of what is learned from this behavioral data. For 
example, an insurance company offers to install location 
sensors in customers’ cars. By doing so, the company 
develops the ability to price the drivers’ policies on how a 
car is driven and where it travels. Pricing is customized to 
match the actual risks of operating a vehicle rather than 
based on general proxies—driver’s age, gender, or location 
of residence.
Opportunities for Improvement
Other applications of embedded physical things are:
• 
In the oil and gas industry, exploration and development 
rely on extensive sensor networks placed in the earth’s 
crust. The sensors produce accurate readings of the 
location, structure, and dimensions of potential fields. 
The payoff is lower development costs and improved oil 
flows.
• 
In the health-care industry, sensors and data links can 
monitor patients’ behavior and symptoms in real time 
and at low cost. This allows physicians to more precisely 
diagnose disease and prescribe treatment regimens. 
For example, sensors embedded in patients with heart 
disease or chronic illnesses can be monitored continu-
ously as they go about their daily activities. Sensors 
placed on congestive heart patients monitor many of 
these signs remotely and continuously, giving doctors 
early warning of risky conditions. Better management 
of congestive heart failure alone could reduce hospi-
talization and treatment costs by $1 billion per year in 
the U.S.
• 
In the retail industry, sensors can capture shoppers’ pro-
file data stored in their membership cards to help close 
purchases by providing additional information or offering 
discounts at the point of sale.
• 
Farm equipment with ground sensors can take into 
account crop and field conditions, and adjust the 
amount of fertilizer that is spread on areas that need more 
nutrients.
• 
Billboards in Japan scan people passing by, assessing 
how they fit consumer profiles, and instantly change the 
displayed messages based on those assessments.
• 
The automobile industry is developing systems that 
can detect imminent collisions and take evasive action. 
Certain basic applications, such as automatic braking 
systems, are available in high-end autos. The potential 
accident reduction savings resulting from wider deploy-
ment of these sensor systems could exceed $100 billion 
annually.
Questions
1.  Research Zipcar. How does this company’s business 
model differ from that of traditional car rental companies, 
such as Hertz or Avis?
2.  Think of two physical things in your home or office that, 
if they were embedded with sensors and linked to a net-
work, would improve the quality of your work or personal 
life. Describe these two scenarios.
3. What might the privacy concerns be?
IT at Work 1 .1
Zipcar and Other Connected Products
Figure 1.14 A Zipcar-reserved parking sign in 
Washington, DC.
© Wiskerke/Alamy

1.2     Business Process Management and Improvement     15  
By 2016 wearable electronics in shoes, tattoos, and accessories 
will become a $10 billion industry, according to Gartner (2012).
Wearable technology builds computing, connectivity, 
and sensor capabilities into materials. The latest wearables 
are lightweight and may be found in athletic shoes, golf 
accessories, and fitness trackers. The wearables can include 
data analysis apps or services that send feedback or insights 
to the wearer. For example, Zepp Labs manufactures sensor-
embedded gloves for golf, tennis, and baseball that analyze 
1,000 data points per second to create 3D representations 
of a player’s swing. The sensors track every inch of a golfer’s 
swing, analyzes the movements, and then sends the wearers 
advice on how to improve their game. Sensors that weigh 
only half an ounce clip onto the glove. Another example is 
Sony’s SmartBand, a wristband that synchs with your phone 
to track how many steps you take, the number of calories you 
burn each day, and how well you sleep. The Lifelog app is 
the key to the Smartband. The app gives a visual display of a 
timeline and your activity, with boxes monitoring your steps, 
calories, kilometers walked, and more. Lifelog goes beyond 
just fitness by also monitoring time spent on social networks 
and photos taken.
The major sources of revenue from wearable smart 
electronics are items worn by athletes and sports enthusiasts 
and devices used to monitor health conditions, such as  auto-
matic insulin delivery for diabetics.
Applications and services are creating new value for 
consumers, especially when they are combined with personal 
preferences, location, biosensing, and social data. Wearable 
electronics can provide more detailed data to retailers for 
targeting advertisements and promotions.
Questions
1.  Discuss how wearable electronics and the instant feedback 
they send to your mobile device could be valuable to you.
2.  How can data from wearable technology be used to 
improve worker productivity or safety?
3.  What are two other potentially valuable uses of instant 
feedback or data from wearable technology?
4. How can wearable devices impact personal privacy?
IT at Work 1 .2
Wearable Technology
All functions and departments in the enterprise have tasks that they need to com-
plete to produce outputs, or deliverables, in order to meet their objectives. Business 
processes are series of steps by which organizations coordinate and organize tasks 
to get work done. In the simplest terms, a process consists of activities that convert 
inputs into outputs by doing work.
The importance of efficient business processes and continuous process improve-
ment cannot be overemphasized. Why? Because 100 per cent of an enterprise’s perfor-
mance is the result of its processes. Maximizing the use of inputs in order to carry out 
similar activities better than one’s competitors is a critical success factor. IT at Work 1.3 
describes the performance gains at AutoTrader.com, the automobile industry’s largest 
online shopping marketplace, after it redesigned its order-to-cash process.
1.2  Business Process Management and Improvement
Objectives define the desired 
benefits or expected per-
formance improvements. 
They do not and should not 
describe what you plan to do, 
how you plan to do it, or what 
you plan to produce, which is 
the function of processes.
Questions
1. What are the benefi ts of cloud computing?
2.  What is machine-to-machine (M2M) technology? Give an example of a 
business process that could be automated with M2M.
3. Describe the relationships in the SoMoClo model.
4. Explain the cloud.
5.  Why have mobile devices given consumers more power in the marketplace?
6. What is a business model?
7. What is a digital business model?
8. Explain the Internet of Things.

16  Chapter 1     Doing Business in Digital Times
AutoTrader.com is the leading automotive marketplace, list-
ing several million new and pre-owned vehicles, as shown 
in Figure 1.15. AutoTrader.com is one of the largest local 
online advertising entities, with profits of $300 million on 
$1.2 billion in revenues in 2013. The site attracts over 15 mil-
lion unique visitors each month.
Outdated Order-to-Cash Process
AutoTrader processes thousands of orders and contracts 
each month. Its cross-functional order fulfillment process, 
or order-to-cash process, was outdated and could not 
handle the sales volume. The legacy process was run on My 
AutoTrader (MAT), a system based on Lotus Notes/Domino. 
MAT took an average of 6.3 to 8.3 days to fulfill orders and 
process contracts, as Figure 1.16 shows. MAT created a bot-
tleneck that slowed the time from order to cash, or revenue 
generation. With over 100 coordinated steps, the process 
was bound to be flawed, resulting in long and error-prone 
cycle times. Cycle time is the time required to complete a 
given process. At AutoTrader, cycle time is the time between 
the signing and delivery of a contract. Customers were 
aggravated by the unnecessary delay in revenue.
Redesigning the Order Fulfillment 
Process with BPM
Management had set three new objectives for the company: 
to be agile, to generate revenue faster, and to increase 
customer satisfaction. They invested in a BPM (business pro-
cess management) solution—selecting webMethods from 
Software AG (softwareag.com, 2011). The BPM software 
was used to document how tasks were performed using 
the legacy system. After simplifying the process as much as 
possible, remaining tasks were automated or optimized. The 
new system cuts down the order fulfillment process to 1 day, 
as shown in Figure 1.17. Changes and benefits resulting from 
the redesigned process are:
• 
There are only six human tasks even though the pro-
cess interacts with over 20 different data sources and 
systems, including the inventory, billing, and contract 
fulfillment.
• 
Tasks are assigned immediately to the right people, who 
are alerted when work is added to their queues.
• 
Fewer than five percent of orders need to go back to 
sales for clarification—a 400 percent improvement.
• 
Managers can check order fulfillment status anytime 
using webMethods Optimize for Process, which provides 
real time visibility into performance. They can measure 
key performance indicators (KPIs) in real time to see 
where to make improvements.
• 
Dealers can make changes directly to their contracts, 
which cut costs for personnel. Software and hardware 
costs are decreasing as the company retires old systems.
Sources: Compiled from Walsh (2012), softwareag.com (2011), Alesci & 
Saitto (2012).
IT at Work 1.3
AutoTrader Redesigns Its Order-to-Cash Process
Figure 1.15 AutoTrader.com car search site.
Figure 1.16 AutoTrader’s 
legacy order fulfi llment 
process had an average cycle 
time of up to 8.3 days.
© NetPhotos/Alamy
Fulfillment
Total Avg
Quality
Assurance
Contract
Delivered
Data Entry
Fax
2.8 days
2.8 days
.5 day
4 days
8.3 days
6.3 days
1 day
1 day
2 days
.5 day
New
Up-sell
Contract
Signed

1.2     Business Process Management and Improvement     17  
Figure 1.17 AutoTrader’s 
objective is to process and 
fi ll orders within one day.
Questions
1.  Discuss how the redesigned order process supports the 
company’s three new business objectives.
2.  How does the reduced cycle time of the order fulfillment pro-
cess improve revenue generation and customer satisfaction?
3.  Does reducing the cycle time of a business process also 
reduce errors? Why or why not?
THREE COMPONENTS 
OF BUSINESS 
PROCESSES
Business processes have three basic components, as shown in Figure 1.18. They 
involve people, technology, and information.
Examples of common business processes are:
• Accounting: Invoicing; reconciling accounts; auditing
• Finance: Credit card or loan approval; estimating credit risk and financing 
terms
• Human resources (HR): Recruiting and hiring; assessing compliance with 
regulations; evaluating job performance
• IT or information systems: Generating and distributing reports and data 
visualizations; data analytics; data archiving
• Marketing: Sales; product promotion; design and implementation of sales 
campaigns; qualifying a lead
• Production and operations: Shipping; receiving; quality control; inventory 
management
• Cross-functional business processes: Involving two or more functions, for 
example, order fulfillment and product development
Designing an effective process can be complex because you need a deep under-
standing of the inputs and outputs (deliverables), how things can go wrong, and how 
to prevent things from going wrong. For example, Dell had implemented a new 
process to reduce the time that tech support spent handling customer service calls. In 
an effort to minimize the length of the call, tech support’s quality dropped so much 
that customers had to call multiple times to solve their problems. The new process 
had backfired—increasing the time to resolve computer problems and aggravating 
Dell customers.
Figure 1.18 Three 
components of a 
business process.
Deliverables are the outputs 
or tangible things that are 
produced by a business pro-
cess. Common deliverables 
are products, services, actions, 
plans, or decisions, such as 
to approve or deny a credit 
application. Deliverables are 
produced in order to achieve 
specific objectives.
Submit sales
order
electronically
Day 1:
Live online
processing of orders
Day 2:
Order fulfillment
1 day elapsed
raw materials,
data,
knowledge,
expertise
work that
transforms
inputs & acts on
data and
knowledge
products,
services,
plans,
or actions
Inputs
Activities
Business Process
Deliverables

18  Chapter 1     Doing Business in Digital Times
Characteristics of Business Processes
Processes can be formal or informal. Formal processes are documented and have 
well-established steps. Order taking and credit approval processes are examples. 
Routine formal processes are referred to as standard operating procedures, or 
SOPs. A SOP is a well-defined and documented way of doing something. An effec-
tive SOP documents who will perform the tasks; what materials to use; and where, 
how, and when the tasks are to be performed. SOPs are needed for the handling of 
food, hazardous materials, or situations involving safety, security, or compliance. In 
contrast, informal processes are typically undocumented, have inputs that may not 
yet been identified, and are knowledge-intensive. Although enterprises would pre-
fer to formalize their informal processes in order to better understand, share, and 
optimize them, in many situations process knowledge remains in people’s heads.
Processes range from slow, rigid to fast-moving, adaptive. Rigid processes 
can be structured to be resistant to change, such as those that enforce security or 
compliance regulations. Adaptive processes are designed to respond to change or 
emerging conditions, particularly in marketing and IT.
Process Improvement
Given that a company’s success depends on the efficiency of its business processes, 
even small improvements in key processes have significant payoff. Poorly designed, 
flawed, or outdated business processes waste resources, increasing costs, causing 
delays, and aggravating customers. For example, when customers’ orders are not 
filled on time or correctly, customer loyalty suffers, returns increase, and reship-
ping increases costs. The blame may be flawed order fulfilment processes and not 
employee incompetence, as described in IT at Work 1.2.
Simply applying IT to a manual or outdated process will not optimize it. 
Processes need to be examined to determine whether they are still necessary. 
After unnecessary processes are identified and eliminated, the remaining ones are 
redesigned (or reengineered) in order to automate or streamline them. Methods 
and efforts to eliminate wasted steps within a process are referred to as business 
process reengineering (BPR). The goal of BPR is to eliminate the unnecessary, 
non-value-added processes, then to simplify and automate the remaining processes 
to significantly reduce cycle time, labor, and costs. For example, reengineering the 
credit approval process cuts time from several days or hours to minutes or less. 
Simplifying processes naturally reduces the time needed to complete the process, 
which also cuts down on errors.
After eliminating waste, digital technology can enhance processes by (1) auto-
mating existing manual processes; (2) expanding the data flows to reach more func-
tions in order to make it possible for sequential activities to occur in parallel; and 
(3) creating innovative business processes that, in turn, create new business models. 
For instance, consumers can scan an image of a product and land on an e-commerce 
site, such as Amazon.com, selling that product. This process flips the traditional 
selling process by making it customer-centric.
Business Process Management
BPR is part of the larger discipline of business process management (BPM), which 
consists of methods, tools, and technology to support and continuously improve 
business processes. The purpose of BPM is to help enterprises become more agile 
and effective by enabling them to better understand, manage, and adapt their busi-
ness processes. Vendors, consulting and tech firms offer BPM expertise, services, 
software suites, and tools.
BPM software is used to map processes performed either by computers or 
manually—and to design new ones. The software includes built-in templates show-
ing workflows and rules for various functions, such as rules for credit approval. These 

1.3     The Power of Competitive Advantage     19  
templates and rules provide consistency and high-quality outcomes. For example, Oracle’s 
WebLogic Server Process Edition includes server software and process integration 
tools for automating complex business processes, such as handling an insurance claim.
But, BPM initiatives can be extremely challenging, and in order to be suc-
cessful, BPM requires buy-in from a broad cross section of the business, the right 
technology selection, and highly effective change management processes. You will 
read more about optimizing business processes and BPM’s role in the alignment of 
IT and business strategy in Chapter 13.
Questions
1. What is a business process? Give three examples.
2. What is the difference between business deliverables and objectives?
3. List and give examples of the three components of a business process.
4. Explain the differences between formal and informal processes.
5. What is a standard operating procedure (SOP)?
6. What is the purpose of business process management (BPM)?
In business, as in sports, companies want to win—customers, market share, and so 
on. Basically, that requires gaining an edge over competitors by being first to take 
advantage of market opportunities, providing great customer experiences, doing 
something well that others cannot easily imitate, or convincing customers why it is 
a more valuable alternative than the competition.
1.3  The Power of Competitive Advantage
Agility means being able 
to respond quickly.
Responsiveness means that 
IT capacity can be easily 
scaled up or down as needed, 
which essentially requires 
cloud computing.
Flexibility means having the 
ability to quickly integrate 
new business functions or to 
easily reconfigure software 
or apps.
BUILDING BLOCKS 
OF COMPETITIVE 
ADVANTAGE
Having a competitive edge means possessing an advantage over your competition. 
Once an enterprise has developed a competitive edge, maintaining it is an ongoing 
challenge. It requires forecasting trends and industry changes and what the company 
needs to do to stay ahead of the game. It demands that you continuously track your 
competitors and their future plans and promptly take corrective action. In summary, 
competitiveness depends on IT agility and responsiveness. The benefit of IT agility 
is being able to take advantage of opportunities faster or better than competitors.
Closely related to IT agility is flexibility. For example, mobile networks are 
flexible—able to be set up, moved, or removed easily, without dealing with cables 
and other physical requirements of wired networks. Mass migration to mobile 
devices from PCs has expanded the scope of IT beyond traditional organizational 
boundaries—making location practically irrelevant.
IT agility, flexibility, and mobility are tightly interrelated and fully dependent 
on an organization’s IT infrastructure and architecture, which are covered in greater 
detail in Chapter 2.
With mobile devices, apps, platforms, and social media becoming inseparable parts 
of work life and corporate collaboration and with more employees working from home, 
the result is the rapid consumerization of IT. IT consumerization is the migration of 
consumer technology into enterprise IT environments. This shift has occurred because 
personally owned IT is as capable and cost-effective as its enterprise equivalents.
COMPETITIVE 
ADVANTAGE
Two key components of corporate profitability are:
1.  Industry structure: An industry’s structure determines the range of profi tability 
of the average competitor and can be very diffi cult to change.
2.  Competitive advantage: This is an edge that enables a company to outperform 
its average competitor. Competitive advantage can be sustained only by con-
tinually pursuing new ways to compete.

20  Chapter 1     Doing Business in Digital Times
IT plays a key role in competitive advantage, but that advantage is short-lived 
if competitors quickly duplicate it. Research firm Gartner defines competitive 
advantage as a difference between a company and its competitors that matters to 
customers.
It is important to recognize that some types of IT are commodities, which do 
not provide a special advantage. Commodities are basic things that companies need 
to function, such as electricity and buildings. Computers, databases, and network 
services are examples of commodities. In contrast, how a business applies IT to sup-
port business processes transforms those IT commodities into competitive assets. 
Critical business processes are those that improve employee performance and profit 
margins.
STRATEGIC PLANNING 
AND COMPETITIVE 
MODELS
Strategy planning is critical for all organizations, including government agencies, 
health care providers, educational institutions, the military, and other nonprofits. 
We start by discussing strategic analysis and then explain the activities or compo-
nent parts of strategic planning.
What Is Strategic (SWOT) Analysis?
There are many views on strategic analysis. In general, strategic analysis is the scan-
ning and review of the political, social, economic, and technical environments of an 
organization. For example, any company looking to expand its business operations 
into a developing country has to investigate that country’s political and economic 
stability and critical infrastructure. That strategic analysis would include reviewing 
the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency’s (CIA) World Factbook. The World Factbook 
provides information on the history, people, government, economy, geography, 
communications, transportation, military, and transnational issues for 266 world 
entities. Then the company would need to investigate competitors and their poten-
tial reactions to a new entrant into their market. Equally important, the company 
would need to assess its ability to compete profitably in the market and impacts of 
the expansion on other parts of the company. For example, having excess production 
capacity would require less capital than if a new factory needed to be built.
The purpose of this analysis of the environment, competition, and capacity is 
to learn about the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) of the 
expansion plan being considered. SWOT analysis, as it is called, involves the evalu-
ation of strengths and weaknesses, which are internal factors, and opportunities and 
threats, which are external factors. Examples are:
• Strengths: Reliable processes; agility; motivated workforce
• Weaknesses: Lack of expertise; competitors with better IT infrastructure
• Opportunities: A developing market; ability to create a new market or product
• Threats: Price wars or other fierce reaction by competitors; obsolescence
SWOT is only a guide. The value of SWOT analysis depends on how the analy-
sis is performed. Here are several rules to follow:
• Be realistic about the strengths and weaknesses of your organization.
• Be realistic about the size of the opportunities and threats.
• Be specific and keep the analysis simple, or as simple as possible.
• Evaluate your company’s strengths and weaknesses in relation to those of 
competitors (better than or worse than competitors).
• Expect conflicting views because SWOT is subjective, forward-looking, and 
based on assumptions.
SWOT analysis is often done at the outset of the strategic planning process. 
Now you will read answers to the question, “What is strategic planning?”

1.3     The Power of Competitive Advantage     21  
What Is Strategic Planning?
Strategic planning is a series of processes in which an organization selects and 
arranges its businesses or services to keep the organization healthy or able to func-
tion even when unexpected events disrupt one or more of its businesses, markets, 
products, or services. Strategic planning involves environmental scanning and pre-
diction, or SWOT analysis, for each business relative to competitors in that business’s 
market or product line. The next step in the strategic planning process is strategy.
What Is Strategy?
Strategy defines the plan for how a business will achieve its mission, goals, and 
objectives. The plan specifies the necessary financial requirements, budgets, and 
resources. Strategy addresses fundamental issues such as the company’s position 
in its industry, its available resources and options, and future directions. A strategy 
addresses questions such as:
• What is the long-term direction of our business?
• What is the overall plan for deploying our resources?
• What trade-offs are necessary? What resources will need to be shared?
• What is our position compared to that of our competitors?
• How do we achieve competitive advantage over rivals in order to achieve or 
maximize profitability?
Two of the most well-known methodologies were developed by Michael Porter.
Porter’s Competitive Forces Model and Strategies
Michael Porter’s competitive forces model, also called the five-forces model, has 
been used to identify competitive strategies. The model demonstrates how IT 
can enhance competitiveness. Professor Porter discusses this model in detail in a 
13-minute YouTube video from Harvard Business School.
The model recognizes five major forces (think of them as pressures or drivers) that 
influence a company’s position within a given industry and the strategy that manage-
ment chooses to pursue. Other forces, including new regulations, affect all companies 
in the industry, and have a rather uniform impact on each company in an industry.
According to Porter, an industry’s profit potential is largely determined by the 
intensity of competitive forces within the industry, shown in Figure 1.19. A good 
understanding of the industry’s competitive forces and their underlying causes is a 
crucial component of strategy formulation.
Basis of the competitive forces model Before examining the model, it is 
helpful to understand that it is based on the fundamental concept of profitability 
and profit margin:
PROFIT 
 TOTAL REVENUES minus TOTAL COSTS 
Profit is increased by increasing total revenues and/or decreasing total costs. Profit 
is decreased when total revenues decrease and/or total costs increase:
PROFIT MARGIN 
 SELLING PRICE minus COST OF THE ITEM 
Profit margin measures the amount of profit per unit of sales, and does not take into 
account all costs of doing business.
Five industry forces According to Porter’s competitive forces model, the five 
major forces in an industry affect the degree of competition, which impact profit 
margins and ultimately profitability. These forces interact, so while you read about 
them individually, their interaction determines the industry’s profit potential. For 
example, while profit margins for pizzerias may be small, the ease of entering that 
Video 1-1
Five Competitive Forces 
that Shape Strategy, by 
Michael Porter: youtube.com/ 
watch?v
mYF2_FBCvXw

22  Chapter 1     Doing Business in Digital Times
Threat of
New Entrants
(Bargaining Power of 
Suppliers and Brands)
(Bargaining Power of
Buyers and Distribution
Channels)
Rivalry
Competing 
Companies
Our 
Company
Threat of Substitute
Products or Services
Supplier Power
Buyer Power
Figure 1.19 Porter’s 
competitive forces model.
industry draws new entrants. Conversely, profit margins for delivery services may 
be large, but the cost of the IT needed to support the service is a huge barrier to 
entry into the market.
The five industry (or market) forces are:
1.  Threat of entry of new competitors. Industries that have large profi t margins 
attract entrants into the market to a greater degree than industries with small 
margins. The same principle applies to jobs—people are attracted to higher-paying 
jobs, provided that they can meet the criteria or acquire the skills for that job. 
In order to gain market share, entrants usually need to sell at lower prices as an 
incentive. Their tactics can force companies already in the industry to defend 
their market share by lowering prices—reducing profi t margin. Thus, this threat 
puts downward pressure on profi t margins by driving down prices.
 
This force also refers to the strength of the barriers to entry into an industry, 
which is how easy it is to enter an industry. The threat of entry is lower (less pow-
erful) when existing companies have ITs that are diffi cult to duplicate or very 
expensive. Those ITs create barriers to entry that reduce the threat of entry.
2.  Bargaining power of suppliers. Bargaining power is high where the supplier or 
brand is powerful, such as Apple, Microsoft, and auto manufacturers. Power is 
determined by how much a company purchases from a supplier. The more pow-
erful company has the leverage to demand better prices or terms, which increase 
its profi t margin. Conversely, suppliers with very little bargaining power tend to 
have small profi t margins.
3.  Bargaining power of customers or buyers. This force is the reverse of the bar-
gaining power of suppliers. Examples are Walmart and government agencies. 
This force is high when there are few large customers or buyers in a market.
4.  Threat of substituting products or services. Where there is product-for-product 
substitution, such as Kindle for Nook, there is downward pressure on prices. As 
the threat of substitutes increases, the profi t margin decreases because sellers 
need to keep prices competitively low.
5.  Competitive rivalry among existing fi rms in the industry. Fierce competition in-
volves expensive advertising and promotions, intense investments in research 
and development (R&D), or other efforts that cut into profi t margins. This force 
is most likely to be high when entry barriers are low, the threat of substitute 
products is high, and suppliers and buyers in the market attempt to control it. 
That is why this force is placed in the center of the model.

1.3     The Power of Competitive Advantage     23  
The strength of each force is determined by the industry’s structure. Existing 
companies in an industry need to protect themselves against these forces. 
Alternatively, they can take advantage of the forces to improve their position or to 
challenge industry leaders. The relationships are shown in Figure 1.19.
Companies can identify the forces that influence competitive advantage in their 
marketplace and then develop their strategy. Porter (1985) proposed three types of 
strategies—cost leadership, differentiation, and niche strategies. In Table 1.2, Porter’s 
three classical strategies are listed first, followed by a list of nine other general 
strategies for dealing with competitive advantage. Each of these strategies can be 
enhanced by IT.
TABLE 1.2 
Strategies for Competitive Advantage
Strategy 
Description
Cost leadership 
 Produce product/service at the lowest cost in the 
industry.
Differentiation 
 Offer different products, services, or product 
features.
Niche 
 Select a narrow-scope segment (market niche) and 
be the best in quality, speed, or cost in that segment.
Growth 
 Increase market share, acquire more customers, or 
sell more types of products.
Alliance 
 Work with business partners in partnerships, alli-
ances, joint ventures, or virtual companies.
Innovation 
 Introduce new products/services; put new features 
in existing products/services; develop new ways to 
produce products/services.
Operational effectiveness 
 Improve the manner in which internal business 
processes are executed so that the fi rm performs 
similar activities better than its rivals.
Customer orientation 
Concentrate on customer satisfaction.
Time 
 Treat time as a resource, then manage it and use it 
to the fi rm’s advantage.
Entry barriers 
 Create barriers to entry. By introducing innovative 
products or using IT to provide exceptional service, 
companies can create entry barriers to discourage 
new entrants.
Customer or supplier 
Encourage customers or suppliers to stay with 
 lock-in 
you rather than going to competitors. Reduce 
 
customers’ bargaining power by locking them in.
Increase switching costs 
 Discourage customers or suppliers from going to 
competitors for economic reasons.

24  Chapter 1     Doing Business in Digital Times
Primary activities are those business activities directly involved in the production 
of goods. Primary activities involve the purchase of materials, the processing of materi-
als into products, and delivery of products to customers. The five primary activities are:
1. Inbound logistics, or acquiring and receiving of raw materials and other inputs
2. Operations, including manufacturing and testing
3. Outbound logistics, which includes packaging, storage, delivery, and distribution
4. Marketing and sales to customers
5. Services, including customer service
The primary activities usually take place in a sequence from 1 to 5. As work 
progresses, value is added to the product in each activity. To be more specific, the 
incoming materials (1) are processed (in receiving, storage, etc.) in activities called 
inbound logistics. Next, the materials are used in operations (2), where significant 
value is added by the process of turning raw materials into products. Products need 
to be prepared for delivery (packaging, storing, and shipping) in the outbound logis-
tics activities (3). Then marketing and sales (4) attempt to sell the products to cus-
tomers, increasing product value by creating demand for the company’s products. 
The value of a sold item is much larger than that of an unsold one. Finally, after-
sales service (5), such as warranty service or upgrade notification, is performed for 
the customer, further adding value.
Primary activities rely on the following support activities:
1. The fi rm’s infrastructure, accounting, fi nance, and management
2.  Human resources (HR) management (For an IT-related HR trend, see IT at 
Work 1.4.)
3. Technology development, and research and development (R&D)
4. Procurement, or purchasing
Each support activity can be applied to any or all of the primary activities. 
Support activities may also support each other, as shown in Figure 1.20.
Innovation and adaptability are critical success factors, or CSFs, related to 
Porter’s models. CSFs are those things that must go right for a company to achieve 
its mission.
Accounting, legal &
finance
Human resources
management
INBOUND
LOGISTICS
Quality control,
receiving,
raw materials 
control
OPERATION
Manufacturing,
packaging,
production
control, quality
control
OUTBOUND
LOGISTICS
Order handling,
delivery,
invoicing
SALES &
MARKETING
Sales
campaigns,
order taking,
social
networking,
sales analysis,
market
research
SERVICING
Warranty,
maintenance
Procurement
Product and
technology
development
Legal, accounting, financial management
Personnel, recruitment, training, staff planning, etc.
Supplier management, funding, subcontracting
Product and process design, production
engineering, market testing, R&D
   
Support Activities
Primary Activities
Figure 1.20 A fi rm’s value 
chain. The arrows represent 
the fl ow of goods, services, 
and data.

1.4     Enterprise Technology Trends     25  
Questions
1. What are the characteristics of an agile organization?
2. Explain IT consumerization.
3. What are two key components of corporate profi tability?
4. Defi ne competitive advantage.
5. Describe strategic planning.
6. Describe SWOT analysis.
7. Explain Porter’s fi ve-forces model, and give an example of each force.
Managers at a global energy services company could not 
find or access their best talent to solve clients’ technical 
problems because of geographic boundaries and business 
unit barriers. The company’s help desks supported engineers 
well enough for common problems, but not for difficult 
issues that needed creative solutions. Using Web technolo-
gies to expand access to experts worldwide, the company 
set up new innovation communities across its business units, 
which have improved the quality of its services.
Dow Chemical set up its own social network to help 
managers identify the talent they need to carry out projects 
across its diverse business units and functions. To expand 
its talent pool, Dow extended the network to include former 
employees and retirees.
Other companies are using networks to tap external tal-
ent pools. These networks include online labor markets such 
as Amazon Mechanical Turk and contest services such as 
InnoCentive that help solve business problems.
• 
Amazon Mechanical Turk is a marketplace for work that 
requires human intelligence. Its web service enables 
companies to access a diverse, on-demand workforce.
• 
InnoCentive is an “open innovation” company that 
takes R&D problems in a broad range of areas such as 
engineering, computer science, and business and frames 
them as “challenge problems” for anyone to solve. It 
gives cash awards for the best solutions to solvers who 
meet the challenge criteria.
Sources: Compiled from McKinsey Global Institute (mckinsey.com/
insights/mgi.aspx), Amazon Mechanical Turk (aws.amazon.com/
mturk), and InnoCentive (Innocentive.com).
Questions
1.  Visit and review the Amazon Mechanical Turk website. 
Explain HITs. How do they provide an on-demand work-
force?
2.  Visit and review the InnoCentive website. Describe what 
the company does and how.
IT at Work 1 .4
Finding Qualified Talent
At the end of his iPhone presentation at MacWorld 2007, Apple’s visionary leader 
Steve Jobs displayed advice once expressed by legendary hockey player Wayne 
Gretzky (Figure 1.21): “I skate to where the puck is going to be, not where it has 
been.” Steve Jobs added: “And we’ve always tried to do that at Apple. Since the 
very very beginning. And we always will.” He was telling us that Apple always 
moves toward where it expects the future will be.
Looking at Apple’s history, you see innovative products and services that shaped 
the future. For example, launching the iTunes store in April 2003 jumpstarted the 
1.4  Enterprise Technology Trends

26  Chapter 1     Doing Business in Digital Times
digital music industry. iTunes was a significant breakthrough that forever changed 
the music industry and the first representation of Apple’s future outside its traditional 
computing product line. You are familiar with the success of that future-driven busi-
ness model.
Three IT directions for the late 2010s are outlined next. Throughout all the 
chapters in this book, you will learn how these and other digital technology are 
transforming business and society.
Figure 1.21 Wayne Gretzky’s strategy for success in hockey was to skate to 
where the puck was going to be. Steve Jobs followed a similar forward-looking 
strategy. In October, 2003, Jobs announced a Windows version of the iTunes 
store, saying “Hell froze over,” which brought a big laugh from the audience in 
San Francisco.
MORE MOBILE 
BUSINESS APPS, FEWER 
DOCS ON DESKTOPS
The direction is away from the traditional desktop and documents era and toward 
business apps in the cloud. Why? Google Apps offers apps that provide work-
ers with information and answers with low effort—instead of having to complete 
tedious actions, such as logging in or doing extensive searches. This ongoing move 
to mobile raises data security issues. Data stored on mobiles are at higher risk, in 
part because the devices can be stolen or lost.
MORE SOCIALLY 
ENGAGED—BUT 
SUBJECT TO 
REGULATION
Engaging customers via mobiles and social media sites—and those customers who 
do not tolerate delays—is the norm. However, customers probably do not know of 
restrictions on financial institutions and health–care providers that make it illegal 
to respond to individuals publicly via social media. That is, for regulatory purposes, 
financial institutions cannot post or respond to comments or e-mails through social 
media sites because of privacy and security.
MORE NEAR-FIELD 
COMMUNICATION 
(NFC) TECHNOLOGY
Near-field communication (NFC) technology is an umbrella description covering 
several technologies that communicate within a limited distance. Using radio fre-
quency identification (RFID) chip-based tags, as shown in Figure 1.22, devices relay 
identifying data, such as product ID, price, and location, to a nearby reader that 
captures the data. It is projected that the global market for NFC handsets will reach 
1.6 billion units by 2018, according to a recent Global Industry Analysts research 
report. According to the report, strong demand is “driven by growing penetration 
of mobile phones, continued rise in demand and production of smartphones, rising 
penetration of NFC in consumer devices, and chip level technology developments” 
© ZUMA Wire Service/Alamy
Jeff Vinnick/Getty Images

1.5     How Your IT Expertise Adds Value to Your Performance and Career     27  
(NFC World, 2014). Innovative ways in which businesses are applying NFC include 
the following:
• Amsterdam’s Schiphol Airport has installed an NFC boarding gate allowing pas-
sengers to validate their boarding pass with a touch of their NFC smartphone.
• French leather goods brand Delage has partnered with NFC object identi-
fication specialist Selinko to integrate NFC tags into its range of premium 
leather bags. Each bag will have a unique chip and a unique digital serial 
number. Consumers with an NFC smartphone equipped with Selinko’s free 
mobile app will be able to use the tag to access information about their 
product and confirm its authenticity as well as access marketing offers.
• iPhone owners in the United States can make Isis payments following 
AT&T’s introduction of a range of phone cases that add NFC functionality 
to the devices. To use the Isis Mobile Wallet on an iPhone, the owner selects 
the Isis-ready NFC case, slides the iPhone in, downloads the Isis Mobile 
Wallet app from the App Store, and taps the iPhone at hundreds of thou-
sands of merchants nationwide for a quick way to pay.
These trends are forces that are changing competition, business models, how 
workers and operations are managed, and the skills valuable to a career in business.
Figure 1.22 NFC technology relies on sensors or RFID chips. NFC is used 
for tracking wine and liquor to manage the supply chain effi ciently. NFC 
smartphones are being integrated into payment systems in supermarkets so 
customers can pay for purchases without cash or credit cards.
Questions
1.  What was the signifi cance of Apple’s introduction of the iPhones music 
store?
2. What are three IT trends?
3. What are three business applications of NFC?
Every tech innovation triggers opportunities and threats to business models and 
strategies. With rare exceptions, every business initiative depends on the mix of IT, 
knowledge of its potential, the requirements for success, and, equally important, its 
limitations. Staying current in emerging technologies affecting markets is essential to 
the careers of knowledge workers, entrepreneurs, managers, and business leaders—
not just IT and chief information officers (CIOs).
1.5   How Your IT Expertise Adds Value to Your Performance 
and Career
© Chris Pearsall/Alamy
© RioPatuca/Alamy

28  Chapter 1     Doing Business in Digital Times
WHAT COMPANIES 
CAN DO DEPENDS 
ON THEIR IT
What companies can do depends on what their information technology and data 
management systems can do. For over a decade, powerful new digital approaches 
to doing business—and getting through your day—have emerged. And there is 
sufficient proof to expect even more rapid and dramatic changes due to IT break-
throughs and advances. Understanding trends that affect the ways business is done 
and getting in front of those trends give you a career edge.
Key strategic and tactical questions that determine an organization’s profitabil-
ity and management performance are shown in Figure 1.23. Answers to each ques-
tion will entail understanding the capabilities of mundane to complex ITs, which 
ones to implement, and how to manage them.
IT CAREERS OUTLOOK
Having a feel for the job market helps you improve your career options. According 
to the U.S. Department of Labor, and the University of California Los Angeles 
(UCLA), the best national jobs in terms of growth, advancement, and salary 
increases in 2013 are in the fields of IT, engineering, health care, finance, construc-
tion, and management. It is projected that these job categories will see above-
average national growth over the next several years. The U.S. Department of Labor 
projections are generally 6–10 years in reference.
With big data, data science, and M2M, companies are increasing their IT staff. 
In addition, many new businesses are seeking more programmers and designers. 
Data security threats continue to get worse. The field of IT covers a wide range that 
includes processing of streaming data, data management, big data analytics, app 
development, system analysis, information security, and more.
Job growth is estimated at 53 percent by 2018, according to the U.S. Department 
of Labor; and salaries in many IT jobs will increase by 4 to 6 percent. The lack of 
skilled IT workers in the U.S. is a primary reason for the outsourcing of IT jobs.
Digital Technology Defines and Creates 
Businesses and Markets
Digital technology creates markets, businesses, products, and careers. As you con-
tinue to read this book, you will see that exciting IT developments are changing how 
organizations and individuals do things. New technologies and IT-supported func-
tions, such as 4G or 5G networks, embedded sensors, on-demand workforces, and 
e-readers, point to ground-breaking changes. CNN.com, one of the most respected 
Figure 1.23 Key strategic 
and tactical questions.
Business
processes,
producers,
and technology
Strategic direction;
industry, markets,
and customers
Business model
• What do we do?
• What is our direction?
• What markets & customers should
   we be targeting and how do we
   prepare for them?
• How do we do it?
• How do we generate revenues &
   profits to sustain ourselves and
   build our brand?
• How well do we do it?
• How can we be more
   efficient?

Key Terms     29  
news media, has created a new market whose impacts are yet to be realized. Visit 
iReport.com where a pop-up reads, “iReport is the way people like you report the 
news. The stories in this section are not edited, fact-checked or screened before 
they post.”
IT as a Career: The Nature of IS and IT Work
IT managers play a vital role in the implementation and administration of digital 
technology. They plan, coordinate, and direct research on the computer-related 
activities of firms. In consultation with other managers, they help determine the 
goals of an organization and then implement technology to meet those goals.
Chief technology officers (CTOs) evaluate the newest and most innovative 
technologies and determine how they can be applied for competitive advantage. 
CTOs develop technical standards, deploy technology, and supervise workers 
who deal with the daily IT issues of the firm. When innovative and useful new 
ITs are launched, the CTO determines implementation strategies, performs 
cost-benefit or SWOT analysis, and reports those strategies to top management, 
including the CIO.
IT project managers develop requirements, budgets, and schedules for their 
firm’s information technology projects. They coordinate such projects from devel-
opment through implementation, working with their organization’s IT workers, as 
well as clients, vendors, and consultants. These managers are increasingly involved 
in projects that upgrade the information security of an organization.
IT Job Prospects
Workers with specialized technical knowledge and strong communications and 
business skills, as well as those with an MBA with a concentration in an IT area, will 
have the best prospects. Job openings will be the result of employment growth and 
the need to replace workers who transfer to other occupations or leave the labor 
force (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2012–2013).
Questions
1. Why is IT a major enabler of business performance and success?
2. Explain why it is benefi cial to study IT today.
3. Why are IT job prospects strong?
Key Terms
agility
barriers to entry
big data
business model
business process
business process 
management (BPM)
business process 
reengineering (BPR)
business-to-business 
(B2B)
chief technology offi cer 
(CTO)
cloud computing
commodity
competitive advantage
competitive forces model 
(fi ve-forces model)
critical success factor (CSF)
cross-functional business 
process
customer experience (CX)
cycle time
dashboards
data analytics
data science
dashboard
deliverables
digital business model
formal process
inbound logistics
industry structure
informal process
Internet of Things (IoT)
IT consumerization
IT project manager
key performance 
indicators (KPIs)
machine-to-machine 
(M2M) technology
near-fi eld communication 
(NFC) technology
objectives
operations
process
productivity
radio frequency 
identifi cation (RFID)
real time system
responsiveness
services
social, mobile, and cloud 
(SoMoClo)
standard operating 
procedures (SOPs)
supply chain
support activities
SWOT analysis
unstructured data
wearable technology

30  Chapter 1     Doing Business in Digital Times
Assuring Your Learning
 1. Why are businesses experiencing a digital transfor-
mation?
 2. More data are collected in a day now than existed in 
the world 10 years ago. What factors have contrib-
uted to this volume of data?
 3. Assume you had no smartphone, other mobile de-
vice, or mobile apps to use for 24 hours. How would 
that mobile blackout disrupt your ability to function?
 4. What were three highly disruptive digital technolo-
gies? Give an example of one disruption for each 
technology.
 5. Why are enterprises adopting cloud computing?
 6. What is the value of M2M technology? Give two 
examples.
 7. Starbucks monitors tweets and other sources of big 
data. How might the company increase revenue 
from big data analytics?
 8. Select three companies in different industries, such 
as banking, retail store, supermarket, airlines, or 
package delivery, that you do business with. What 
digital technologies does each company use to 
engage you, keep you informed, or create a unique 
customer experience? How effective is each use of 
digital technology to keeping you a loyal customer?
 9. Describe two examples of the infl uence of SoMoClo 
on the fi nancial industry.
 10. What is a potential impact of the Internet of things 
on the health-care industry?
 11. How could wearable technology be used to create 
a competitive edge in the athletic and sportswear 
industry?
 12. Why does reducing the cycle time of a business 
process also help to reduce errors?
 13. Research fi rm Gartner defi nes competitive advantage 
as a difference between a company and its competi-
tors that matters to customers. Describe one use of 
M2M technology that could provide a manufacturer 
with a competitive advantage.
 14. What IT careers are forecasted to be in high de-
mand? Explain why.
 15. Why or how would understanding the latest IT 
trends infl uence your career?
DISCUSS: Critical Thinking Questions
 16. Research the growing importance of big data ana-
lytics. Find two forecasts of big data growth. What 
do they forecast?
 17. Go to the U.S. Department of Commerce website 
and search for U.S. Economy at a Glance: Perspec-
tive from the BEA Accounts.
a. Review the BEA homepage to learn the types of 
information, news, reports, and interactive data 
available. Search for the page that identifi es who 
uses BEA measures. Identify two users of indus-
try data and two users of international trade and 
investment data.
b. Click on the Glossary. Use the Glossary to 
explain GDP in your own words.
c. Under the NEWS menu, select U.S. Economy at 
a Glance. Review the GDP current numbers for 
the last two reported quarters. How did GDP 
change in each of these two quarters?
EXPLORE: Online and Interactive Exercises
 18. A transportation company is considering investing 
in a truck tire with embedded sensors—the Internet 
of Things. Outline the benefi ts of this investment. 
Would this investment create a long-term competi-
tive advantage for the transportation company?
 19. Visit the website of UPS (ups.com), Federal Express 
(fedex.com), and one other logistics and delivery 
company.
a. At each site, what information is available to 
customers before and after they send a package?
b. Compare the three customer experiences.
 20. Visit YouTube.com and search for two videos on 
Michael Porter’s strategic or competitive forces 
models. For each video, report what you learned. 
Specify the complete URL, video title, who uploaded 
the video and the date, video length, and number of 
views.
 21. Visit Dell.com and Apple.com to simulate buying a 
laptop computer. Compare and contrast the selection 
process, degree of customization, and other buying 
features. What are the barriers to entry into this mar-
ket, based on what you learned from this exercise?
ANALYZE & DECIDE: Apply IT Concepts to Business Decisions

CASE 1.2     Business Case     31  
CASE 1.2
Business Case: Restaurant Creates Opportunities to Engage Customers
Back when phones were used only to make calls, few 
retailers and restaurants could have predicted that mo-
bile technology was going to transform their industries. 
Smartphones and other portable devices are access points 
to customers. Companies can push real time, personally 
targeted ads to customers’ phones using text messages, or 
interact with them using location-aware mobile apps. And 
potential customers can access product or brand informa-
tion using 2D codes, and comparison-shop right in the 
store.
 
Brands are always looking for more effective ways 
to integrate social media with traditional media, such as 
print and TV, when implementing marketing campaigns. 
Managing these campaigns and interactions requires 
specialized software, and possibly support from the 
vendor or consulting firm if the company lacks in-house 
expertise.
Pei Wei Asian Diner’s Mobile 
and Cloud Campaign
Pei Wei Asian Diner (www.peiwei.com), a fast-food casual 
restaurant chain owned by P.F. Chang’s China Bistro, is an 
example of a company that invested in technology to 
manage multichannel (also called cross-channel) marketing 
campaigns. In mid-2011 Pei Wei introduced a new entrée, 
Caramel Chicken. The company integrated traditional 
in-store promotions with mobile and Web-based 
marketing efforts to motivate people to subscribe to 
its e-mail marketing campaign. It also reached out to 
fans via Facebook and Twitter. The success of the new 
campaign depended on investing in appropriate software 
and expertise. With thousands of tweets, Facebook posts, 
and Google searches per second, companies need IT 
support to understand what people are saying about their 
brands.
Campaign Management 
Software Vendor
Software vendor ExactTarget was selected to run and 
manage Pei Wei’s marketing campaigns. Famous brands—
like Expedia, Best Buy, Nike, and Papa John’s—also used 
ExactTarget to power their mission-critical messages. 
With ExactTarget’s software, Pei Wei invited guests to join 
(register) its e-mail list via text, the Web, Twitter, or Face-
book in order to receive a buy-one, get-one free (BOGO) 
coupon.
 
Using ExactTarget’s software and infrastructure, clients 
such as Pei Wei can send more than thousands of e-mails per 
second and millions of messages in 15 minutes. A massive 
infrastructure and architecture are needed to meet the de-
mands of high-volume senders.
 
Another feature of ExactTarget is the ability to respond in 
a real time environment. Companies need to be able to react 
to the real time actions that their customers are taking across 
all channels. That is why it is necessary to be able to quickly 
and easily confi gure messages that are triggered by external 
events like purchases or website interactions. Finally, software 
helps companies immediately respond to customers with 
burst sending capabilities—sending millions of e-mails in a 
few minutes.
Why the Campaign Was a Success
Within two weeks, about 20,000 people had responded to 
the offer by registering. The BOGO coupon redemption rate 
at Pei Wei’s 173 locations was 20 percent. It was the restau-
rant chain’s most successful new e-mail list growth effort to 
date.
 
Effective marketing requires companies or brands to cre-
ate opportunities with which to engage customers. Pei Wei 
was successful because it used multiple interactive channels 
to engage—connect with—current and potential custom-
ers. Brands have a tremendous opportunity to connect with 
consumers on their mobiles in stores and on Twitter and 
Facebook.
 
A 2010 ExactTarget study of more than 1,500 U.S. 
consumers entitled The Collaborative Future found that:
• 
27 percent of consumers said they are more likely to 
purchase from a brand after subscribing to e-mail.
• 
17 percent of consumers are more likely to purchase after 
liking a brand on Facebook.
 
A study by Forrester Consulting found that 48 percent 
of interactive marketing executives ranked understanding 
customers’ cross-channel interactions as one of the top 
challenges facing marketing today.
Questions
1. What software capabilities did Pei Wei need to launch its 
marketing campaign?
2. What factors contributed to the success of Pei Wei’s 
campaign?
3. Why is a high-capacity (massive) infrastructure needed to 
launch e-mail or text campaigns?
4. Visit ExactTarget.com. Identify and describe how the 
vendor makes it easy for companies to connect via e-mail 
and Twitter.
5. What solutions for small businesses does ExactTarget 
offer?

32  Chapter 1     Doing Business in Digital Times
CASE 1.3
Video Case: What Is the Value of Knowing More and Doing More?
Teradata (Teradata.com) is a leading provider of big data 
and data analytics solutions. In a video, Teradata explains 
that when you know the right thing to do, you can do 
more of what truly matters for your business and your 
customers. View the video entitled “What Would You Do 
If You Knew?”™ at http://www.teradata.com/Resources/
Videos/What-would-you-do-if-you-knew/
Questions
1. What did you learn from the video?
2. What is the value of knowing and doing more?
Accenture Technology Vision 2013.
Alesci, C. & S. Saitto. “AutoTrader.Com Said to Be in Talks 
About Possible IPO of Buyer-Seller Site.” Bloomberg, 
February 4, 2012.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. Occupational Outlook Handbook. 
U.S. Department of Labor, 2012–2013.
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). World Factbook.
Cooper, B. B. “10 Surprising Social Media Statistics That Will 
Make You Rethink Your Social Strategy.” Fast Company, 
November 18, 2013.
Davenport, T.H. & D.J. Patil. “Data Scientist: The Sexiest Job 
of the 21st Century.” Harvard Business Review Magazine. 
October 2012.
“Gartner Reveals Top Predictions for IT Organizations and 
Users for 2013 and Beyond.” Gartner Newsroom. October 24, 
2012.
glassdoor.com. “Data Analyst Salaries.” May 8, 2014.
Gnau, S. “Putting Big Data in Context.” Wired, September 10, 
2013.
Joy, O. “What Does It Mean to Be a Digital Native?” CNN, 
December 8, 2012.
Kelly, M. “Data Scientists Needed: Why This Career Is 
Exploding Right Now.” VentureBeat.com, November 11, 2013.
Lockard, C.B. & M. Wolf. “Occupational Employment Projec-
tions to 2020.” Monthly Labor Review, January 2012.
McCain Foods. “McCain Foods: Integrating Data from the 
Plant to the Boardroom to Increase the Bottom Line.” 
Teradata.com, 2013.
NFC World. “News in Brief.” February 2014.
Pogue, D. “Embracing the Mothers of Invention.” The New 
York Times, January 25, 2012.
Porter, M. E. The Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining 
Superior Performance. NY: Free Press. 1985.
Porter, M. E. “Strategy and the Internet.” Harvard Business 
Review, March 2001.
Schmidt-Subramanian, M., H. Manning, J. Knott, & M. Murphy. 
“The Business Impact of Customer Experience, 2013.” For-
rester Research, June 10, 2013.
Smith, Gavin. “Frozen Food Production in the US Industry 
Market Research Report from IBISWorld Has Been Updated.” 
PRWeb, March 27, 2013.
softwareag.com. “Orders Are in the Fast Lane at AutoTrader.
com—Thanks to BPM.” 2011.
Transparency Market Research. “Frozen Food Market—Global 
Industry Analysis, Size, Share, Growth, Trends and Forecast, 
2013–2019.” September 2013.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2014.
Walsh, M. “Autotrader.com Tops In Local Online Ad Dollars.” 
MediaPost.com, April 3, 2012.
References

Chapter Snapshot
High performance is about outperforming rivals again 
and again, even as the basis of competition in an indus-
try changes. Markets do not stand still and the basis of 
competition is changing at a faster pace. By the time a 
company’s financial performance starts tapering off, it 
might be too late to start building new market-relevant 
capabilities. To stay ahead, today’s leaders seek out new 
ways to grow their businesses during rapid technology 
changes, more empowered consumers and employees, 
and more government intervention.
Effective ways to thrive over the long term are to 
launch new business models and strategies or devise new 
ways to outperform competitors. In turn, these perfor-
mance capabilities depend on a company’s enterprise IT 
Data Governance and 
IT Architecture Support 
Long-Term Performance
2
Chapter
1.  Explain the business benefits of information management 
and how data quality determines system success or failure.
2.  Describe how enterprise architecture (EA) and data 
governance play leading roles in guiding IT growth and 
sustaining long-term performance.
3.  Map the functions of various types of information 
systems to the type of support needed by business 
operations and decision makers.
4.  Describe the functions of data centers, cloud computing, 
and virtualization and their strengths, weaknesses, and 
cost considerations.
5.  Explain the range of cloud services, their benefits, and 
business and legal risks that they create.
Learning Outcomes
33
Chapter Snapshot
Case 2.1 Opening Case: Detoxing Dirty Data 
with Data Governance at Intel Security
2.1 Information Management
2.2  Enterprise Architecture and Data 
Governance
2.3 Information Systems: The Basics
2.4  Data Centers, Cloud Computing, and 
Virtualization
2.5 Cloud Services Add Agility
Key Terms
Assuring Your Learning
• Discuss: Critical Thinking Questions
• Explore: Online and Interactive Exercises
•  Analyze & Decide: Apply IT Concepts 
to Business Decisions
Case 2.2 Business Case:  Data Chaos Creates Risk
Case 2.3 Video Case: Cloud Computing: 
Three Case Studies
References

architecture and data governance. The enterprise IT archi-
tecture, or simply the enterprise architecture (EA), guides 
the evolution and expansion of information systems, 
digital technology, and business processes. This guide is 
needed in order to leverage IT capability for competitive 
advantage and growth. Data governance, or information 
governance, is the control of enterprise data through for-
mal policies and procedures. A goal of data governance 
is to provide employees and business partners with high-
quality data they trust and can access on demand.
CASE 2.1 OPENING CASE
Detoxing Dirty Data with Data Governance at Intel Security
COMPANY OVERVIEW
CUSTOMER-CENTRIC 
BUSINESS MODEL
Intel Security protects data and IT resources from attack and unauthorized access. 
The company provides cybersecurity services to large enterprises, governments, 
small- and medium-sized businesses, and consumers. A significant portion of its 
revenues comes from postsales service, support, and subscriptions to its software 
and managed services. The company sells directly and also through resellers to 
corporations and consumers in the United States, Europe, Asia, and Latin America.
Intel Security management recognized that it needed to implement a best-practices 
customer-centric business model. In the fiercely competitive industry, the ability 
to connect with customers, anticipate their needs, and provide flawless customer 
service is essential to loyalty and long-term growth. Why? Mostly because social 
and mobile technology is forcing businesses to offer excellent customer experiences 
(CX) across every available touchpoint, including chat, video, mobile apps, and 
alerts (Figure 2.2). A touchpoint is “any influencing action initiated through com-
munication, human contact or physical or sensory interaction” (De Clerck, 2013).
Most customers search for and exchange detailed information about the good 
and bad of their encounters with companies. (You will read about Yelp and the 
34
Customer-centric business 
models strive to create the 
best solution or experience 
for the customer. In contrast, 
product-centric models are 
internally focused on creating 
the best product.
TABLE 2.1 
Opening Case Overview
Company 
 McAfee was renamed Intel Security in 2014. It is a sub-
sidiary of Intel Corp. headquartered in Santa Clara, CA. 
Has more than $2 billion in revenues annually, over 7,600 
employees, and over 1 million customers.
Industry  
Cybersecurity software, hardware, and services.
Product lines 
 The company develops, markets, distributes, and supports 
cybersecurity products that protect computers, networks, 
and mobile devices. They offer managed security services 
to protect endpoints, servers, networks, and mobile devices. 
Consulting, training and support services are also provided.
Digital technology 
 Data governance and master data management (MDM) in 
order to build a best-in-class customer data management 
capability to facilitate the company’s vision.
Business vision 
 To become the fastest-growing dedicated security 
company in the world.

CASE 2.1     Opening Case     35  
BUSINESS CHALLENGES 
FROM POOR-QUALITY 
CUSTOMER DATA
Intel Security is following a growth-driven business strategy. Its vision is to become 
the fastest-growing dedicated security company in the world. Management rec-
ognized that accurate customer data are the foundation of top-notch customer 
service. But, they faced a common business problem—poor-quality customer data. 
Characteristics of poor-quality data, also known as dirty data, are listed in Table 2.2.
Duplicate customer records and incomplete customer data were harming 
sales. The company could not effectively cross-sell (sell complementary products 
or services) or up-sell (sell more expensive models or features). Opportunities to 
get customers to renew their software licenses—and keep them loyal—were being 
lost. Data errors degraded sales forecasts and caused order-processing mistakes. 
Time was wasted trying to find, validate, and correct customer records and manu-
ally reconcile month-end sales and calculate sales commissions. Until the causes of 
dirty data were identified and corrected, the growth strategy could not be achieved.
Dirty data are data of such 
poor quality that they cannot 
be trusted or relied upon for 
decisions.
Figure 2.2 Providing 
excellent service to 
customers via their preferred 
touchpoints, such as online 
chat, has never been more 
important as consumers use 
social media to rate brands, 
expose bad service, and vent 
their frustrations.
Intel Security
(formerly McAfee, Inc.)
Data governance
Master data management (MDM)
Digital Technology
Delivers proactive cybersecurity
solutions and services for
information systems, networks,
and mobile devices around the
world.
Brand
Aligned Data
Management with
Business Strategy
Implemented data governance to
build a best-in-class customer data
management capability in order to
achieve the company’s strategic
vision.
Figure 2.1 Intel Security overview.
United Breaks Guitar video in Chapter 7.) This transparency gives companies a 
strong incentive to work harder to make customers happy before, during, and after 
their purchases.
By creating a customer-centric business model, Intel Security can track what is 
working for its customers and what is not. Using digital technology and data analytics 
to understand customer touchpoints would enable the company to connect with 
customers in meaningful ways. Committing to a better experience for customers can 
increase revenue and promote loyalty—and achieve the company’s growth objective.
© Andrei Shumskiy/Shutterstock 
© faysal/Shutterstock 

36  Chapter 2     Data Governance and IT Architecture Support Long-Term Performance
TABLE 2.2 
Characteristics of Poor-Quality or Dirty Data
Characteristic of Dirty Data 
Description
Incomplete 
Missing data.
Outdated or invalid 
Too old to be valid or useful.
Incorrect 
Too many errors.
Duplicated or in confl ict 
 Too many copies or versions of the same 
data—and the versions are inconsistent or in 
confl ict with each other.
Nonstandardized 
 Data are stored in incompatible formats—and 
cannot be compared or summarized.
Unusable 
 Data are not in context to be understood or 
interpreted correctly at the time of access.
DATA QUALITY 
SOLUTION: DATA 
GOVERNANCE
Working with consulting company First San Francisco Partners, Intel Security 
planned and implemented data governance and master data management (MDM). 
Master data are the business-critical information on customers, products, accounts, 
and other things that is needed for operations and business transactions. Master 
data were stored in disparate systems spread across the enterprise. MDM would 
link and synchronize all critical data from those disparate systems into one file, 
called a master file, that provided a common point of reference. Data governance 
and MDM manage the availability, usability, integrity, and security of the data used 
throughout the enterprise. Intel Security’s data governance strategy and MDM 
were designed after a thorough review of its 1.3 million customer records, sales 
processes, and estimated future business requirements.
BENEFITS OF DATA 
GOVERNANCE AND 
MDM
Data governance and MDM have improved the quality of Intel Security’s customer 
data, which were essential for its customer-centric business model. With high-quality 
data, the company is able to identify up-sell and cross-sell sales opportunities. Best 
practices for customer data management improved customer experiences that 
translated into better customer retention and acquisition. The key benefits achieved 
after implementing data governance and the MDM architecture to improve data 
quality are:
• Better customer experience
• Greater customer loyalty and retention
• Increased sales growth
• Accurate sales forecasts and order processing
Intel Security has successfully aligned its IT capabilities to meet business needs. All 
these efforts benefit the business by improving productivity as a result of reduced 
data-cleansing efforts, and by increasing sales as a result of better customer experi-
ences.
Sources: Compiled from mcafee.com (2013), De Clerck, (2013), First San Francisco Partners (2009), and 
Rich (2013).
Data governance is the 
control of enterprise data 
through formal policies and 
procedures to help ensure 
that data can be trusted and 
are accessible.
Master data management 
(MDM) methods synchronize 
all business-critical data from 
disparate systems into a 
master file, which provides 
a trusted data source.

2.1     Information Management     37  
Questions
1.  What is the difference between customer-centric and product-centric 
business models?
2.  Explain the business challenges caused by Intel Security’s dirty data.
3.  What is the function of data governance?
4.  Describe the function of master data.
5.  Why is it important to keep data synchronized across disparate systems?
6. Why did Intel Security need master data management (MDM)?
7.  How did MDM and data governance enable the company to achieve its 
vision?
8.  What benefi ts did the company achieve as a result of implementing 
data governance and MDM?
Most business initiatives succeed or fail based on the quality of their data. Effective 
planning and decisions depend on systems being able to make data available to 
decision makers in usable formats on a timely basis. Most everyone manages infor-
mation. You manage your social and cloud accounts across multiple mobile devices 
and computers. You update or synchronize (“synch”) your calendars, appoint-
ments, contact lists, media files, documents, and reports. Your productivity depends 
on the compatibility of devices and apps and their ability to share data. Not being 
able to transfer and synch whenever you add a device or app is bothersome and 
wastes your time. For example, when you switch to the latest mobile device, you 
might need to reorganize content to make dealing with data and devices easier. To 
simplify add-ons, upgrades, sharing, and access, you might leverage cloud services 
such as iTunes, Instagram, Diigo, and Box.
This is just a glimpse of the information management situations that organiza-
tions face today—and why a continuous plan is needed to guide, control, and govern 
IT growth. As with building construction (Figure 2.3), blueprints and models help 
guide and govern future IT and digital technology investments.
2.1  Information Management
Information management is 
the use of IT tools and 
methods to collect, process, 
consolidate, store, and 
secure data from sources that 
are often fragmented and 
inconsistent.
INFORMATION 
MANAGEMENT 
HARNESSES SCATTERED 
DATA
Business information is generally scattered throughout an enterprise, stored in 
separate systems dedicated to specific purposes, such as operations, supply chain 
management, or customer relationship management. Major organizations have over 
100 data repositories (storage areas). In many companies, the integration of these 
disparate systems is limited—as is users’ ability to access all the information they 
Figure 2.3 Blueprints and 
models, like those used for 
building construction, are 
needed to guide and govern 
an enterprise’s IT assets.
© Martin Barraud/Alamy

38  Chapter 2     Data Governance and IT Architecture Support Long-Term Performance
need. Therefore, despite all the information flowing through companies, executives, 
managers, and workers often struggle to find the information they need to make 
sound decisions or do their jobs. The overall goal of information management is to 
eliminate that struggle through the design and implementation of data governance 
and a well-planned enterprise architecture.
Providing easy access to large volumes of information is just one of the chal-
lenges facing organizations. The days of simply managing structured data are over. 
Now, organizations must manage semistructured and unstructured content from 
social and mobile sources even though that data may be of questionable quality.
Information management is critical to data security and compliance with con-
tinually evolving regulatory requirements, such as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, Basel III, 
the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA), the USA PATRIOT Act, and the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA).
Issues of information access, management, and security must also deal with 
information degradation and disorder—where people do not understand what data 
mean or how they can be useful.
REASONS FOR 
INFORMATION 
DEFICIENCIES
Companies’ information and decision support technologies have developed over 
many decades. During that time span, there have been different management teams 
with their own priorities and understanding of the role of IT; technology advanced 
in unforeseeable ways, and IT investments were cut or increased based on compet-
ing demands on the budget. These are some of the contributing factors. Other com-
mon reasons why information deficiencies are still a problem include:
1.  Data silos. Information can be trapped in departments’ data silos (also called 
information silos), such as marketing or production databases. Data silos are 
illustrated in Figure 2.4. Since silos are unable to share or exchange data, they 
cannot consistently be updated. When data are inconsistent across multiple 
enterprise applications, data quality cannot (and should not) be trusted without 
extensive verifi cation. Data silos exist when there is no overall IT architecture 
to guide IS investments, data coordination, and communication. Data silos sup-
port a single function and, as a result, do not support an organization’s cross-
functional needs.
For example, most health-care organizations are drowning in data, yet they 
cannot get reliable, actionable insights from these data. Physician notes, regis-
tration forms, discharge summaries, documents, and more are doubling every 
five years. Unlike structured machine-ready data, these are messy data that take 
Data silos are stand-alone 
data stores. Their data are 
not accessible by other ISs 
that need it or outside that 
department.
Information Requirements:
Understandable
Relevant
Timely
Accurate
Secure
Parts Replenish
Procuring
Design
Build
Ship
Sales
Fulfillment
Billing
Support
Customer data
Product data
Procurement data
Contract data
Data order
Parts inventory data
Engineering data
Logistics data
Data Types
Operations
silos
Sourcing
silos
Customer-facing
silos
Figure 2.4 Data (or 
information) silos are ISs that 
do not have the capability to 
exchange data with other ISs, 
making timely coordination 
and communication across 
functions or departments 
diffi cult.

2.1     Information Management     39  
too much time and effort for health-care providers to include in their business 
analysis. So, valuable messy data are routinely left out. Millions of patient notes 
and records sit inaccessible or unavailable in separate clinical data silos because 
historically there has been no easy way to analyze the information.
2.  Lost or bypassed data. Data can get lost in transit from one IS to another. Or, 
data might never get captured because of inadequately tuned data collection 
systems, such as those that rely on sensors or scanners. Or, the data may not get 
captured in suffi cient enough detail, as described in Tech Note 2.1.
3.  Poorly designed interfaces. Despite all the talk about user-friendly interfaces, 
some ISs are horrible to deal with. Poorly designed interfaces or formats that 
require extra time and effort to fi gure out increase the risk of errors from misun-
derstanding the data or ignoring them.
4.  Nonstandardized data formats. When users are presented with data in inconsis-
tent or nonstandardized formats, errors increase. Attempts to compare or ana-
lyze data are more diffi cult and take more time. For example, if the Northeast 
division reports weekly gross sales revenues per product line and the South-
west division reports monthly net sales per product, you cannot compare their 
performance without converting the data to a common format. Consider the 
extra effort needed to compare temperature-related sales, such as air condition-
ers, when some temperatures are expressed in degrees Fahrenheit and others in 
Centigrade.
5.  Cannot hit moving targets. The information that decision makers want keeps 
changing—and changes faster than ISs can respond to because of the fi rst four 
reasons in this list. Tracking tweets, YouTube hits, and other unstructured con-
tent requires expensive investments—which managers fi nd risky in an economic 
downturn.
Without information management, these are the data challenges managers 
have to face. Companies undergoing fast growth or merger activity or those with 
decentralized systems (each division or business unit manages its own IT) will end 
up with a patchwork of reporting processes. As you would expect, patchwork sys-
tems are more complicated to modify, too rigid to support an agile business, and yet 
more expensive to maintain.
TECH NOTE 2.1 Need to Measure in Order to Manage
A residential home construction company had two divisions: standard homes and 
luxury homes. The company was not capturing material, labor, and other costs 
associated with each type of construction. Instead, these costs were pooled, making 
it impossible to allocate costs to each type of construction and then to calculate the 
profi t margins of each division. They had no way of calculating profi t margins on 
each type of home within the divisions. Without the ability to measure costs, they did 
not have any cost control.
 
After upgrading their ISs, they began to capture detailed data at the house level. 
They discovered a wide profi t margin on standard homes, which was hiding the nega-
tive margins (losses) of the luxury home division. Without cost control data, the prof-
itable standard homes division had been subsidizing the luxury home division for 
many years.

40  Chapter 2     Data Governance and IT Architecture Support Long-Term Performance
Executives at a large chemical corporation were supported 
by an information system specifically designed for their 
needs—called an executive information system (EIS). The 
EIS was designed to provide senior managers with internal 
and external data and key performance indicators (KPIs) 
that were relevant to their specific needs. Tech Note 2.2 
describes KPIs. As with any system, the value of the EIS 
depends on the data quality.
Too Much Irrelevant Data
The EIS was a failure. Executives found that only half of 
the data available through the EIS related to their level of 
analysis and decision making—the corporate level. A worse 
problem was that the data they needed were not available 
when and how they wanted them. For example, executives 
needed current detailed sales revenue and cost data for 
every strategic business unit (SBU), product line, and operat-
ing business. Sales and cost data were needed for analysis 
and to compare performance. But, data were not in stan-
dardized format as is needed for accurate comparisons and 
analysis. A large part of the problem was that SBUs reported 
sales revenues in different time frames (e.g., daily, weekly, 
monthly, or quarterly), and many of those reports were not 
available because of delays in preparing them. As a result, 
senior management could not get a trusted view of the com-
pany’s current overall performance and did not know which 
products were profitable.
There were two reasons for the failure of the EIS:
1. IT architecture was not designed for customized 
reporting. The design of the IT architecture had been 
based on financial accounting rules. That is, the data 
were organized to make it easy to collect and consolidate 
the data needed to prepare financial statements and 
reports that had to be submitted to the SEC (Securities 
and Exchange Commission) and other regulatory agen-
cies. These statements and reports have well-defined or 
standardized formats and only need to be prepared at 
specific times during the year, typically annually or quar-
terly. The organization of the data (for financial reporting) 
did not have the flexibility needed for the customized ad 
hoc (unplanned) data needs of the executives. For exam-
ple, it was nearly impossible to generate customized 
sales performance (nonfinancial) reports or do ad hoc 
analyses, such as comparing inventory turnover rates by 
product for each region for each sales quarter. Because 
of lags in reports from various SBUs, executives did not 
trust the underlying data.
2. Complicated user interface. Executives could not easily 
review the KPIs. Instead, they had to sort through screens 
packed with too much data—some of interest and some 
irrelevant. To compensate for poor interface design, sev-
eral IT analysts themselves had to do the data and KPI 
analyses for the executives—delaying response time and 
driving up the cost of reporting.
Solution: New Enterprise IT Architecture 
with Standardized Data Formats
The CIO worked with a task force to design and implement 
an entirely new EA. Data governance policies and proce-
dures were implemented to standardize data formats com-
panywide. Data governance eliminated data inconsistencies 
to provide reliable KPI reports on inventory turns, cycle 
times, and profit margins of all SBUs.
The new architecture was business-driven instead of 
financial reporting-driven. It was easy to modify reports—
eliminating the costly and time-consuming ad hoc analyses. 
Fewer IT resources are needed to maintain the system. 
Because the underlying data are now relatively reliable, EIS 
use by executives increased significantly.
Questions
1. Why was an EIS designed and implemented?
2. What problems did executives have with the EIS?
3. What were the two reasons for those EIS problems?
4. How did the CIO improve the EIS?
5. What are the benefits of the new IT architecture?
6. What are the benefits of data governance?
IT at Work 2 .1
Data Quality Determines Systems Success and Failure

2.1     Information Management     41  
TECH NOTE 2.2 KPIs
KPIs are performance measurements. These measures demonstrate the effective-
ness of a business process at achieving organizational goals. KPIs present data in 
easy-to-comprehend and comparison-ready formats. Examples of key comparisons 
are actual vs. budget, actual vs. forecasted, and this year vs. prior years. KPIs help 
reduce the complex nature of organizational performance to a small number of 
understandable measures, including:
• Financial KPIs: current ratio; accounts payable turnover; inventory turn-
over; net profit margin
• Social media KPIs: social traffic and conversions (number of visitors who 
are converted to customers); likes; new followers per week; social visits and 
leads
• Sales and marketing KPIs: cost per lead; how much revenue a marketing 
campaign generates
• Operational and supply chain KPIs: units per transaction; carrying cost of 
inventory; order status; back order rate
• Environmental and carbon-footprint KPIs: energy, water, or other resource 
use; spend by utility; weight of landfill waste
FACTORS DRIVING 
THE SHIFT FROM SILOS 
TO SHARING AND 
COLLABORATION
BUSINESS BENEFITS 
OF INFORMATION 
MANAGEMENT
Senior executives and managers know about their data silos and information 
management problems, but they also know about the huge cost and disruption 
associated with converting to newer IT architectures. A Tech CEO Council Report 
estimated that Fortune 500 companies waste $480 billion every year on inefficient 
business processes (techceocouncil.org, 2010). However, business process improve-
ments are being made. An IBM study of more than 3,000 CIOs showed that more 
than 80 percent plan to simplify internal processes, which includes integrated siloed 
global applications (IBM Institute, 2011). Companies are struggling to integrate 
thousands of siloed global applications, while aligning them to business operations. 
To remain competitive, they must be able to analyze and adapt their business pro-
cesses quickly, efficiently and without disruption.
Greater investments in collaboration technologies have been reported by the 
research firm Forrester (Keitt, 2011). The three factors that Forrester identified as 
driving the trend toward collaboration and data sharing technology are shown in 
Figure 2.5.
Based on the examples you have read, the obvious benefits of information manage-
ment are the following:
1. Improves decision quality. Decision quality depends on accurate and complete 
data.
2. Improves the accuracy and reliability of management predictions. It is essential 
for managers to be able to predict sales, product demand, opportunities, and 
competitive threats. Management predictions focus on “what is going to happen” 
as opposed to fi nancial reporting on “what has happened.”

42  Chapter 2     Data Governance and IT Architecture Support Long-Term Performance
3. Reduces the risk of noncompliance. Government regulations and compliance 
requirements have increased signifi cantly in the past decade. Companies that 
fail to comply with laws on privacy, fraud, anti-money laundering, cybersecurity, 
occupational safety, and so on face harsh penalties.
4. Reduces the time and cost of locating and integrating relevant information.
Figure 2.5 Factors that 
are increasing demand for 
collaboration technology.
Questions
1. Explain information management.
2. Why do organizations still have information defi ciency problems?
3. What is a data silo?
4. Explain KPIs and give an example.
5. What three factors are driving collaboration and information sharing?
6. What are the business benefi ts of information management?
Every enterprise has a core set of information systems and business processes 
that execute the transactions that keep it in business. Transactions include 
processing orders, order fulfillment and delivery, purchasing inventory and sup-
plies, hiring and paying employees, and paying bills. The enterprise architecture 
(EA) helps or impedes day-to-day operations and efforts to execute business 
strategy.
Success of EA and data governance is measured in financial terms of prof-
itability and return on investment (ROI), and in the nonfinancial terms of 
improved customer satisfaction, faster speed to market, and lower employee 
turnover.
2.2  Enterprise Architecture and Data Governance
MAINTAINING IT–
BUSINESS ALIGNMENT
As you read in Chapter 1, the volume, variety, and velocity of data being collected 
or generated have grown exponentially. As enterprise information systems become 
more complex, the importance of long-range IT planning increases dramatically. 
Companies cannot simply add storage, new apps, or data analytics on an as-needed 
basis and expect those additions to work with the existing systems.
62% of the workforce works
outside an office at some
point. This number is
increasing.
Global, mobile
workforce
Growing number of cloud
collaboration services
Mobility-driven
consumerization
Growing need to connect
anybody, anytime, anywhere
on any device
Principle of “any”
Enterprise architecture (EA) 
is the way IT systems and 
processes are structured. EA 
is an ongoing process of cre-
ating, maintaining, and lever-
aging IT. It helps to solve two 
critical challenges: where an 
organization is going and 
how it will get there.

2.2     Enterprise Architecture and Data Governance     43  
The relationship between complexity and planning is easier to see in physical 
things such as skyscrapers and transportation systems. If you are constructing a 
simple cabin in a remote area, you do not need a detailed plan for expansion or 
to make sure that the cabin fits into its environment. If you are building a simple, 
single-user, nondistributed system, you would not need a well-thought-out growth 
plan either. Therefore, it is no longer feasible to manage big data, content from 
mobiles and social networks, and data in the cloud without the well-designed set of 
plans, or blueprint, provided by EA. The EA guides and controls software add-ons 
and upgrades, hardware, systems, networks, cloud services, and other digital tech-
nology investments.
ONGOING PROCESS 
OF LEVERAGING IT
According to consulting firm Gartner, enterprise architecture is the ongoing process 
of creating, maintaining, and leveraging IT. It helps to solve two critical challenges: 
where an organization is going and how it will get there.
Shared Vision of the Future
EA has to start with the organization’s target–where it is going—not with where it is. 
Gartner recommends that an organization begin by identifying the strategic direc-
tion in which it is heading and the business drivers to which it is responding. The 
goal is to make sure that everyone understands and shares a single vision. As soon 
as managers have defined this single shared vision of the future, they then consider 
the implications of this vision on the business, technical, information, and solutions 
architectures of the enterprise. The shared vision of the future will dictate changes 
in all these architectures, assign priorities to those changes, and keep those changes 
grounded in business value.
Strategic Focus
There are two problems that the EA is designed to address:
1. IT systems’ complexity. IT systems have become unmanageably complex and 
expensive to maintain.
2. Poor business alignment. Organizations fi nd it diffi cult to keep their increasingly 
expensive IT systems aligned with business needs.
Business and IT Benefits of EA
Having the right architecture in place is important for the following reasons:
• EA cuts IT costs and increases productivity by giving decision makers access 
to information, insights, and ideas where and when they need them.
• EA determines an organization’s competitiveness, flexibility, and IT eco-
nomics for the next decade and beyond. That is, it provides a long-term view 
of a company’s processes, systems, and technologies so that IT investments 
do not simply fulfill immediate needs.
• EA helps align IT capabilities with business strategy—to grow, innovate, 
and respond to market demands, supported by an IT practice that is 100 
percent in accord with business objectives.
• EA can reduce the risk of buying or building systems and enterprise apps 
that are incompatible or unnecessarily expensive to maintain and integrate.
Basic EA components are listed and described in Table 2.3. IT at Work 2.2 describes 
Gartner’s view of EA.

44  Chapter 2     Data Governance and IT Architecture Support Long-Term Performance
TABLE 2.3 
Components of Enterprise Architecture
Business architecture 
The processes the business uses to meet its goals.
Application architecture 
 How specifi c applications are designed and how they 
interact with each other.
Data architecture 
 How an enterprise’s data stores are organized and 
accessed.
Technical architecture 
 The hardware and software infrastructure that 
supports applications and their interactions.
In order to keep IT and business in alignment, the EA must 
be a dynamic plan. As shown in the model in Figure 2.6, the 
EA evolves toward the target architecture, which represents 
the company’s future IT needs. According to this model, EA 
defines the following:
1. The organization’s mission, business functions, and future 
direction
2. Information and information flows needed to perform the 
mission
3. The current baseline architecture
4. The desired target architecture
5. The sequencing plan or strategy to progress from the 
baseline to the target architecture.
IT at Work 2 .2
EA Is Dynamic
Figure 2.6 The importance of viewing EA as a 
dynamic and evolving plan. The purpose of the EA is 
to maintain IT–business alignment. Changes in priorities 
and business are refl ected in the target architecture to 
help keep IT aligned with them (GAO, 2010).
Baseline
Transition
Target
Implementation Status
Baseline architecture
Sequencing plan
Target architecture
Essential Skills of an Enterprise Architect
Enterprise architects need much more than technol-
ogy skills. The job performance and success of such 
an architect—or anyone responsible for large-scale IT 
projects—depend on a broad range of skills.
• Interpersonal or people skills. The job requires inter-
acting with people and getting their cooperation.
• Ability to influence and motivate. A large part of 
the job is motivating users to comply with new pro-
cesses and practices.
• Negotiating skills. The project needs resources—
time, money, and personnel—that must be negoti-
ated to get things accomplished.
CAREER INSIGHT 2 . 1

2.2     Enterprise Architecture and Data Governance     45  
• Critical-thinking and problem-solving skills. Architects 
face complex and unique problems. Being able to 
expedite solutions prevents bottlenecks.
• Business and industry expertise. Knowing the busi-
ness and industry improves the outcomes and the 
architect’s credibility.
Managing EA implementations requires someone who 
is able to handle multiple aspects of a project at one 
time. Project management is covered in Chapter 13.
DATA GOVERNANCE: 
MAINTAINING DATA 
QUALITY AND COST 
CONTROL
Data governance is the process of creating and agreeing to standards and require-
ments for the collection, identification, storage, and use of data. The success of 
every data-driven strategy or marketing effort depends on data governance. Data 
governance policies must address structured, semistructured, and unstructured data 
(discussed in Section 2.3) to ensure that insights can be trusted.
Enterprisewide Data Governance
With an effective data governance program, managers can determine where their 
data are coming from, who owns them, and who is responsible for what—in order 
to know they can trust the available data when needed. Data governance is an 
enterprise-wide project because data cross boundaries and are used by people 
throughout the enterprise. New regulations and pressure to reduce costs have increased 
the importance of effective data governance. Governance eliminates the cost of 
maintaining and archiving bad, unneeded, or wrong data. These costs grow as the 
volume of data grows. Governance also reduces the legal risks associated with 
unmanaged or inconsistently managed information.
Three industries that depend on data governance to comply with regulations or 
reporting requirements are the following:
• Food industry. In the food industry, data governance is required to comply 
with food safety regulations. Food manufacturers and retailers have sophis-
ticated control systems in place so that if a contaminated food product, such 
as spinach or peanut butter, is detected, they are able to trace the problem 
back to a particular processing plant or even the farm at the start of the food 
chain.
• Financial services industry. In the financial services sector, strict report-
ing requirements of the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer 
Protection Act of 2010 are leading to greater use of data governance. The 
Dodd–Frank Act regulates Wall Street practices by enforcing transparency 
and accountability in an effort to prevent another significant financial crisis 
like the one that occurred in 2008.
• Health-care industry. Data are health care’s most valuable asset. Hospitals 
have mountains of electronic patient information. New health-care account-
ability and reporting obligations require data governance models for trans-
parency to defend against fraud and to protect patients’ information.
As you read in the Intel Security opening case, data governance and MDM are 
a powerful combination. As data sources and volumes continue to increase, so does 
the need to manage data as a strategic asset in order to extract its full value. Making 
business data consistent, trusted, and accessible across the enterprise is a critical 
first step in customer-centric business models. With data governance, companies 

46  Chapter 2     Data Governance and IT Architecture Support Long-Term Performance
are able to extract maximum value from their data, specifically by making better 
use of opportunities that are buried within behavioral data. According to Adele 
Pugliese, data governance director of Toronto-based Scotiabank, “If we are able 
to leverage and understand the data, and achieve integrity and a level of accuracy 
with that data, in terms of our touchpoints with the customers, we should be able to 
change that customer experience and take it to the next level where we know a lot 
more about our customers” (Hamilton, 2013).
Master Data and MDM
Master data describe key entities such as customers, products and services, vendors, 
locations, and employees around which business is conducted. Master data are typi-
cally quite stable—and fundamentally different from the high volume, velocity, and 
variety of big data and traditional data. For example, when a customer applies for 
automobile insurance, data provided on the application become the master data 
for that customer. In contrast, if the customer’s vehicle has a device that sends data 
about his or her driving behavior to the insurer, those machine-generated data are 
transactional or operational, but not master data.
Data are used in two ways—both depend on high-quality trustworthy data:
1. For running the business: Transactional or operational use
2. For improving the business: Analytic use
Strong data governance is needed to manage the availability, usability, integrity, 
and security of the data used throughout the enterprise so that data are of sufficient 
quality to meet business needs. The characteristics and consequences of weak or 
nonexistent data governance are listed in Table 2.4.
MDM solutions can be complex and expensive. Given their complexity and 
cost, most MDM solutions are out of reach for small and medium companies. 
Vendors have addressed this challenge by offering cloud-managed MDM ser-
vices. For example, in 2013 Dell Software launched its next-generation Dell Boomi 
MDM. Dell Boomi provides MDM, data management, and data quality services 
(DQS)—and they are 100 percent cloud-based with near real time synchronization.
Politics: The People Conflict
In an organization, there may be a culture of distrust between the technology and 
business employees. No enterprise architecture methodology or data governance 
can bridge this divide unless there is a genuine commitment to change. That com-
mitment must come from the highest level of the organization—senior management. 
Methodologies cannot solve people problems; they can only provide a framework in 
which those problems can be solved.
TABLE 2.4 
 Characteristics and Consequences of Weak or Nonexistent 
Data Governance
• 
Data duplication causes isolated data silos.
• 
Inconsistency exists in the meaning and level of detail of data elements.
• 
Users do not trust the data and waste time verifying the data rather than 
analyzing them for appropriate decision making.
• 
Leads to inaccurate data analysis.
• 
Bad decisions are made on perception rather than reality, which can negatively 
affect the company and its customers.
• 
Results in increased workloads and processing time.

2.3     Information Systems: The Basics     47  
Questions
1. Explain the relationship between complexity and planning. Give an 
example.
2. Explain enterprise architecture.
3. What are the four components of EA?
4. What are the business benefi ts of EA?
5. How can EA maintain alignment between IT and business strategy?
6. What are the two ways that data are used in an organization?
7. What is the function of data governance?
8. Why has interest in data governance and MDM increased?
9. What role does personal confl ict or politics play in the success of data 
governance?
Information systems (ISs) are built to achieve specific goals, such as processing cus-
tomer orders and payroll. In general, ISs process data into meaningful information 
and knowledge.
2.3  Information Systems: The Basics
DATA, INFORMATION, 
AND KNOWLEDGE
Data, or raw data, describe products, customers, events, activities, and transactions 
that are recorded, classified, and stored. Data are the raw material from which 
information is produced; the quality, reliability, and integrity of the data must be 
maintained for the information to be useful. Examples are the number of hours an 
employee worked in a certain week or the number of new Toyota vehicles sold in 
the first quarter of 2015.
A database is a repository or data store that is organized for efficient access, 
search, retrieval, and update.
Information is data that have been processed, organized, or put into context 
so that they have meaning and value to the person receiving them. For example, 
the quarterly sales of new Toyota vehicles from 2010 through 2014 is information 
because it would give some insight into how the vehicle recalls during 2009 and 2010 
impacted sales. Information is an organization’s most important asset, second only 
to people.
Knowledge consists of data and/or information that have been processed, 
organized, and put into context to be meaningful, and to convey understanding, 
experience, accumulated learning, and expertise as they apply to a current problem 
or activity. Knowing how to manage a vehicle recall to minimize negative impacts 
on new vehicle sales is an example of knowledge. Figure 2.7 shows the differences 
in data, information, and knowledge.
ISs collect or input and process data, distribute reports or other outputs that 
support decision making and business processes. Figure 2.8 shows the input-
processing-output (IPO) model.
Figure 2.9 shows how major types of ISs relate to one another and how data 
flow among them. In this example,
1. Data from online purchases are captured and processed by the TPS, or transac-
tion processing system and then stored in the transactional database.
2. Data needed for reporting purposes are extracted from the database and used 
by the MIS (management information system) to create periodic, ad hoc, or 
other types of reports.

48  Chapter 2     Data Governance and IT Architecture Support Long-Term Performance
Figure 2.7 Examples of data, 
information, and knowledge.
Figure 2.8 Input-processing-
output model.
Figure 2.9 Flow of data 
from the point of sale (POS) 
through processing, storage, 
reporting, decision support, 
and analysis. Also shows 
the relationships among 
information systems.
Q1-
2008 2008
Q2-
2008
Q3-
2008
Q4-
2009
Q1-
2009
Q2-
2009
Q3-
2009
Q4-
2010
Q1-
2010
Q2-
2010
Q3-
2010
Q4-
Number of new vehicles sold in the
1st quarter of 2010 (Q1-2010)
Information
Data
Managing a vehicle recall in a way that minimizes
negative impacts on new vehicle sales and net income
Knowledge
Storage
Temporary memory (RAM), hard disks, flash memory, cloud
People
Users, clients, customers, operators, technicians, governments, companies
Sending
results,
collecting
data,
feedback
Communication
Working with
information,
changing,
calculating,
manipulating
Processing
Data collected,
captured,
scanned,
snapped from
transactions
Input
Showing
results on
screen,
hardcopy, digital
copy, archive
Output
Data
Data
Data
Data are extracted,
transformed, &
loaded (ETL)
Data from online
purchases
of transactional 
data
Database
Reporting
MIS
Models applied to
data for analysis
DSS
Processes raw
data
TPS
Analytical processing
of data to discover
trends and learn
insights
Data Warehouse

2.3     Information Systems: The Basics     49  
TRANSACTION 
PROCESSING SYSTEMS
Transaction processing systems (TPSs) are designed to process specific types of 
data input from ongoing transactions. TPSs can be manual, as when data are typed 
into a form on a screen, or automated by using scanners or sensors to capture bar-
codes or other data (Figure 2.10).
Organizational data are processed by a TPS—sales orders, payroll, accounting, 
financial, marketing, purchasing, inventory control, and so forth. Transactions are 
either:
• Internal transactions that originate within the organization or that occur 
within the organization. Examples are payroll, purchases, budget trans-
fers, and payments (in accounting terms, they are referred to as accounts 
payable).
• External transactions that originate from outside the organization, for 
example, from customers, suppliers, regulators, distributors, and financing 
institutions.
TPSs are essential systems. Transactions that are not captured can result in lost 
sales, dissatisfied customers, and many other types of data errors with finan-
cial impacts. For example, if the accounting department issued a check to pay 
an invoice (bill) and it was cashed by the recipient, but information about that 
transaction was not captured, then two things happen. First, the amount of cash 
listed on the company’s financial statements is wrong because no deduction was 
made for the amount of the check. Second, the accounts payable (A/P) system 
3. Data are output to a decision-support system (DSS) where they are analyzed 
using formulas, fi nancial ratios, or models.
Data collected by the TPS are converted into reports by the MIS and analyzed by 
the DSS to support decision making. Corporations, government agencies, the mili-
tary, health care, medical research, major league sports, and nonprofits depend on 
their DSSs at all levels of the organization. Innovative DSSs create and help sustain 
competitive advantages. DSSs reduce waste in production operations, improve 
inventory management, support investment decisions, and predict demand. The 
model of a DSS consists of a set of formulas and functions, such as statistical, finan-
cial, optimization, and/or simulation models.
Customer data, sales, and other critical data are selected for additional analy-
sis, such as trend analysis or forecasting demand. These data are extracted from 
the database, transformed into a standard format, and then loaded into a data 
warehouse.
Figure 2.10 Scanners 
automate the input of data 
into a transaction processing 
system (TPS).
© Jan_Neville/iStockphoto

50  Chapter 2     Data Governance and IT Architecture Support Long-Term Performance
will continue to show the invoice as unpaid, so the accounting department might 
pay it a second time. Likewise, if services are provided, but the transactions are 
not recorded, the company will not bill for them and thus not collect that service 
revenue.
Batch vs. Online Real Time Processing
Data captured by a TPS are processed and stored in a database; they then become 
available for use by other systems. Processing of transactions is done in one of two 
modes:
1. Batch processing: A TPS in batch processing mode collects all transaction for 
a day, shift, or other time period, and then processes the data and updates the 
data stores. Payroll processing done weekly or bi-weekly is an example of batch 
mode.
2. Online transaction processing (OLTP) or real time processing: The TPS pro-
cesses each transaction as it occurs, which is what is meant by the term real time 
processing. In order for OLTP to occur, the input device or website must be 
directly linked via a network to the TPS. Airlines need to process fl ight reserva-
tions in real time to verify that seats are available.
Batch processing costs less than real time processing. A disadvantage is that data 
are inaccurate because they are not updated immediately, in real time.
Processing Impacts Data Quality
As data are collected or captured, they are validated to detect and correct obvi-
ous errors and omissions. For example, when a customer sets up an account with a 
financial services firm or retailer, the TPS validates that the address, city, and postal 
code provided are consistent with one another and also that they match the credit 
card holder’s address, city, and postal code. If the form is not complete or errors 
are detected, the customer is required to make the corrections before the data are 
processed any further.
Data errors detected later may be time-consuming to correct or cause other 
problems. You can better understand the difficulty of detecting and correcting 
errors by considering identity theft. Victims of identity theft face enormous chal-
lenges and frustration trying to correct data about them.
MANAGEMENT 
INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS
Functional areas or departments—accounting, finance, production/operations, 
marketing and sales, human resources, and engineering and design—are supported 
by ISs designed for their particular reporting needs. General-purpose reporting 
systems are referred to as management information systems (MISs). Their objective 
is to provide reports to managers for tracking operations, monitoring, and control.
Typically, a functional system provides reports about such topics as operational 
efficiency, effectiveness, and productivity by extracting information from databases 
and processing it according to the needs of the user. Types of reports include the 
following:
• Periodic: These reports are created or run according to a pre-set schedule. 
Examples are daily, weekly, and quarterly. Reports are easily distributed via 
e-mail, blogs, internal websites (called intranets), or other electronic media. 
Periodic reports are also easily ignored if workers do nott find them worth 
the time to review.
• Exception: Exception reports are generated only when something is outside 
the norm, either higher or lower than expected. Sales in hardware stores 
prior to a hurricane may be much higher than the norm. Or sales of fresh 

2.3     Information Systems: The Basics     51  
produce may drop during a food contamination crisis. Exception reports are 
more likely to be read because workers know that some unusual event or 
deviation has occurred.
• Ad hoc, or on demand: Ad hoc reports are unplanned reports. They are gen-
erated to a mobile device or computer on demand as needed. They are gener-
ated on request to learn more about a situation, problem, or opportunity.
Reports typically include interactive data visualizations, such as column and pie 
charts, as shown in Figure 2.11.
Functional information systems that support business analysts and other 
departmental employees can be fairly complex, depending on the type of employ-
ees supported. The following examples show the support that IT provides to major 
functional areas.
1. Bolsa de Comercio de Santiago, a large stock exchange in Chile, processes 
high-volume trading in microseconds using IBM software. The stock exchange 
increased its transaction capacity by 900 percent by 2011. The Chilean stock 
exchange system can do the detective work of analyzing current and past 
transactions and market information, learning and adapting to market trends 
and connecting its traders to business information in real time. Immediate 
throughput in combination with analytics allows traders to make more accu-
rate decisions.
2. According to the New England Journal of Medicine, 1 in 5 patients suffers from 
preventable readmissions, which cost taxpayers over $17 billion a year. Begin-
ning in 2012, hospitals have been penalized for high readmission rates with cuts 
to the payments they receive from the government (Miliard, 2011). Using a DSS 
and predictive analytics, the health-care industry can leverage unstructured in-
formation in ways not possible before, according to Charles J. Barnett, president/
CEO of Seton Health Care. “With this solution, we can access an integrated view 
of relevant clinical and operational information to drive more informed decision 
making. For example, by predicting which patients might be readmitted, we can 
reduce costly and preventable readmissions, decrease mortality rates, and ulti-
mately improve the quality of life for our patients” (Miliard, 2011).
DECISION SUPPORT 
SYSTEMS
Decision support systems (DSSs) are interactive applications that support decision 
making. Configurations of a DSS range from relatively simple applications that 
support a single user to complex enterprisewide systems. A DSS can support the 
analysis and solution of a specific problem, evaluate a strategic opportunity, or sup-
port ongoing operations. These systems support unstructured and semistructured 
decisions, such as make-or-buy-or-outsource decisions, or what products to develop 
and introduce into existing markets.
Figure 2.11 Sample report 
produced by an MIS.
© Damir Karan/iStockphoto

52  Chapter 2     Data Governance and IT Architecture Support Long-Term Performance
Degree of Structure of Decisions
Decisions range from structured to unstructured. Structured decisions are those 
that have a well-defined method for solving and the data necessary to reach a sound 
decision. An example of a structured decision is determining whether an applicant 
qualifies for an auto loan, or whether to extend credit to a new customer—and the 
terms of those financing options. Structured decisions are relatively straightforward 
and made on a regular basis, and an IS can ensure that they are done consistently.
At the other end of the continuum are unstructured decisions that depend on 
human intelligence, knowledge, and/or experience—as well as data and models to 
solve. Examples include deciding which new products to develop or which new mar-
kets to enter. Semistructured decisions fall in the middle of the continuum. DSSs 
are best suited to support these types of decisions, but they are also used to support 
unstructured ones. To provide such support, DSSs have certain characteristics to 
support the decision maker and the overall decision-making process.
Three Defining DSS Characteristics
These characteristics of DSSs include:
1. An easy-to-use interactive interface
2. Models or formulas that enable sensitivity analysis, what-if analysis, goal seek-
ing, and risk analysis
3. Data from multiple sources—internal and external sources plus data added by 
the decision maker who may have insights relevant to the decision situation
Having models is what distinguishes DSS from MIS. Some models are devel-
oped by end users through an interactive and iterative process. Decision makers can 
manipulate models to conduct experiments and sensitivity analyses, for example, 
what-if and goal seeking. What-if analysis refers to changing assumptions or data in 
the model to observe the impacts of those changes on the outcome. For example, if 
sale forecasts are based on a 5 percent increase in customer demand, a what-if anal-
ysis would replace the 5 percent with higher and/or lower estimates to determine 
what would happen to sales if demand changed. With goal seeking, the decision 
maker has a specific outcome in mind and needs to figure out how that outcome 
could be achieved and whether it is feasible to achieve that desired outcome. A DSS 
can also estimate the risk of alternative strategies or actions.
California Pizza Kitchen (CPK) uses a DSS to support inventory decisions. 
CPK has 77 restaurants located in various states in the United States. Maintaining 
optimal inventory levels at all restaurants was challenging and time-consuming. A 
DSS was built to make it easy for the chain’s managers to maintain updated records 
and make decisions. Many CPK restaurants increased sales by 5 percent after 
implementing a DSS.
Building DSS Applications
Planners Lab is an example of software for building DSSs. The software is free to 
academic institutions and can be downloaded from plannerslab.com. Planners Lab 
includes:
• An easy-to-use model-building language
• An easy-to-use option for visualizing model output, such as answers to what-if 
and goal-seeking questions, to analyze the impacts of different assumptions
These tools enable managers and analysts to build, review, and challenge the 
assumptions upon which their decision scenarios are based. With Planners Lab, 
decision makers can experiment and play with assumptions to assess multiple views 
of the future.

2.4     Data Centers, Cloud Computing, and Virtualization     53  
DATABASE VOLATILITY 
AND DATA 
WAREHOUSING
Given the huge number of transactions, the data in databases are constantly in use 
or being updated. This characteristic of databases—referred to as volatility—makes 
it impossible to use them for complex decision-making and problem-solving tasks. 
For this reason, data are extracted from the database transformed (processed to 
standardize the data), and then loaded into a data warehouse. As a result of the 
extract, transformation, and load (ETL), operations data in the data warehouse are 
better formatted for analyses.
ISS EXIST WITHIN 
A CULTURE
ISs do not exist in isolation. They have a purpose and a social (organizational) 
context. A common purpose is to provide a solution to a business problem. The 
social context of the system consists of the values and beliefs that determine what 
is admissible and possible within the culture of the organization and among the 
people involved. For example, a company may believe that superb customer service 
and on-time delivery are critical success factors. This belief system influences IT 
investments, among other factors.
The business value of IT is determined by the people who use them, the busi-
ness processes they support, and the culture of the organization. That is, IS value 
is determined by the relationships among ISs, people, and business processes—all 
of which are influenced strongly by organizational culture, as shown in Figure 2.12.
Figure 2.12 Organizational 
culture plays a signifi cant 
role in the use and benefi ts 
of Information systems.
Questions
1. Contrast data, information, and knowledge.
2. Defi ne TPS and give an example.
3. When is batch processing used?
4. When are real time processing capabilities needed?
5. Explain why TPSs need to process incoming data before they are 
stored.
6. Defi ne MIS and DSS and give an example of each.
7. Why are databases inappropriate for doing data analysis?
On-premises data centers, virtualization, and cloud computing are types of IT 
infrastructures or computing systems. Long ago, there were few IT infrastructure 
options. Mostly, companies owned their servers, storage, and network com-
ponents to support their business applications and these computing resources 
were on their premises. Now, there are several choices for an IT infrastructure 
2.4  Data Centers, Cloud Computing, and Virtualization
Organizational Culture
Information
Systems:
hardware, software,
networks, and data
Business
Processes
People

54  Chapter 2     Data Governance and IT Architecture Support Long-Term Performance
strategy—including virtualization and cloud computing. As is common to IT 
investments, each infrastructure configuration has strengths, weaknesses, and cost 
considerations.
DATA CENTERS
A data center consists of a large number of network servers (Figure 2.13) used for the 
storage, processing, management, distribution, and archiving of data, systems, Web 
traffic, services, and enterprise applications. Data center also refers to the building or 
facility that houses the servers and equipment. Here are some examples of data centers:
• National Climatic Data Center. The National Climatic Data Center is an 
example of a public data center that stores and manages the world’s largest 
archive of weather data.
• U.S. National Security Agency. The National Security Agency’s (NSA) data 
center in Bluffdale, UT, shown in Figure 2.14, opened in the fall of 2013. It 
is the largest spy data center for the NSA. People who think their corre-
spondence and postings through sites like Google, Facebook, and Apple are 
safe from prying eyes should rethink that belief. You will read more about 
reports exposing government data collection programs in Chapter 5.
• Apple. Apple has a 500,000-square-foot data center in Maiden, NC, that 
houses servers for various iCloud and iTunes services. The center plays 
a vital role in the company’s back-end IT infrastructure. In 2014 Apple 
expanded this center with a new, smaller 14,250 square-foot tactical data 
center that also includes office space, meeting areas, and breakrooms.
Companies may own and manage their own on-premises data centers or pay 
for the use of their vendors’ data centers, such as in cloud computing, virtualization, 
and software, as service arrangements (Figure 2.15).
Figure 2.13 A row of 
network servers in data 
center.
Figure 2.14 The NSA 
data center (shown under 
construction) opened in the 
fall of 2013 in Bluffdale, UT. It 
is the largest spy data center 
for the NSA. People who 
believe their correspondence 
and postings through sites 
like Google, Facebook, and 
Apple are safe from prying 
eyes should think again.
© Oleksiy Mark/Shutterstock
© epa european pressphoto 
agency b.v./Alamy

2.4     Data Centers, Cloud Computing, and Virtualization     55  
Since only the company owns the infrastructure, a data center is more suitable 
for organizations that run many different types of applications and have complex 
workloads. A data center, like a factory, has limited capacity. Once it is built, the 
amount of storage and the workload the center can handle does not change without 
purchasing and installing more equipment.
When a Data Center Goes Down, so Does Business
Data center failures disrupt all operations regardless of who owns the data center. 
Here are two examples.
• Uber. The startup company Uber experienced an hour-long outage in 
February 2014 that brought its car-hailing service to a halt across the coun-
try. The problem was caused by an outage at its vendor’s West Coast data 
center. Uber users flooded social media sites with complaints about prob-
lems kicking off Uber’s app to summon a driver-for-hire.
• WhatsApp. WhatsApp also experienced a server outage in early 2014 that took 
the service offline for 2.5 hours. WhatsApp is a smartphone text-messaging 
service that had been bought by Facebook for $19 billion. “Sorry we currently 
experiencing server issues. We hope to be back up and recovered shortly,” 
WhatsApp said in a message on Twitter that was retweeted more than 25,000 
times in just a few hours. The company has grown rapidly to 450 million active 
users within five years, nearly twice as many as Twitter. More than two-thirds of 
these global users use the app daily. WhatsApp’s’ server failure drove millions 
of users to a competitor. Line, a messaging app developed in Japan, added 2 
million new registered users within 24 hours of WhatsApp’s outage—the big-
gest increase in Line’s user base within a 24-hour period.
These outages point to the risks of maintaining the complex and sophisticated 
technology needed to power digital services used by millions or hundreds of mil-
lions of people.
Figure 2.15 Data centers 
are the infrastructure 
underlying cloud computing, 
virtualization, networking, 
security, delivery systems, 
and software as a service. 
Many of these issues are 
discussed in this chapter.
© Michael D Brown/Shutterstock
INTEGRATING DATA TO 
COMBAT DATA CHAOS
An enterprise’s data are stored in many different or remote locations—creating 
data chaos at times. And some data may be duplicated so that they are available 
in multiple locations that need a quick response. Therefore, the data needed for 
planning, decision making, operations, queries, and reporting are scattered or dupli-
cated across numerous servers, data centers, devices, and cloud services. Disparate 
data must be unified or integrated in order for the organization to function.

56  Chapter 2     Data Governance and IT Architecture Support Long-Term Performance
Unified Data Center
One solution is Cisco’s Unified Data Center (UDC). UDC can significantly speed 
up the integration and consolidation of data and cut data center costs. UDC inte-
grates compute, storage, networking, virtualization, and management into a single 
or unified platform. That platform provides an infrastructure that simplifies data 
management and improves business agility or responsiveness. UDC can run appli-
cations more quickly in virtual and cloud computing environments.
Data Virtualization
Cisco provides data virtualization, which gives greater IT flexibility. Using virtual-
ization methods, enterprises can respond to change more quickly and make better 
decisions in real time without physically moving their data, which significantly cuts 
costs. Cisco Data Virtualization makes it possible to:
• Have instant access to data at any time and in any format.
• Respond faster to changing data analytics needs.
• Cut complexity and costs.
Compared to traditional (nonvirtual) data integration and replication methods, 
Cisco Data Virtualization accelerates time to value with:
• Greater agility: speeds 5 to 10 times faster than traditional data integration 
methods
• Streamlined approach: 50 to 75 percent time savings over data replication 
and consolidation methods
• Better insight: instant access to data
Cisco offers videos on cloud computing, virtualization, and other IT infrastruc-
tures at its video portal at video.cisco.com.
CLOUD COMPUTING 
INCREASES AGILITY
In a business world where first movers gain the advantage, IT responsiveness and 
agility provide a competitive edge. Yet, many IT infrastructures are extremely 
expensive to manage and too complex to easily adapt. A common solution is cloud 
computing. Cloud computing is the general term for infrastructures that use the 
Internet and private networks to access, share, and deliver computing resources. 
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) more precisely defines 
cloud computing as “a model for enabling convenient, on-demand network access to 
a shared pool of configuration computing resources that can be rapidly provisioned 
and released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction” 
(NIST, 2012).
SELECTING A CLOUD 
VENDOR
Because cloud is still a relatively new and evolving business model, the decision to 
select a cloud service provider should be approached with even greater diligence 
than other IT decisions. As cloud computing becomes an increasingly important 
part of the IT delivery model, assessing and selecting the right cloud provider also 
become the most strategic decisions that business leaders undertake. Providers are 
not created equally, so it is important to investigate each provider’s offerings prior to 
subscribing. When selecting and investing in cloud services, there are several service 
factors a vendor needs to address. These evaluation factors are listed in Table 2.5.
Vendor Management and Service-Level Agreements
The move to the cloud is also a move to vendor-managed services and cloud service-
level agreements (SLAs). An SLA is a negotiated agreement between a company 

2.4     Data Centers, Cloud Computing, and Virtualization     57  
and service provider that can be a legally binding contract or an informal contract. 
You can review an example of the Google Apps SLA by visiting its website at 
Google.com and searching for “SLA.” Staff experienced in managing outsourcing 
projects may have the necessary expertise for managing work in the cloud and polic-
ing SLAs with vendors. The goal is not building the best SLA terms, but getting the 
terms that are most meaningful to the business.
The Cloud Standards Customer Council published the Practical Guide to 
Cloud Service Level Agreements (2012), which brings together numerous customer 
experiences into a single guide for IT and business leaders who are considering 
cloud adoption. According to this guide, an SLA serves:
as a means of formally documenting the service(s), performance expectations, 
responsibilities and limits between cloud service providers and their users. A 
typical SLA describes levels of service using various attributes such as: availability, 
TABLE 2.5 
 Service Factors to Consider when Evaluating Cloud Vendors 
or Service Providers
Factors 
Examples of Questions to Be Addressed
Delays 
 What are the estimated server delays and network 
delays?
Workloads 
 What is the volume of data and processing that can be 
handled during a specifi c amount of time?
Costs 
 What are the costs associated with workloads across 
multiple cloud computing platforms?
Security  
 How are data and networks secured against attacks? 
Are data encrypted and how strong is the encryption? 
What are network security practices?
Disaster recovery  
How is service outage defi ned? What level of
and business  
redundancy is in place to minimize outages, including
continuity 
backup services in different geographical regions? If a 
 
natural disaster or outage occurs, how will cloud 
 
services be continued?
Technical expertise  
Does the vendor have expertise in your industry or
and understanding 
business processes? Does the vendor understand what 
 
 you need to do and have the technical expertise to 
fulfi ll those obligations?
Insurance in case  
Does the vendor provide cloud insurance to mitigate
of failure 
 user losses in case of service failure or damage? This is 
a new and important concept.
Third-party audit, or  
Can the vendor show objective proof with an audit
an unbiased assessment  
that it can live up to the promises it is making?
of the ability to rely on 
the service provided by 
the vendor

58  Chapter 2     Data Governance and IT Architecture Support Long-Term Performance
serviceability, performance, operations, billing, and penalties associated with 
violations of such attributes. (Cloud Standards Customer Council, 2012, pp. 5–6.)
Implementing an effective management process is an important step in ensur-
ing internal and external user satisfaction with cloud services.
CLOUD VS. DATA 
CENTER: WHAT IS THE 
DIFFERENCE?
A main difference between a cloud and data center is that a cloud is an off-premise 
form of computing that stores data on the Internet. In contrast, a data center refers 
to on-premises hardware and equipment that store data within an organization’s 
local network. Cloud services are outsourced to a third-party cloud provider who 
manages the updates, security, and ongoing maintenance. Data centers are typically 
run by an in-house IT department.
Cloud computing is the delivery of computing and storage resources as a ser-
vice to end-users over a network. Cloud systems are scalable. That is, they can be 
adjusted to meet changes in business needs. At the extreme, the cloud’s capacity is 
unlimited depending on the vendor’s offerings and service plans. A drawback of the 
cloud is control because a third party manages it. Companies do not have as much 
control as they do with a data center. And unless the company uses a private cloud 
within its network, it shares computing and storage resources with other cloud users 
in the vendor’s public cloud. Public clouds allow multiple clients to access the same 
virtualized services and utilize the same pool of servers across a public network. In 
contrast, private clouds are single-tenant environments with stronger security and 
control for regulated industries and critical data. In effect, private clouds retain all 
the IT security and control provided by traditional data center infrastructures with 
the advantage of cloud computing.
Companies often use an arrangement of both on-premises data centers and 
cloud computing (Figure 2.16).
A data center is physically connected to a local network, which makes it easier 
to restrict access to apps and information to only authorized, company-approved 
people and equipment. However, the cloud is accessible by anyone with the proper 
credentials and Internet connection. This accessibility arrangement increases expo-
sure to company data at many more entry and exit points.
CLOUD 
INFRASTRUCTURE
The cloud has greatly expanded the options for enterprise IT infrastructures 
because any device that accesses the Internet can access, share, and deliver data. 
Cloud computing is a valuable infrastructure because it:
1. Provides a dynamic infrastructure that makes apps and computing power avail-
able on demand. Apps and power are available on demand because they are 
provided as a service. For example, any software that is provided on demand is 
referred to as software as a service, or SaaS. Typical SaaS products are Google 
Apps and Salesforce.com. Section 2.5 discussed SaaS and other cloud services.
2. Helps companies become more agile and responsive while signifi cantly reducing 
IT costs and complexity through improved workload optimization and service 
delivery.
Move to Enterprise Clouds
A majority of large organizations have hundreds or thousands of software licenses 
that support business processes, such as licenses for Microsoft Office, Oracle database 
management, IBM CRM (customer relationship management), and various network 
security software. Managing software and their licenses involves deploying, provi-
sioning, and updating them—all of which are time-consuming and expensive. Cloud 
computing overcomes these problems.

2.4     Data Centers, Cloud Computing, and Virtualization     59  
Figure 2.16 Corporate IT 
infrastructures can consist of 
an on-premises data center 
and off-premises cloud 
computing.
ISSUES IN MOVING 
WORKLOADS FROM 
THE ENTERPRISE TO 
THE CLOUD
Building a cloud strategy is a challenge, and moving existing apps to the cloud is 
stressful. Despite the business and technical benefits, the risk exists of disrupting 
operations or customers in the process. With the cloud, the network and WAN 
(wide area network) become an even more critical part of the IT infrastructure. 
Greater network bandwidth is needed to support the increase in network traffic. 
And, putting part of the IT architecture or workload into the cloud requires dif-
ferent management approaches, different IT skills, and knowing how to manage 
vendor relationships and contracts.
Infrastructure Issues
There is a big difference because cloud computing runs on a shared infrastructure, 
so the arrangement is less customized to a specific company’s requirements. A 
comparison to help understand the challenges is that outsourcing is like renting an 
apartment, while the cloud is like getting a room at a hotel.
With cloud computing, it may be more difficult to get to the root of perfor-
mance problems, like the unplanned outages that occurred with Google’s Gmail 
and Workday’s human resources apps. The trade-off is cost vs. control.
Increasing demand for faster and more powerful computers, and increases in 
the number and variety of applications are driving the need for more capable IT 
architectures.
VIRTUALIZATION AND 
VIRTUAL MACHINES
Computer hardware had been designed to run a single operating system (OS) and 
a single app, which leaves most computers vastly underutilized. Virtualization is a 
technique that creates a virtual (i.e., nonphysical) layer and multiple virtual machines 
(VMs) to run on a single physical machine. The virtual (or virtualization) layer makes 
it possible for each VM to share the resources of the hardware. Figure 2.17 shows the 
relationship among the VMs and physical hardware.
© Kittichai/Shutterstock 

60  Chapter 2     Data Governance and IT Architecture Support Long-Term Performance
What Is a Virtual Machine?
Just as virtual reality is not real, but a software-created world, a virtual machine is 
a software-created computer. Technically, a virtual machine (VM) is created by a 
software layer, called the virtualization layer, as shown in Figure 2.17. That layer 
has its own Windows or other OS and apps, such as Microsoft Office, as if it were 
an actual physical computer. A VM behaves exactly like a physical computer and 
contains its own virtual—that is, software-based—CPU, RAM (random access 
memory), hard drive, and network interface card (NIC). An OS cannot tell the dif-
ference between a VM and a physical machine, nor can apps or other computers 
on a network tell the difference. Even the VM thinks it is a “real” computer. Users 
can set up multiple real computers to function as a single PC through virtualization 
to pool resources to create a more powerful VM.
Virtualization is a concept that has several meanings in IT and therefore sev-
eral definitions. The major type of virtualization is hardware virtualization, which 
remains popular and widely used. Virtualization is often a key part of an enter-
prise’s disaster recovery plan. In general, virtualization separates business applica-
tions and data from hardware resources. This separation allows companies to pool 
hardware resources—rather than dedicate servers to applications—and assign those 
resources to applications as needed.
The major types of virtualization are the following:
• Storage virtualization is the pooling of physical storage from multiple net-
work storage devices into what appears to be a single storage device man-
aged from a central console.
• Network virtualization combines the available resources in a network by 
splitting the network load into manageable parts, each of which can be 
assigned (or reassigned) to a particular server on the network.
• Hardware virtualization is the use of software to emulate hardware or a total 
computer environment other than the one the software is actually running 
in. It allows a piece of hardware to run multiple operating system images at 
once. This kind of software is sometimes known as a virtual machine.
Virtualization Characteristics and Benefits
Virtualization increases the flexibility of IT assets, allowing companies to consoli-
date IT infrastructure, reduce maintenance and administration costs, and prepare 
for strategic IT initiatives. Virtualization is not primarily about cost-cutting, which 
Figure 2.17 Virtual machines 
running on a simple 
computer hardware layer.
Application
Virtualization Layer
Hardware Layer
Operating
System
Application
Operating
System
Application
Operating
System
Virtual Machines

2.4     Data Centers, Cloud Computing, and Virtualization     61  
is a tactical reason. More importantly, for strategic reasons, virtualization is used 
because it enables flexible sourcing and cloud computing.
The characteristics and benefits of virtualization are as follows:
1. Memory-intensive. VMs need a huge amount of RAM (random access memory, 
or primary memory) because of their massive processing requirements.
2. Energy-effi cient. Minimizes energy consumed running and cooling servers in 
the data center—representing up to a 95 percent reduction in energy use per 
server.
3. Scalability and load balancing. When a big event happens, such as the Super 
Bowl, millions of people go to a website at the same time. Virtualization pro-
vides load balancing to handle the demand for requests to the site. The VMware 
infrastructure automatically distributes the load across a cluster of physical serv-
ers to ensure the maximum performance of all running VMs. Load balancing is 
key to solving many of today’s IT challenges.
Virtualization consolidates servers, which reduces the cost of servers, makes 
more efficient use of data center space, and reduces energy consumption. All of 
these factors reduce the total cost of ownership (TCO). Over a three-year life cycle, 
a VM costs approximately 75 percent less to operate than a physical server.
Liberty Wines supplies to restaurants, supermarkets, and 
independent retailers from its headquarters in central 
London. Recipient of multiple international wine awards—
including the International Wine Challenge on Trade Supplier 
of the Year for two years running—Liberty Wines is one of the 
United Kingdom’s foremost wine importers and distributors.
IT Problems and Business Needs
As the business expanded, the existing servers did not have 
the capacity to handle increased data volumes, and main-
tenance of the system put a strain on the IT team of two 
employees. Existing systems were slow and could not pro-
vide the responsiveness that employees expected.
Liberty Wines had to speed up business processes to 
meet the needs of customers in the fast-paced world of 
fine dining. To provide the service their customers expect, 
employees at Liberty Wines needed quick and easy access 
to customer, order, and stock information. In the past, the 
company relied on 10 physical servers for apps and services, 
such as order processing, reporting, and e-mail.
Virtualized Solution
Liberty Wines deployed a virtualized server solution incor-
porating Windows Server 2008 R2. The 10 servers were 
replaced with 3 physical servers, running 10 virtual servers. 
An additional server was used as part of a backup system, 
further improving resilience and stability.
By reducing the number of physical servers from 10 
to 4, power use and air conditioning costs were cut by 
60 percent. Not only was the bottom line improved, but the 
carbon footprint was also reduced, which was good for the 
environment.
The new IT infrastructure cut hardware replacement costs 
by £45,000 (U.S. $69,500) while enhancing stability with the 
backup system. Apps now run faster, too, so employees can 
provide better customer service with improved productivity. 
When needed, virtual servers can be added quickly and eas-
ily to support business growth.
Questions
1. What business risks had Liberty Wines faced?
2. How does Liberty Wines’ IT infrastructure impact its com-
petitive advantage?
3. How did server virtualization benefit Liberty Wines and 
the environment?
IT at Work 2 .3
Business Continuity with Virtualization

62  Chapter 2     Data Governance and IT Architecture Support Long-Term Performance
Managers want streamlined, real time data-driven enterprises, yet they may face 
budget cuts. Sustaining performance requires the development of new business 
apps and analytics capabilities, which comprise the front end—and the data stores 
and digital infrastructure, or back end, to support them. The back end is where the 
data reside. The problem is that data may have to navigate through a congested 
IT infrastructure that was first designed decades ago. These network or database 
bottlenecks can quickly wipe out the competitive advantages from big data, mobility, 
and so on. Traditional approaches to increasing database performance—manually tun-
ing databases, adding more disk space, and upgrading processors—are not enough 
when you are have streaming data and real time big data analytics. Cloud services 
help to overcome these limitations.
2.5  Cloud Services Add Agility
XAAS: “AS A SERVICE” 
MODELS
The cloud computing model for on-demand delivery of and access to various types 
of computing resources also extends to the development of business apps. Figure 2.18 
shows four “as a service” (XaaS) solutions based on the concept that the resource—
software, platform, infrastructure, or data–can be provided on demand regardless 
of geolocation.
CLOUD COMPUTING 
STACK
Figure 2.19 shows the cloud computing stack, which consists of the following three 
categories:
• SaaS apps are designed for end-users.
• PaaS is a set of tools and services that make coding and deploying these 
apps faster and more efficient.
• IaaS consists of hardware and software that power computing resources—
servers, storage, operating systems, and networks.
Questions
 1. What is a data center?
 2. Describe cloud computing.
 3. What is the difference between data centers and cloud computing?
 4. What are the benefi ts of cloud computing?
 5. How can cloud computing solve the problems of managing software 
licenses?
 6. What is an SLA? Why are SLAs important?
 7. What factors should be considered when selecting a cloud vendor or 
provider?
 8. When are private clouds used instead of public clouds?
 9. Explain three issues that need to be addressed when moving to cloud 
computing or services.
10. How does a virtual machine (VM) function?
11. Explain virtualization.
12. What are the characteristics and benefi ts of virtualization?
13. When is load balancing important?

2.5     Cloud Services Add Agility     63  
Software as a Service
Software as a service (SaaS) is a widely used model in which software is available 
to users as needed. Specifically, in SaaS, a service provider hosts the application at 
its data center and customers access it via a standard Web browser. Other terms for 
SaaS are on-demand computing and hosted services. The idea is basically the same: 
Instead of buying and installing expensive packaged enterprise applications, users 
can access software apps over a network, with an Internet browser being the only 
necessity.
A SaaS provider licenses an application to customers either on-demand, 
through a subscription, based on usage (pay-as-you-go), or increasingly at no cost 
when the opportunity exists to generate revenue from advertisements or through 
other methods.
Figure 2.19 The cloud 
computing stack consists 
of SaaS, PaaS, and IaaS.
Figure 2.18 Four as-a-service 
solutions: software, platform, 
infrastructure, and data as a 
service.
© Vallepu/Shutterstock 
© Yabresse/Shutterstock 

64  Chapter 2     Data Governance and IT Architecture Support Long-Term Performance
The SaaS model was developed to overcome the common challenge to an 
enterprise of being able to meet fluctuating demands on IT resources efficiently. 
It is used in many business functions, primarily customer relationship management 
(CRM), accounting, human resources (HR), service desk management, and col-
laboration.
There are thousands of SaaS vendors. Salesforce.com is one of the most widely 
known SaaS providers. Other examples are Google Docs and collaborative presen-
tation software Prezi. For instance, instead of installing Microsoft Word on your 
own computer, and then loading Word to create a document, you use a browser to 
log into Google Docs. Only the browser uses your computer’s resources.
Platform as a Service
Platform as a service (PaaS) benefits software development. PaaS provides a stan-
dard unified platform for app development, testing, and deployment. This comput-
ing platform allows the creation of Web applications quickly and easily without the 
complexity of buying and maintaining the underlying infrastructure. Without PaaS, 
the cost of developing some apps would be prohibitive. The trend is for PaaS to 
be combined with IaaS. For an example of the value of SaaS and PaaS, see IT at 
Work 2.4.
Within only 12 weeks, Unilever had its new digital social 
platform built and implemented. The platform was designed 
to support Unilever Global Marketing by connecting its mar-
keters, brand managers, and partners in 190 countries. The 
new social platform is built on the Salesforce Platform and 
leverages Salesforce Chatter, which is an enterprise social 
networking technology. It enables Unilever marketers to share 
knowledge, best practices, and creative assets across the net-
work. According to Mark McClennon, the CIO Consumer at 
Unilever, “We’ve gone from a blank piece of paper all the way 
through to rolling out the first release of the platform in about 
three months using Salesforce technology” (Accenture, 2013).
IT at Work 2.4
Unilever
Infrastructure as a Service
Infrastructure as a service (IaaS) is a way of delivering cloud computing infrastruc-
ture as an on-demand service. Rather than purchasing servers, software, data center 
space, or networks, companies instead buy all computing resources as a fully out-
sourced service. IaaS providers are Amazon Web Services (AWS) and Rackspace.
Data as a Service
Similar to SaaS, PaaS, and IaaS, data as a service (DaaS) enables data to be 
shared among clouds, systems, apps, and so on regardless of the data source or 
where they are stored. DaaS makes it easier for data architects to select data from 
different pools, filter out sensitive data, and make the remaining data available 
on demand.
A key benefit of DaaS is the elimination of the risks and burdens of data man-
agement to a third-party cloud provider. This model is growing in popularity as data 
become more complex, difficult, and expensive to maintain.

Key Terms     65  
At-a-Service Models are Enterprisewide 
and Can Trigger Lawsuits
The various at-a-service models are used in various aspects of business. You will 
read how these specific services, such as CRM and HR management, are being 
used for operational and strategic purposes in later chapters. Companies are fre-
quently adopting software, platform, infrastructure, data management and starting 
to embrace mobility as a service and big data as a service because they typically no 
longer have to worry about the costs of buying, maintaining, or updating their own 
data servers. Both hardware and human resources expenses can be cut significantly. 
Service arrangements all require that managers understand the benefits and trade-
offs—and how to negotiate effective SLAs. Regulations mandate that confidential 
data be protected regardless of whether the data are on-premises on in the cloud. 
Therefore, a company’s legal department needs to get involved in these IT deci-
sions. Put simply, moving to cloud services is not simply an IT decision because the 
stakes around legal and compliance issues are very high.
GOING CLOUD
Cloud services can advance the core business of delivering superior services to 
optimize business performance. Cloud can cut costs and add flexibility to the 
performance of critical business apps. And, it can improve responsiveness to end-
consumers, application developers, and business organizations. But to achieve these 
benefits, there must be IT, legal, and senior management oversight because a com-
pany still must meet its legal obligations and responsibilities to employees, customers, 
investors, business partners, and society.
Questions
1. What is SaaS?
2. Describe the cloud computing stack.
3. What is PaaS?
4. What is IaaS?
5. Why is DaaS growing in popularity?
6. How might companies risk violating regulation or compliance requirements with 
cloud services?
Key Terms
ad hoc report
batch processing
cloud computing
cloud computing stack
cross-sell
customer-centric
data
data as a service (DaaS)
data center
data governance
data silo
database
decision support system 
(DSS)
dirty data
enterprise architecture (EA)
exception report
executive information 
system (EIS)
goal seeking
information
information management
infrastructure as a service 
(IaaS)
IT infrastructure
knowledge
management information 
system (MIS)
master data
master data management 
(MDM)
master fi le
model
online transaction 
processing (OLTP)
platform as a service 
(PaaS)
private cloud
public cloud
real time processing
service-level agreements 
(SLAs)
software as a service 
(SaaS)
structured decisions
transaction processing 
system (TPS)
touchpoint
unstructured decisions
up-sell
virtualization
virtual machine (VM)
volatility
what-if analysis

66  Chapter 2     Data Governance and IT Architecture Support Long-Term Performance
Assuring Your Learning
 1. Why is a strong market position or good profi t 
performance only temporary?
 2. Explain the difference between customer-centric 
and product-centric business models.
 3. Assume you had:
a. A tall ladder with a sticker that listed a weight 
allowance only 5 pounds more than you 
weighed. You know the manufacturer and 
model number.
b. Perishable food with an expiration date 2 days 
into the future.
c. A checking account balance that indicated you 
had suffi cient funds to cover the balance due on 
an account.
 
In all three cases, you cannot trust the data to be ex-
actly correct. The data could be incorrect by about 20 
percent. How might you fi nd the correct data for each 
instance? Which data might not be possible to verify? 
How does dirty data impact your decision making?
 4. If business data are scattered throughout the enter-
prise and not synched until the end of the month, 
how does that impact day-to-day decision making 
and planning?
 5. Assume a bank’s data are stored in silos based on 
fi nancial product—checking accounts, saving accounts, 
mortgages, auto loans, and so on. What problems do 
these data silos create for the bank’s managers?
 6. Why do managers and workers still struggle to fi nd 
information that they need to make decisions or 
take action despite advances in digital technology? 
That is, what causes data defi ciencies?
 7. According to a Tech CEO Council Report, Fortune 
500 companies waste $480 billion every year on 
ineffi cient business processes. What factors cause 
such huge waste? How can this waste be reduced?
 8. Explain why organizations need to implement 
enterprise architecture (EA) and data governance.
 9. What two problems can EA solve?
 10. Name two industries that depend on data gov-
ernance to comply with regulations or reporting 
requirements. Given an example of each.
 11. Why is it important for data to be standardized? 
Given an example of unstandardized data.
 12. Why are TPSs critical systems?
 13. Explain what is meant by data volatility. How does 
it affect the use of databases for data analysis?
 14. Discuss why the cloud acts as the great IT delivery 
frontier.
 15. What are the immediate benefi ts of cloud computing?
 16. What are the functions of data centers?
 17. What factors need to be considered when selecting 
a cloud vendor?
 18. What protection does an effective SLA provide?
 19. Why is an SLA a legal document?
 20. How can virtualization reduce IT costs while 
improving performance?
DISCUSS: Critical Thinking Questions
 21. When selecting a cloud vendor to host your en-
terprise data and apps, you need to evaluate the 
service level agreement (SLA).
a. Research the SLAs of two cloud vendors, such 
as Rackspace, Amazon, or Google.
b. For the vendors you selected, what are the 
SLAs’ uptime percent? Expect them to be 
99.9 percent or less.
c. Does each vendor count both scheduled down-
time and planned downtime toward the SLA 
uptime percent?
d. Compare the SLAs in terms of two other criteria.
e. Decide which SLA is better based on your com-
parisons.
f. Report your results and explain your decision.
 22. Many organizations initiate data governance pro-
grams because of pressing compliance issues that 
impact data usage. Organizations may need data 
governance to be in compliance with one or more 
regulations, such as the Gramm–Leach Bliley Act 
(GLB), HIPAA, Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
(FCPA), Sarbanes–Oxley Act, and several state and 
federal privacy laws.
a. Research and select two U.S. regulations or 
privacy laws.
b. Describe how data governance would help an 
enterprise comply with these regulations or 
laws.
 23. Visit eWeek.com Cloud Computing Solutions 
Center for news and reviews at eweek.com/c/s/
Cloud-Computing. Select one of the articles listed 
EXPLORE: Online and Interactive Exercises

CASE 2.2     Business Case     67  
under Latest Cloud Computing News. Prepare an 
executive summary of the article.
 24. Visit Rackspace.com and review the company’s 
three types of cloud products. Describe each of 
those cloud solutions.
 25. Visit Oracle.com. Describe the types of virtualiza-
tion services offered by Oracle.
 26. Visit YouTube.com and search for two videos on 
virtualization. For each video, report what you 
learned. Specify the complete URL, video title, who 
uploaded the video and the date, video length, and 
number of views.
 27. Financial services fi rms experience large fl uctua-
tions in business volumes because of the cyclical 
nature of fi nancial markets. These fl uctuations 
are often caused by crises—such as the subprime 
mortgage problems, the discovery of major fraud, 
or a slowdown in the economy. These fl uctuations 
require that executives and IT leaders have the abil-
ity to cut spending levels in market downturns and 
quickly scale up when business volumes rise again. 
Research SaaS solutions and vendors for the fi nan-
cial services sector. Would investment in SaaS help 
such fi rms align their IT capacity with their business 
needs and also cut IT costs? Explain your answer.
 28. Despite multimillion-dollar investments, many IT 
organizations cannot respond quickly to evolving 
business needs. Also, they cannot adapt to large-
scale shifts like mergers, sudden drops in sales, or 
new product introductions. Can cloud computing 
help organizations improve their responsiveness 
and get better control of their IT costs? Explain 
your answer.
 29. Describe the relationship between enterprise archi-
tecture and organizational performance.
 30. Identify four KPIs for a major airline (e.g., American, 
United, Delta) or an automobile manufacturer 
(e.g., GM, Ford, BMW). Which KPI would be the 
easiest to present to managers on an online dash-
board? Explain why.
ANALYZE & DECIDE: Apply IT Concepts to Business Decisions
CASE 2.2
Business Case: Data Chaos Creates Risk
Data chaos often runs rampant in service organizations, such 
as health care and the government. For example, in many 
hospitals, each line of business, division, and department has 
implemented its own IT applications, often without a thorough 
analysis of its relationship with other departmental or divisional 
systems. This arrangement leads to the hospital having IT 
groups that specifi cally manage a particular type of applica-
tion suite or data silo for a particular department or division.
Data Management
When apps are not well managed, they can generate terabytes 
of irrelevant data, causing hospitals to drown in such data. This 
data chaos could lead to medical errors. In the effort to man-
age excessive and massive amounts of data, there is increased 
risk of relevant information being lost (missing) or inaccurate—
that is, faulty or dirty data. Another risk is data breaches.
• 
Faulty data: By 2016 an estimated 80 percent of health-
care organizations will adopt electronic health records, 
or EHRs (IDC MarketScape, 2012). It is well known that an 
unintended consequence of EHR is faulty data. According 
to research done at Columbia University, data in EHR sys-
tems may not be as accurate and complete as expected 
(Hripscak & Albers, 2012). Incorrect lab values, imaging 
results, or physician documentation lead to medical 
errors, harm patients, and damage the organization’s ac-
creditation and reputation.
• 
Data breaches: More than 25 million people have been 
affected by health-care system data breaches since the 
Offi ce for Civil Rights, a division of the U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services, began reporting breaches 
in 2009. Most breaches involved lost or stolen data on 
laptops, removable drives, or other portable media. 
Breaches are extremely expensive and destroy trust.
Accountability in health care demands compliance with 
strong data governance efforts. Data governance programs 
verify that data input into EHR, clinical, fi nancial, and opera-
tional systems are accurate and complete—and that only 
authorized edits can be made and logged.
Vanderbilt University Medical Center 
Adopts EHR and Data Governance
Vanderbilt University Medical Center (VUMC) in Nashville, TN, 
was an early adopter of EHR and implemented data governance 
in 2009. VUMC’s experience provides valuable lessons.
 
VUMC consists of three hospitals and the Vanderbilt Clinic, 
which have 918 beds, discharge 53,000 patients each year, and 
count 1.6 million clinic visits each year. On average, VUMC has 
an 83 percent occupancy rate and has achieved HIMSS Stage 6 

68  Chapter 2     Data Governance and IT Architecture Support Long-Term Performance
hospital EHR adoption. HIMSS (Healthcare Information and 
Management Systems Society, himss.org) is a global, nonprofi t 
organization dedicated to better health-care outcomes through 
IT. There are seven stages of EHR adoption, with Stage 7 be-
ing a fully paperless environment. That means all clinical data 
are part of an electronic medical record and, as a result, can 
be shared across and outside the enterprise. At Stage 7, the 
health-care organization is getting full advantage of the health 
information exchange (HIE). HIE provides interoperability so 
that information can fl ow back and forth among physicians, 
patients, and health networks (Murphy, 2012).
 
VUMC began collecting data as part of its EHR efforts in 
1997. By 2009 the center needed stronger, more disciplined 
data management. At that time, hospital leaders initiated a 
project to build a data governance infrastructure.
Data Governance Implementation
VUMC’s leadership team had several concerns.
1. IT investments and tools were evolving rapidly, but they 
were not governed by HIM (Healthcare Information and 
Management) policies.
2. As medical records became electronic so they might be 
transmitted and shared easily, they became more vulner-
able to hacking.
3. As new uses of electronic information were emerging, the 
medical center struggled to keep up.
Health Record Executive Committee
Initially, VUMC’s leaders assigned data governance to their tra-
ditional medical records committee, but that approach failed. 
Next, they hired consultants to help develop a data governance 
structure and organized a health record executive committee 
to oversee the project. The committee reports to the medi-
cal board and an executive committee to ensure executive 
involvement and sponsorship. The committee is responsible for 
developing the strategy for standardizing health record prac-
tices, minimizing risk, and maintaining compliance. Members 
include the chief medical information offi cer (CMIO), CIO, legal 
counsel, medical staff, nursing informatics, HIM, administration, 
risk management, compliance, and accreditation. In addition, 
a legal medical records team was formed to support additions, 
corrections, and deletions to the EHR. This team defi nes pro-
cedures for removal of duplicate medical record numbers and 
policies for data management and compliance.
Costs of Data Failure
Data failures incur the following costs:
• 
Rework
• 
Loss of business
• 
Patient safety errors
• 
Malpractice lawsuits
• 
Delays in receiving payments because billing or medical 
codes data are not available
Measuring the Value of Data Governance
One metric to calculate the value of a data governance 
program is confi dence in data-dependent assumptions, or 
CIDDA. CIDDA is computed by multiplying three confi dence 
estimates as follows:
CIDDA 
 G 
 M 
 TS
where
 G 
  Confi dence that data are good enough for their 
intended purpose
 M 
 Confi dence that data mean what you think they do
TS 
  Confi dence that you know where the data come from 
and trust the source
CIDDA is a subjective metric for which there are no industry 
benchmarks, yet it can be evaluated over time to gauge any 
improvement in data quality confi dence.
Benefi ts Achieved from Data Governance
As in other industries, in health care, data are the most valu-
able asset. The handling of data is the real risk. EHRs are 
effective only if the data are accurate and useful to support 
patient care. Effective ongoing data governance has achieved 
that goal at VUMC.
Sources: Compiled from Murphy (2012), HIMSS.org (2014), 
HIMSSanalytics.org (2014), Reeves & Bowen (2013).
Questions
1. What might happen when each line of business, division, 
and department develops its own IT apps?
2. What are the consequences of poorly managed apps?
3. What two risks are posed by data chaos? Explain why.
4. What are the functions of data governance in the health-
care sector?
5. Why is it important to have executives involved in data 
governance projects?
6. List and explain the costs of data failure.
7. Calculate the CIDDA over time:
Q1: G 
 40%, M 
 50%, TS 
 20%
Q2: G 
 50%, M 
 55%, TS 
 30%
Q3: G 
 60%, M 
 60%, TS 
 40%
Q4: G 
 60%, M 
 70%, TS 
 45%
8. Why are data the most valuable asset in health care?

References     69  
CASE 2.3
Video Case: Cloud Computing: Three Case Studies
When organizations say they are “using the cloud,” they can 
mean a number of very different things. Using an IaaS service 
such as Amazon EC2 or Terremark is different from using 
Google Apps for outsourced e-mail, which is different again 
from exposing an API in Facebook.
 
A video shows three cloud computing case studies 
from Vordel’s customers. The cases cover SaaS, IaaS, and 
PaaS. In fi rst two examples, customers are connecting to the 
cloud: fi rst to Google Apps (for single sign-on to Google 
Apps e-mail) and second to Terremark to manage virtual 
servers. In the third example, the connection is from the 
cloud using a Facebook app to a company’s APIs. You might 
spot Animal House references. Follow these three steps: 
Visit SOAtoTheCloud.com/2011/10/video-three-cloud-
computing-case.html. View the 11-minute video of the three 
case studies.
Question
1. Explain the value or benefi ts of each organization’s cloud 
investment.
Cloud Standards Customer Council. Practical Guide to Cloud 
Service Level Agreements. Version 1. April 10, 2012. http://
www.cloudstandardscustomercouncil.org/2012_Practical_
Guide_to_Cloud_SLAs.pdf
De Clerck, J. P. “Optimizing the Digital and Social Customer 
Experience.” Social Marketing Forum, February 16, 2013.
Enterprise Architecture Research Forum (EARF). 2012.
First San Francisco Partners. “How McAfee Took Its First 
Steps to MDM Success.” 2009.
GAO (General Accounting Offi ce). “Practical Guide to 
Federal Enterprise Architecture.” Version 2. August 2010.
Hamilton, N. “Choosing Data Governance Battles.” Inside 
Reference Data, December 2013.
HIMSS.org (2014)
HIMSSanalytics.org (2014),
Hripscak, G. & D. J. Albers. “Next Generation Phenotyping of 
Electronic Health Records.” Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, Volume 19, Issue 5. September 2012.
IBM Institute for Business Value. “IBM Chief Information 
Offi cer Study: The Essential CIO.” May 2011.
IDC MarketScape. “U.S. Ambulatory EMR/EHR for Small 
Practices.” 3012 Vendor Assessment. May 2012.
Keitt, T.J. “Demystifying The Mobile Workforce–An Informa-
tion Workplace Report.” Forrester.com. June 7, 2011.
mcafee.com. McAfee Fact Sheet. 2013.
Miliard, M. “IBM Unveils New Watson-based Analytics.” 
Healthcare IT News. October 25, 2011.
Murphy, K. “Health Information Exchange.” EHR Intelligence, 
April 9, 2012.
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). Cloud 
Computing Program. 2012.
Reeves, M. G. & R.  Bowen. “Developing a Data Governance 
Model in Health Care.” Healthcare Finance Management, 
February 2013.
Rich, R. “Master Data Management or Data Governance? Yes, 
Please.” Teradata Magazine Q3, 2013.
Tech CEO Council Report 2010. techceocouncil.org/news/
reports/
References

70
Chapter Snapshot
Analytics differentiates business in the 21st century. 
Transactional, social, mobile, cloud, web, and sensor 
data offer enormous potential. But without tools to ana-
lyze these data types and volumes, there would not be 
much difference between business in the 20th century 
and business today—except for mobile access. High-
quality data and human expertise are essential to the 
value of analytics (Figure 3.1).
Human expertise is necessary because analytics alone 
cannot explain the reasons for trends or relationships; 
1. Describe the functions of database and data warehouse 
technologies, the differences between centralized and 
distributed database architecture, how data quality impacts 
performance, and the role of a master reference file in cre-
ating accurate and consistent data across the enterprise.
2. Evaluate the tactical and strategic benefits of big data 
and analytics.
3. Describe data and text mining, and give examples of 
mining applications to find patterns, correlations, trends, 
or other meaningful relationships in organizational data 
stores.
4. Explain the operational benefits and competitive advan-
tages of business intelligence, and how forecasting can 
be improved.
5. Describe electronic records management and how it 
helps companies meet their compliance, regulatory, and 
legal obligations.
Chapter Snapshot
Case 3.1 Opening Case: Coca-Cola Manages 
at the Point That Makes a Difference
3.1 Database Management Systems
3.2 Data Warehouse and Big Data Analytics
3.3 Data and Text Mining
3.4 Business Intelligence
3.5 Electronic Records Management
Key Terms
Assuring Your Learning
• Discuss: Critical Thinking Questions 
• Explore: Online and Interactive Exercises 
•  Analyze & Decide: Apply IT Concepts 
to Business Decisions 
Case 3.2 Business Case: Financial Intelligence 
Fights Fraud
Case 3.3 Video Case: Hertz Finds Gold in 
Integrated Data
References
Learning Outcomes
Data Management, 
Big Data Analytics, and 
Records Management
3
Chapter

71
know what action to take; or provide sufficient context 
to determine what the numbers represent and how to 
interpret them.
Database, data warehouse, big data, and business 
intelligence (BI) technologies interact to create a new 
biz-tech ecosystem. Big data analytics and BI discover 
insights or relationships of interest that otherwise might 
not have been recognized. They make it possible for 
managers to make decisions and act with clarity, speed, 
and confidence. Big data analytics is not just about man-
aging more or varied data. Rather, it is about asking new 
questions, formulating new hypotheses, exploration and 
discovery, and making data-driven decisions. Ultimately, 
a big part of big data analytic efforts is the use of new 
analytics techniques.
Mining data or text taken from day-to-day busi-
ness operations reveals valuable information, such as 
customers’ desires, products that are most important, or 
processes that can be made more efficient. These insights 
expand the ability to take advantage of opportunities, 
minimize risks, and control costs.
While you might think that physical pieces of paper 
are a relic of the past, in most offices the opposite is 
true. Aberdeen Group’s survey of 176 organizations 
worldwide found that the volume of physical documents 
is growing by up to 30 percent per year. Document man-
agement technology archives digital and physical data 
to meet business needs, as well as regulatory and legal 
requirements (Rowe, 2012).
CASE 3.1 OPENING CASE
Coca-Cola Manages at the Point That Makes a Difference
COCA-COLA’S DATA 
MANAGEMENT 
CHALLENGES
The Coca-Cola Company is a Fortune 100 company with over $48 billion in sales 
revenue and $9 billion in profit (Figure 3.2). The market leader manages and 
analyzes several petabytes (Pb) of data generated or collected from more than 
500 brands and consumers in 206 countries. Its bottling partners provide sales and 
shipment data, while retail customers transmit transaction and merchandising data. 
Other data sources are listed in Table 3.1. From 2003 to spring 2013, data analysts 
at Coca-Cola knew there were BI opportunities in the mountains of data its bottlers 
were storing, but finding and accessing all of that data for analytics proved to be 
nearly impossible. The disparate data sources caused long delays in getting analytics 
reports from IT to sales teams. The company decided to replace the legacy software 
at each bottling facility and standardize them on a new BI system, a combination of 
MicroStrategy and Microsoft BI products.
Enterprise Data Management Like most global companies, Coca-Cola relies 
on sophisticated enterprise data management, BI, and analytic technologies to sus-
tain its performance in fi ercely competitive markets (Figure 3.3). Data are managed 
Petabyte (Pb) 
 1,000 
Terabytes (Tb) 
 1 million 
Gigabytes (Gb).
Human
expertise
Data
analytics
High-Quality 
data
Trends or
relationships
Context to understand 
what the numbers
represent and how
to interpret them
What action to take
+
+
Figure 3.1 Data analytics, 
and human expertise 
and high-quality data, 
are needed to obtain 
actionable information.

72  Chapter 3     Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management
in a centralized database, as illustrated in Figure 3.4. Data warehousing, big data, 
analytics, data modeling, and social media are used to respond to competitors’ activ-
ity, market changes, and consumer preferences.
To support its business strategy and operations, Coca-Cola changed from a 
decentralized database approach to a centralized database approach. Now its data 
are combined centrally and accessible via shared platforms across the organization 
(Figure 3.5). Key objectives of the data management strategy are to help its retail 
customers such as Walmart, which sells $4 billion of Coca-Cola products annually, sell 
Figure 3.3 Coca-Cola World Headquarters in Atlanta, GA, announced on 
January 25, 2010, that new packaging material for plastic bottles will be made 
partially from plants—as part of its sustainability efforts.
Centralized database stores 
data at a single location that 
is accessible from anywhere. 
Searches can be fast because 
the search engine does not 
need to check multiple dis-
tributed locations to find 
responsive data.
Data warehouses that inte-
grate data from databases 
across an entire enterprise 
are called enterprise data 
warehouses (EDW).
© Katherine Welles/Shutterstock 
World’s largest nonalcoholic 
beverage company with more 
than 500 brands of beverages,
ready-to-drink coffees, juices, and 
juice drinks.
Has the world’s largest beverage 
distribution system, with 
consumers in more than 200 
countries.
Products consumed at a rate of 
1.9 billion servings a day 
worldwide.
Brand
Business Ethics &
Sustainability
Focused on initiatives that reduce their
environmental footprint; support 
active, healthy living; create a safe
work environment; and enhance the 
economic development of the 
communities where they operate.
Digital Technology
Centralized database
Enterprise data warehouse (EDW)
Big data analytics
Decision models
70 million Facebook followers
The Coca-Cola
Company
Figure 3.2 The Coca-Cola Company overview.

CASE 3.1     Opening Case     73  
TABLE 3.1 
Opening Case Overview
Company 
•  The Coca-Cola Company, coca-cola.com
 
•  Sustainability: www.coca-colacompany.com/sustainability
 
•  $48 billion in sales revenue and profi ts of $9 billion, 2013
Industry 
•   The global company manufactures, sells, and distributes 
nonalcoholic beverages.
Product lines 
•   More than 500 brands of still and sparkling beverages, 
ready-to-drink coffees, juices, and juice drinks.
Digital technology 
•   Enterprise data warehouse (EDW)
 
•  Big data and analytics
 
•  Business intelligence
 
•   In 2014, moved from a decentralized approach to a central-
ized approach, where the data are combined centrally and 
available via the shared platforms across the organization.
Business challenges 
•   In 2010, Coca-Cola had 74 unique databases, many of them 
used different software to store and analyze data. Dealing 
with incompatible databases and reporting systems re-
mained a problem from 2003 to 2013.
 
•   Chief Big Data Insights Offi cer Esat Sezer has stated that 
Coca-Cola took a strategic approach instead of a tactical 
approach with big data.
Global data sources 
•   Transaction and merchandising data
 
•   Data from nationwide network of 74 bottlers
 
•   Multichannel retail data
 
•   Customer profi le data from loyalty programs
 
•   Social media data
 
•   Supply chain data
 
•   Competitor data
 
•   Sales and shipment data from bottling partners
Figure 3.4 Centralized data 
architecture.
more Coca-Cola products and to improve the consumer experience. The company 
has implemented a data governance program to ensure that cultural data sensitivi-
ties are respected.
© Vallepu/Shutterstock 

74  Chapter 3     Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management
SUSTAINING BUSINESS 
PERFORMANCE
All data are standardized through a series of master data management (MDM) 
processes, as discussed in Chapter 2. An enterprise data warehouse (EDW) gener-
ates a single view of all multichannel retail data. The EDW creates a trusted view 
of customers, sales, and transactions, enabling Coca-Cola to respond quickly and 
accurately to changes in market conditions.
Throughout Coca-Cola’s divisions and departments, huge volumes of data 
are analyzed to make more and better time-sensitive, critical decisions about 
products, shopper marketing, the supply chain, and production. Point-of-sale 
(POS) data are captured from retail channels and used to create customer pro-
files. Those profiles are communicated via a centralized iPad reporting  system. 
POS data are analyzed to support collaborative planning, forecasting, and 
replenishment processes within its supply chain. (Supply chain management, 
collaborative planning, forecasting, and replenishment are covered in greater 
detail in Chapter 10.)
Coca-Cola’s Approach to Big Data and Decision Models Big data are 
treated as a strategic asset. Chief Big Data Insights Offi cer Esat Sezer has stated 
that Coca-Cola takes a strategic approach instead of a tactical approach with big 
data. The company is far advanced in the use of big data to manage its products, 
sales revenue, and customer experiences in near real time and to reduce costs. For 
example, it cut overtime costs almost in half by analyzing the service center data. 
Big data help Coca-Cola relate to its 70 million Facebook followers—many of them 
bolster the Coke brand.
Figure 3.5 Data from online and offl ine transactions are stored in databases. 
Data about entities such as customers, products, orders, and employees are 
stored in an organized way.
© alphaspirit/Shutterstock 

3.1     Database Management Systems     75  
Big data play a key role in ensuring that its orange juice tastes the same year-
round and is readily available anywhere in the world. Oranges used by Coca-Cola 
have a peak growing season of only three months. Producing orange juice with a 
consistent taste year-round despite the inconsistent quality of the orange supply is 
complex. To deal with the complexity, an orange juice decision model was devel-
oped, the Black Book model. A decision model quantifies the relationship between 
variables, which reduces uncertainty. Black Book combines detailed data on the 
600
 flavors that make up an orange, weather, customer preferences, expected 
crop yields, cost pressures, regional consumer preferences, and acidity or sweet-
ness rate. The model specifies how to blend the orange juice to create a consistent 
taste. Coke’s Black Book juice model is considered to be one of the most complex 
business analytics apps. It requires analyzing up to 1 quintillion (10E18) decision 
variables to consistently deliver the optimal blend.
With the power of big data and decision models, Coca-Cola is prepared for 
disruptions in supply far in advance. According to Doug Bippert, Coca-Cola’s vice 
president of business acceleration, “If we have a hurricane or a freeze, we can 
quickly re-plan the business in five or 10 minutes just because we’ve mathematically 
modeled it” (BusinessIntelligence.com, 2013b).
Sources: Compiled from Burns (2013), Fernandez (2012), BusinessIntelligence.com (2013a, 2013b), 
CNNMoney (2014), Big Data Startups (2013), and Teradata (2012).
Questions
1. Why does the Coca-Cola Company have petabytes of data?
2.  Why is it important for Coca-Cola to be able to process POS data in 
near real time?
3.  How does Coca-Cola attempt to create favorable customer 
 experiences?
4. What is the importance of having a trusted view of the data?
5. What is the benefi t of a decision model?
6. What is the Black Book model?
7. Explain the strategic benefi t of the Black Book model.
Data are the driving force behind any successful business. Operations, plan-
ning, control, and all other management functions rely largely on processed 
information, not raw data. And, no one wants to wait for business-critical 
reports or specific answers to their questions. Data management technologies 
that keep users informed and support the various business demands are the 
following:
• Databases store data generated by business apps, sensors, operations, and 
transaction-processing systems (TPS). Data in databases are extremely vola-
tile. Medium and large enterprises typically have many databases of various 
types.
• Data warehouses integrate data from multiple databases and data silos, and 
organize them for complex analysis, knowledge discovery, and to support 
3.1  Database Management Systems
Databases are collections of 
data sets or records stored 
in a systematic way.
Volatile refers to data that 
change frequently.

76  Chapter 3     Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management
DATABASE 
MANAGEMENT 
SYSTEMS AND SQL
Database management systems (DBMSs) integrate with data collection systems 
such as TPS and business applications; store the data in an organized way; and 
provide facilities for accessing and managing that data. Over the past 25 years, the 
relational database has been the standard database model adopted by most enter-
prises. Relational databases store data in tables consisting of columns and rows, 
similar to the format of a spreadsheet, as shown in Figure 3.6.
Relational management systems (RDBMSs) provide access to data using a 
declarative language—structured query language (SQL). Declarative languages 
simplify data access by requiring that users only specify what data they want to 
access without defining how access will be achieved. The format of a basic SQL 
statement is
SELECT column_name(s)
FROM table_name
WHERE condition
An instance of SQL is shown in Figure 3.7.
Database management 
 systems (DBMSs) are 
 software used to manage the 
additions, updates, and dele-
tions of data as transactions 
occur, and to support data 
 queries and reporting. They 
are OLTP systems.
SQL is a standardized query 
language for accessing 
databases.
decision making. For example, data are extracted from a database, processed 
to standardize their format, and then loaded into data warehouses at specific 
times, such as weekly. As such, data in data warehouses are nonvolatile—and 
ready for analysis.
• Data marts are small-scale data warehouses that support a single function or 
one department. Enterprises that cannot afford to invest in data warehous-
ing may start with one or more data marts.
• Business intelligence (BI) tools and techniques process data and do statisti-
cal analysis for insight and discovery—that is, to discover meaningful rela-
tionships in the data, keep informed in real time, detect trends, and identify 
opportunities and risks.
Data-processing techniques, processing power, and enterprise performance 
management capabilities have undergone revolutionary advances in recent years 
for reasons you are already familiar with—big data, mobility, and cloud comput-
ing. The last decade, however, has seen the emergence of new approaches, first in 
data warehousing and, more recently, for transaction processing, as you read in this 
chapter.
Figure 3.6 Illustration of 
structured data format. 
Numeric and alphanumeric 
data are arranged into rows 
and predefi ned columns 
similar to those in an Excel 
spreadsheet.
© Alexander Fediachov/Alamy

3.1     Database Management Systems     77  
DBMS Functions
An accurate and consistent view of data throughout the enterprise is needed so 
one can make informed, actionable decisions that support the business strategy. 
Functions performed by a DBMS to help create such a view are:
• Data filtering and profiling: Process and store data efficiently. Inspect 
the data for errors, inconsistencies, redundancies, and incomplete 
information.
• Data integrity and maintenance: Correct, standardize, and verify the consis-
tency and integrity of the data.
• Data synchronization: Integrate, match, or link data from disparate sources.
• Data security: Check and control data integrity over time.
• Data access: Provide authorized access to data in both planned and ad hoc 
ways within acceptable time.
Today’s computing hardware is capable of crunching through huge datasets 
that were impossible to manage a few years back and making them available on-
demand via wired or wireless networks (Figure 3.8).
Figure 3.7 An instance of SQL to access employee information based on date 
of hire.
© Piotr Adamowicz/Shutterstock 
TECH NOTE 3.1 Factors That Determine the Performance of a DBMS
Factors to consider when evaluating the performance of a database are the following.
Data latency. Latency is the elapsed time (or delay) between when data are created 
and when they are available for a query or report. Applications have different toler-
ances for latency. Database systems tend to have shorter latency than data ware-
houses. Short latency imposes more restrictions on a system.
Queries are ad hoc 
(unplanned) user requests for 
specific data.

78  Chapter 3     Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management
Figure 3.8 Database queries are processed in real time (a), and results are transmitted via wired or wireless 
networks to computer screens or handhelds (b).
(a)
(b)
© Corbis RF/Alamy
© Focus Technology/Alamy
Ability to handle the volatility of the data. The database has the processing power 
to handle the volatility of the data. The rates at which data are added, updated, or 
deleted determine the workload that the database must be able to control to prevent 
problems with the response rate to queries.
Query response time. The volume of data impacts response times to queries and 
data explorations. Many databases pre-stage data—that is, summarize or precalcu-
late results—so queries have faster response rates.
Data consistency. Immediate consistency means that as soon as data are updated, 
responses to any new query will return the updated value. With eventual consistency, 
not all query responses will refl ect data changes uniformly. Inconsistent query results 
could cause serious problems for analyses that depend on accurate data.
Query predictability. The greater the number of ad hoc or unpredictable queries, the 
more fl exible the database needs to be. Database or query performance manage-
ment is more diffi cult when the workloads are so unpredictable that they cannot be 
prepared for in advance. The ability to handle the workload is the most important 
criterion when choosing a database.

3.1     Database Management Systems     79  
Online Transaction Processing and Online 
Analytics Processing
When most business transactions occur—for instance, an item is sold or returned, 
an order is sent or cancelled, a payment or deposit is made—changes are made 
immediately to the database. These online changes are additions, updates, or 
deletions. DBMSs record and process transactions in the database, and support 
queries and reporting. Given their functions, DBMSs are referred to as online 
transaction-processing (OLTP) systems. OLTP is a database design that breaks 
down complex information into simpler data tables to strike a balance between 
transaction-processing efficiency and query efficiency. OLTP databases process 
millions of transactions per second. However, databases cannot be optimized for 
data mining, complex online analytics-processing (OLAP) systems, and decision 
support. These limitations led to the introduction of data warehouse technology. 
Data warehouses and data marts are optimized for OLAP, data mining, BI, and 
decision support. OLAP is a term used to describe the analysis of complex data 
from the data warehouse. In summary, databases are optimized for extremely fast 
transaction processing and query processing. Data warehouses are optimized for 
analysis.
DBMS AND DATA 
WAREHOUSING 
VENDORS RESPOND 
TO LATEST DATA 
DEMANDS
One of the major drivers of change in the data management market is the 
increased amount of data to be managed. Enterprises need powerful DBMSs and 
data warehousing solutions, analytics, and reporting. The four vendors that domi-
nate this market—Oracle, IBM, Microsoft, and Teradata—continue to respond 
to evolving data management needs with more intelligent and advanced software 
and hardware. Advanced hardware technology enables scaling to much higher 
data volumes and workloads than previously possible, or it can handle specific 
workloads. Older general-purpose relational databases DBMSs lack the scal-
ability or flexibility for specialized or very large workloads, but are very good at 
what they do.
DBMS Vendor Rankings
The highest-ranking enterprise DBMSs in mid-2014 were Oracle’s MySQL, 
Microsoft’s SQL Server, PostgreSQL, IBM’s DB2, and Teradata Database. Most 
run on multiple operating systems (OSs).
• MySQL, which was acquired by Oracle in January 2010, powers hundreds of 
thousands of commercial websites and a huge number of internal enterprise 
applications.
• SQL Server’s ease of use, availability, and Windows operating system inte-
gration make it an easy choice for firms that choose Microsoft products for 
their enterprises.
• PostgreSQL is the most advanced open source database, often used by 
online gaming applications and Skype, Yahoo!, and MySpace.
• DB2 is widely used in data centers and runs on Linux, UNIX, Windows, and 
mainframes.
Trend Toward NoSQL Systems
RDBMSs are still the dominant database engines, but the trend toward NoSQL 
(short for “not only SQL”) systems is clear. NoSQL systems increased in popu-
larity by 50 percent from 2013 to 2014. Although NoSQL have existed for as 
Online transaction 
processing (OLTP) systems 
are designed to manage 
transaction data, which are 
volatile.

80  Chapter 3     Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management
long as relational DBMS, the term itself was not introduced until 2009. That 
was when many new systems were developed in order to cope with the unfold-
ing requirements for DBMS—namely, handling big data, scalability, and fault 
tolerance for large Web applications. Scalability means the system can increase 
in size to handle data growth or the load of an increasing number of concurrent 
users. To put it differently, scalable systems efficiently meet the demands of high-
performance computing. Fault tolerance means that no single failure results in 
any loss of service.
NoSQL systems are such a heterogeneous group of database systems that 
attempts to classify them are not very helpful. However, their general advantages 
are these:
• Higher performance 
• Easy distribution of data on different nodes, which enables scalability and 
fault tolerance 
• Greater flexibility 
• Simpler administration 
Starting in 2010 and continuing through 2014, Microsoft has been working on 
the first rewrite of SQL Server’s query execution since Version 7 was released in 
1998. The goal is to offer NoSQL-like speeds without sacrificing the capabilities of 
a relational database.
With most NoSQL offerings, the bulk of the cost does not lie in acquiring the 
database, but rather in implementing it. Data need to be selected and migrated 
(moved) to the new database. Microsoft hopes to reduce these costs by offering 
migration solutions.
CENTRALIZED 
AND DISTRIBUTED 
DATABASE 
ARCHITECTURE
Databases are centralized or distributed, as shown in Figure 3.9. Both types of data-
bases need one or more backups and should be archived onsite and offsite in case 
of a crash or security incident.
Centralized Database Architecture
A centralized database stores all related files in a central location—as you read in 
the opening Coca-Cola case. For decades the main database platform consisted of 
centralized database files on massive mainframe computers. Benefits of centralized 
database configurations include:
1.  Better control of data quality. Data consistency is easier when data are kept 
in one physical location because data additions, updates, and deletions can be 
made in a supervised and orderly fashion.
2.  Better IT security. Data are accessed via the centralized host computer, where 
they can be protected more easily from unauthorized access or modifi cation.
A major disadvantage of centralized databases, like all centralized systems, 
is transmission delay when users are geodispersed. More powerful hardware and 
networks compensate for this disadvantage.
Distributed Database Architecture
A distributed database system allows apps on computers and mobiles to access data 
from both local and remote databases, as diagrammed in Figure 3.10. Distributed 
databases use client/server architecture to process information requests. Computers 
and mobile devices accessing the servers are called clients. The databases are stored 
on servers that reside in the company’s data centers, a private cloud, or a public cloud.

3.1     Database Management Systems     81  
Users
Los Angeles
Users
New York
Users
Kansas City
Users
Chicago
New York
Users
Los Angeles
Los Angeles
Users
Kansas City
Kansas City
Central Location
Central
Location
New York
Users
New York
(a)
(b)
New York
Users
Chicago
Chicago
Figure 3.9 Comparison of centralized and distributed databases.
GARBAGE IN, 
GARBAGE OUT
Data collection is a highly complex process that can create problems concerning 
the quality of the data being collected. Therefore, regardless of how the data are 
collected, they need to be validated so users know they can trust them. Classic 
expressions that sum up the situation are “garbage in, garbage out” (GIGO) and 
the potentially riskier “garbage in, gospel out.” In the latter case, poor-quality 
data are trusted and used as the basis for planning. You have encountered data 
safeguards, such as integrity checks, to help improve data quality when you fill in 
an online form. For example, the form will not accept an e-mail address that is not 
formatted correctly.
Dirty Data Costs and Consequences
Dirty data—that is, poor-quality data—lack integrity and cannot be trusted. 
Too often managers and information workers are actually constrained by data 
that cannot be trusted because they are incomplete, out of context, outdated, 
inaccurate, inaccessible, or so overwhelming that they require weeks to analyze. 

82  Chapter 3     Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management
In such situations, the decision maker is facing too much uncertainty to make 
intelligent business decisions. The cost of poor-quality data may be expressed 
as a formula:
Cost to 
Correct 
Errors
Cost to 
Prevent 
Errors
Lost 
Business
Cost of Poor- 
Quality Data
Examples of these costs include:
• Lost business. Business is lost when sales opportunities are missed, orders 
are returned because wrong items were delivered, or errors frustrate and 
drive away customers.
• Time spent preventing errors. If data cannot be trusted, then employees 
need to spend more time and effort trying to verify information in order to 
avoid mistakes.
• Time spent correcting errors. Database staff need to process corrections 
to the database. For example, the costs of correcting errors at Urent 
Corporation are estimated as follows:
a) Two database staff members spend 25 percent of their workday process-
ing and verifying data corrections each day:
2 people * 25% of 8 hours/day 
 4 hours/day correcting errors
b) Hourly salaries are $50 per hour based on pay rate and benefits:
$50/hour * 4 hours/day 
 $200/day correcting errors
c) 250 workdays per year:
$200/day * 250 days 
 $50,000/year to correct errors
The costs of poor-quality data spread throughout a company, affecting 
systems from shipping and receiving to accounting and customer service. Data 
Distributed databases on servers
Manufacturing
Manufacturing
clients
Headquarter
clients
Headquarters
Sales &
Marketing
Sales & marketing clients
Figure 3.10 Distributed database architecture for headquarters, manufacturing, 
and sales and marketing.

3.1     Database Management Systems     83  
errors typically arise from the functions or departments that generate or create 
the data—and not within the IT department. When all costs are considered, the 
value of finding and fixing the causes of data errors becomes clear. In a time of 
decreased budgets, some organizations may not have the resources for such proj-
ects and may not even be aware of the problem. Others may be spending most of 
their time fixing problems, thus leaving them with no time to work on preventing 
them.
Bad data are costing U.S. businesses hundreds of billions of dollars a year 
and affecting their ability to ride out the tough economic climate. Incorrect 
and outdated values, missing data, and inconsistent data formats can cause lost 
customers, sales, and revenue; misallocation of resources; and flawed pricing 
strategies.
For a particular company, it is difficult to calculate the full cost of poor data 
quality and its long-term effects. Part of the difficulty is the time delay between the 
mistake and when it is detected. Errors can be very difficult to correct, especially 
when systems extend across the enterprise. Another concern is that the impacts of 
errors can be unpredictable or serious. For example, the cost of errors due to unre-
liable and incorrect data alone is estimated to be as high as $40 billion annually in 
the retail sector (Zynapse, 2010). And, one health-care company whose agents were 
working with multiple ISs, but were not updating client details in every IS, saw its 
annual expenses increase by $9 million.
Data Ownership and Organizational Politics
Despite the need for high-quality data, organizational politics and technical issues 
make that difficult to achieve. The source of the problem is data ownership—that 
is, who owns or is responsible for the data. Data ownership problems exist when 
there are no policies defining responsibility and accountability for managing data. 
Inconsistent data formats of various departments create an additional set of prob-
lems as organizations try to combine individual applications into integrated enter-
prise systems.
The tendency to delegate data-quality responsibilities to the technical teams 
who have no control over data quality, as opposed to business users who do have 
such control, is another common pitfall that stands in the way of accumulating high-
quality data.
Those who manage a business or part of a business are tasked with trying 
to improve business performance and retain customers. Compensation is tied to 
improving profitability, driving revenue growth, and improving the quality of cus-
tomer service. These key performance indicators (KPIs) are monitored closely by 
senior managers who want to find and eliminate defects that harm performance. It 
is strange then that so few managers take the time to understand how performance 
is impacted by poor-quality data. Two examples make a strong case for investment 
in high-quality data.
Retail banks: For retail bank executives, risk management is the number- 
one issue. Disregard for risk contributed to the 2008 financial services meltdown. 
Despite risk management strategies, many banks still incur huge losses. Part of the 
problem in many banks is that their ISs enable them to monitor risk only at the 
product level—mortgages, loans, or credit cards. Product-level risk management 
ISs monitor a customer’s risk exposure for mortgages, or for loans, or for credit 
cards, and so forth—but not for a customer for all products. With product-level ISs, 
a bank cannot see the full risk exposure of a customer. The limitations of these siloed 
product-level risks have serious implications for business performance because 
bad-risk customers cannot be identified easily, and customer data in the various ISs 
may differ. For example, consider what happens when each product-level risk man-
agement IS feeds data to marketing ISs. Marketing may offer bad-risk customers 
incentives to take out another credit card or loan that they cannot repay. And since 

84  Chapter 3     Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management
the bank cannot identify its best customers either, they may be ignored and enticed 
away by better deals offered by competitors. This scenario illustrates how data own-
ership and data-quality management are critical to risk management. Data defects 
and incomplete data can quickly trigger inaccurate marketing and mounting losses. 
One retail bank facing these problems lost 16 percent of its mortgage business 
within 18 months while losses in its credit card business increased (Ferguson, 2012).
Manufacturing. Many manufacturers are at the mercy of a powerful customer 
base—large retailers. Manufacturers want to align their processes with those of 
large retail customers to keep them happy. This alignment makes it possible for 
a retailer to order centrally for all stores or to order locally from a specific manu-
facturer. Supporting both central and local ordering makes it difficult to plan pro-
duction runs. For example, each manufacturing site has to collect order data from 
central ordering and local ordering systems to get a complete picture of what to 
manufacture at each site. Without accurate, up-to-date data, orders may go unfilled, 
or manufacturers may have excess inventory. One manufacturer who tried to keep 
its key retailer happy by implementing central and local ordering could not process 
orders correctly at each manufacturing site. No data ownership and lack of control 
over how order data flowed throughout business operations had negative impacts. 
Conflicting and duplicate business processes at each manufacturing site caused data 
errors, leading to mistakes in manufacturing, packing, and shipments. Customers 
were very dissatisfied.
These two examples represent the consequences of a lack of data ownership 
and data quality. Understanding the impact of mismanaged data makes data owner-
ship and accurate data a higher priority.
Compliance with numerous federal and state regulations relies on rock-solid 
data and trusted metrics used for regulatory reporting. Data ownership, data quality, 
and formally managed data are high on the agenda of CFOs and CEOs who are held 
personally accountable if their company is found to be in violation of regulations.
DATA LIFE CYCLE AND 
DATA PRINCIPLES
The data life cycle is a model that illustrates the way data travel through an organi-
zation, as shown in Figure 3.11. The data life cycle begins with storage in a database, 
to being loaded into a data warehouse for analysis, then reported to knowledge 
workers or used in business apps. Supply chain management (SCM), customer 
relationship management (CRM), and e-commerce are enterprise applications that 
require up-to-date, readily accessible data to function properly.
Three general data principles relate to the data life cycle perspective and help 
to guide IT investment decisions:
1.  Principle of diminishing data value. The value of data diminishes as they age. 
This is a simple, yet powerful principle. Most organizations cannot operate at 
peak performance with blind spots (lack of data availability) of 30 days or 
longer. Global fi nancial services institutions rely on near real time data for peak 
performance.
Figure 3.11 Data life cycle.
Data Sources
and Databases
Personal
expertise &
judgment
Data
Visualization
SCM
E-commerce
Strategy
Others
CRM
Data Analysis
Data Storage
Results
Business Analytics
Business
Applications
Internal
Data
External
Data
Data
Warehouse
Data
Marts
Data
Marts
OLAP,
Queries,
EIS, DSS
Data
Mining
Decision
Support
Knowledge
and its
Management

3.1     Database Management Systems     85  
2.  Principle of 90/90 data use. According to the 90/90 data-use principle, a majority 
of stored data, as high as 90 percent, is seldom accessed after 90 days (except for 
auditing purposes). That is, roughly 90 percent of data lose most of their value 
after 3 months.
3.  Principle of data in context. The capability to capture, process, format, and 
distribute data in near real time or faster requires a huge investment in data 
architecture (Chapter 2) and infrastructure to link remote POS systems to data 
storage, data analysis systems, and reporting apps. The investment can be justi-
fi ed on the principle that data must be integrated, processed, analyzed, and for-
matted into “actionable information.”
MASTER DATA AND 
MASTER DATA 
MANAGEMENT
As data become more complex and their volumes explode, database performance 
degrades. One solution is the use of master data and master data management 
(MDM), as introduced in Chapter 2. MDM processes integrate data from various 
sources or enterprise applications to create a more complete (unified) view of a cus-
tomer, product, or other entity. Figure 3.12 shows how master data serve as a layer 
between transactional data in a database and analytical data in a data warehouse. 
Although vendors may claim that their MDM solution creates “a single version of 
the truth,” this claim is probably not true. In reality, MDM cannot create a single 
unified version of the data because constructing a completely unified view of all 
master data is simply not possible.
Master Reference File and Data Entities
Realistically, MDM consolidates data from various data sources into a master refer-
ence file, which then feeds data back to the applications, thereby creating accurate 
and consistent data across the enterprise. In IT at Work 3.1, participants in the 
health-care supply chain essentially developed a master reference file of its key data 
entities. A data entity is anything real or abstract about which a company wants to 
collect and store data. Master data entities are the main entities of a company, such 
as customers, products, suppliers, employees, and assets.
Each department has distinct master data needs. Marketing, for example, is 
concerned with product pricing, brand, and product packaging, whereas production 
is concerned with product costs and schedules. A customer master reference file can 
feed data to all enterprise systems that have a customer relationship component, 
thereby providing a more unified picture of customers. Similarly, a product master 
reference file can feed data to all the production systems within the enterprise.
An MDM includes tools for cleaning and auditing the master data elements as 
well as tools for integrating and synchronizing data to make them more accessible. 
MDM offers a solution for managers who are frustrated with how fragmented and 
dispersed their data sources are.
Figure 3.12 An enterprise 
has transactional, master, and 
analytical data.
Transactional data supports
the applications.
Transactional
Data
Master
Data
Analytical
Data
Enterprise
Data
Master data describes the enterprise’s
business entities upon which
transactions are done and the
dimensions (Customer, Product,
Supplier, Account, and Site), around
which analyses are done.
Analytical data supports
decision making and planning.

86  Chapter 3     Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management
At an insurance company, the cost of processing each claim 
is $1, but the average downstream cost due to errors in a 
claim is $300. The $300 average downstream costs included 
manual handling of exceptions, customer support calls initi-
ated due to errors in claims, and reissuing corrected docu-
ments for any claims processed incorrectly the first time. In 
addition, the company faced significant soft costs from 
regulatory risk, lost revenues due to customer dissatisfaction, 
and overpayment on claims due to claims-processing errors. 
These soft costs are not included in the hard cost of $300.
Every day health-care administrators and others through-
out the health-care supply chain waste 24 to 30 percent of 
their time correcting data errors. Each transaction error costs 
$60 to $80 to correct. In addition, about 60 percent of all 
invoices among supply chain partners contain errors, and 
each invoice error costs $40 to $400 to reconcile. Altogether, 
errors and conflicting data increase supply costs by 3 to 
5 percent. In other words, each year billions of dollars are 
wasted in the health-care supply chain because of supply 
chain data disconnects, which refer to one organization’s IS 
not understanding data from another’s IS.
Questions
1. Why are the downstream costs of data errors so high?
2. What are soft costs?
3.  Explain how soft costs might exceed hard costs. Give an 
example.
IT at Work 3 .1
Data Errors Increase Costs Downstream
Questions
1. Describe a database and a database management system (DBMS).
2. Explain what an online transaction-processing (OLAP) system does.
3. Why are data in databases volatile?
4. Explain what processes DBMSs are optimized to perform.
5. What are the business costs or risks of poor data quality?
6. Describe the data life cycle.
7. What is the function of master data management (MDM)?
The senior marketing manager of a major U.S. retailer learned that her company 
was steadily losing market share to a competitor in many of their profitable seg-
ments. Losses continued even after a sales campaign that combined online promo-
tions with improved merchandizing (Brown, Chui, & Manyika, 2011). To under-
stand the causes, a team of senior managers studied their competitor’s practices. 
They discovered that the problems were not simply due to basic marketing tactics, 
but ran much deeper. The competitor:
• Had invested heavily in IT to collect, integrate, and analyze data from each 
store and sales unit.
• Had linked these data to suppliers’ databases, making it possible to adjust 
prices in real time, to reorder hot-selling items automatically, and to shift 
items from store to store easily.
• Was constantly testing, integrating, and reporting information instantly 
available across the organization—from the store floor to the CFO’s office.
The senior management team realized that their competitor was stealing away 
their customers because big data analytics enabled them to pinpoint improvement 
3.2  Data Warehouse and Big Data Analytics
Market share is the percent-
age of total sales in a market 
captured by a brand, product, 
or company.

3.2     Data Warehouse and Big Data Analytics     87  
opportunities across the supply chain—from purchasing to in-store availabil-
ity management. Specifically, the competitor was able to predict how customers 
would behave and used that knowledge to be prepared to respond quickly. This 
case is an example of what researchers have learned. According to the McKinsey 
Global Institute (MGI), big data analytics have helped companies outperform their 
competitors. MGI estimates that retailers using big data analytics increase their 
operating margin by more than 60 percent. Leading retailers, insurance, and 
financial services use big data to capture market share away from local competi-
tors (Breuer, Forina, & Moulton, 2013). An IBM study shows that companies with 
advanced business analytics and optimization can experience 20 times more profit 
growth and 30 percent higher return on invested capital (ibm.com, 2011).
In this section, you will learn about the value, challenges, and technologies 
involved in putting data and analytics to use to support decisions and action. The four 
V’s of analytics—variety, volume, velocity, and veracity—are described in Table 3.2.
Big data can have a dramatic impact on the success of any enterprise, or they 
can be a low-contributing major expense. However, success is not achieved with 
technology alone. Many companies are collecting and capturing huge amounts of 
data, but spending very little effort to ensure the veracity and value of data captured 
at the transactional stage or point of origin. Emphasis in this direction will not only 
increase confidence in the datasets, but also significantly reduce the efforts for ana-
lytics and enhance the quality of decision making. Success depends also on ensuring 
that you avoid invalid assumptions, which can be done by testing the assumptions 
during analysis.
Operating margin is a 
measure of the percent of a 
company’s revenue left over 
after paying for its variable 
costs, such as wages and 
raw materials. An increasing 
margin means the company 
is earning more per dollar of 
sales. The higher the operating 
margin, the better.
TABLE 3.2 
Four V’s of Data Analytics
1. 
 Variety: The analytic environment has expanded from pulling data from enter-
prise systems to include big data and unstructured sources.
2. 
 Volume: Large volumes of structured and unstructured data are analyzed.
3. 
 Velocity: Speed of access to reports that are drawn from data defi nes the differ-
ence between effective and ineffective analytics.
4. 
 Veracity: Validating data and extracting insights that managers and workers 
can trust are key factors of successful analytics. Trust in analytics has grown 
more diffi cult with the explosion of data sources.
Managing and Interpreting Big Data Are in Highest Demand
The IT job market is on the rise, and top jobs include 
anything in big data, mobile, cloud, or IT security. 
TechRepublic held a roundtable of IT executives and 
tech recruiters to learn about the latest hiring trends. 
Here are three forecasts (Hammond, 2014):
•  Pete Kazanjy, co-founder of TalentBin, stated 
there “will be the continued uptick in demand 
for technical talent, but more broadly across the 
entire economy, and not just siloed in its own tech 
sector. Technology is ceasing to be a sector on its 
own, and is instead becoming more critical in every 
industry.”
•  Tendu Yogurtcu, vice president of engineering at 
Syncsort, explained: “With the rising popularity of 
Hadoop, positions are geared towards filling these 
roles, with lots of interest placed on big data and data 
mining and analysis. Most of the new hires are recent 
graduates, since they embody a lot of creativity and 
forward thinking, both qualities needed in the indus-
try of big data.”
CAREER INSIGHT 3 . 1  JOBS

88  Chapter 3     Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management
TORTURE DATA LONG 
ENOUGH AND IT WILL 
CONFESS . . . BUT MAY 
NOT TELL THE TRUTH
As someone posted in a Harvard Business Review (HBR) blog, “If you torture 
the data long enough, it will confess” (Neill, 2013). That is, analytics will produce 
results, but those results may be meaningless or misleading. For example, some 
believe that Super Bowl results in February predict whether the stock market will 
go up or down that year. If the National Football Conference (NFC) wins, the mar-
ket goes up; otherwise, stocks take a dive. Looking at results over the past 30 years, 
most often the NFC has won the Super Bowl and the market has gone up. Does this 
mean anything? No.
HUMAN EXPERTISE 
AND JUDGMENT ARE 
NEEDED
Human expertise and judgment are needed to interpret the output of analytics 
(refer to Figure 3.1). Data are worthless if you cannot analyze, interpret, under-
stand, and apply the results in context. This brings up several challenges:
• Data need to be prepared for analysis. For example, data that are incom-
plete or duplicated need to be fixed.
• Dirty data degrade the value of analytics. The “cleanliness” of data is very 
important to data mining and analysis projects. Analysts have complained 
that data analytics is like janitorial work because they spend so much time 
on manual, error-prone processes to clean the data. Large data volumes and 
variety mean more data that are dirty and harder to handle.
• Data must be put into meaningful context. If the wrong analysis or datasets 
are used, the output would be nonsense, as in the example of the Super Bowl 
winners and stock market performance. Stated in reverse, managers need 
context in order to understand how to interpret traditional and big data.
IT at Work 3.2 describes how big data analytics, collaboration, and human 
expertise have transformed the new drug development process.
•  Robert Noble, director of software of engineering 
at WhitePages, gave an overview of the recruiting 
issues: “The demand for tech and software talent 
is exploding. A lot of companies have been aggres-
sive and creative to compete for candidates in these 
fields. For instance, besides compensation and the 
technical work of the job role, companies are using 
culture as a key differentiator. They are not only 
talking about the company, they are also talking 
about the perks outside of work, and benefits, like 
cool team events, providing free haircuts, massages, 
food and more.”
Drug development is a high-risk business. Almost 90 percent 
of new drugs ultimately fail. One of the challenges has been 
the amount, variety, and complexity of the data that need to 
be systematically analyzed. Big data technologies and private–
public partnerships have made biomedical analytics feasible.
New Drug Development Had Been Slow 
and Expensive
Biotechnology advances have produced massive data on the 
biological causes of disease. However, analyzing these data 
and converting discoveries into treatments are much more 
difficult. Not all biomedical insights lead to effective drug 
targets, and choosing the wrong target leads to failures late in 
the drug development process, costing time, money, and lives. 
Developing a new drug—from early discovery through Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) approval—takes over a decade 
and has a failure rate of more than 95 percent (Figure 3.13). As 
a consequence, each success ends up costing more than $1 
billion.
IT at Work 3 .2
Researchers Use Genomics and Big Data in Drug Discovery

3.2     Data Warehouse and Big Data Analytics     89  
For example, by the time Pfizer Inc., Johnson & Johnson, 
and Eli Lilly & Co. announced their new drugs had only lim-
ited benefit for Alzheimer’s patients in late-stage testing, the 
industry had spent more than $30 billion researching amyloid 
plaque in the brain.
Cutting Risk of Failure
Drug makers, governments, and academic researchers have 
partnered to improve the odds of drug success. Partnerships 
bring together the expertise of scientists from biology, 
chemistry, bioinformatics, genomics, and big data. They are 
using big data to identify biological targets for drugs and 
eliminate failures before they reach the human testing stage.
GlaxoSmithKline, the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI), 
and the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute established the Centre 
for Therapeutic Target Validation (CTTV) near Cambridge, 
England. CTTV partners combine cutting-edge genomics with 
the ability to collect and analyze massive amounts of biological 
data. By not developing drugs that target the wrong biological 
pathways, they avoid wasting billions of research dollars.
Janet Thornton, director of the EBI, explained that 
maximizing “our use of ‘big data’ in the life sciences is 
critical for solving some of society’s most pressing problems” 
(Kitamura, 2014). With biology now a data-driven discipline, 
collaborations such as CTTV are needed to improve efficien-
cies, cut costs, and provide the best opportunities for suc-
cess. Other private–public partnerships that had formed to 
harness drug research and big data include:
• 
 Accelerating Medicines Partnership and U.S. National 
Institutes of Health (NIH). In February 2014 the NIH 
announced that the agency, 10 pharmaceutical companies, 
and nonprofit organizations were investing $230 million in 
the Accelerating Medicines Partnership.
• 
 Target Discovery Institute and Oxford University. 
Oxford University opened the Target Discovery Institute in 
2013. Target Discovery helps to identify drug targets and 
molecular interactions at a critical point in a disease-
causing pathway—that is, when those diseases will 
respond to drug therapy. Researchers try to understand 
complex biological processes by analyzing image data 
that have been acquired at the microscopic scale.
“By changing our business model, taking a more open-
minded approach to sharing information and forging collab-
orations like the CTTV, we believe there is an opportunity to 
accelerate the development of innovative new medicines,” 
said Patrick Vallance, president of Glaxo’s pharmaceuticals 
research and development (Kitamura, 2014).
Sources: Compiled from Kitamura (2014), NIH (2014), and HealthCanal 
(2014).
Questions
1.  What are the consequences of new drug development 
failures?
2.  What factors have made biomedical analytics feasible? 
Why?
3.  Large-scale big data analytics are expensive. How can the 
drug makers justify investments in big data?
4.  Why would drug makers such as Glaxo and Pfizer be 
willing to share data given the fierce competition in their 
industry?
Figure 3.13 An estimated 90 to 95 percent of new 
drugs that undergo clinical trials ultimately fail. These 
costs drive up the prices of drugs that are a success—
to an average of $1 billion.
© anyaivanova/Shutterstock 
ENTERPRISE DATA 
WAREHOUSE AND 
DATA MART
Data warehouses store data from various source systems and databases across 
an enterprise in order to run analytical queries against huge datasets collected 
over long time periods. Warehouses are the primary source of cleansed data 
for analysis, reporting, and BI. Often the data are summarized in ways that enable 
quick responses to queries. For instance, query results can reveal changes in cus-
tomer behavior and drive the decision to redevelop the advertising strategy.

90  Chapter 3     Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management
Data warehouses that pull together data from disparate sources and databases 
across an entire enterprise are called enterprise data warehouses (EDW). Tech 
Note 3.2 summarizes key characteristics of the two types of data stores.
The high cost of data warehouses can make them too expensive for a company 
to implement. Data marts are lower-cost, scaled-down versions that can be imple-
mented in a much shorter time, for example, in less than 90 days. Data marts serve 
a specific department or function, such as finance, marketing, or operations. Since 
they store smaller amounts of data, they are faster, easier to use, and navigate.
TECH NOTE 3.2 Summary of Differences Between Databases and Data Warehouses
Databases are:
• Designed and optimized to ensure that every transaction gets recorded and 
stored immediately.
• Volatile because data are constantly being updated, added, or edited.
• OLTP systems.
Data warehouses are:
• Designed and optimized for analysis and quick response to queries.
• Nonvolatile. This stability is important to being able to analyze the data and 
make comparisons. When data are stored, they might never be changed or 
deleted in order to do trend analysis or make comparisons with newer data.
• OLAP systems.
• Subject-oriented, which means that the data captured are organized to have 
similar data linked together.
Procedures to Prepare EDW Data for Analytics
Consider a bank’s database. Every deposit, withdrawal, loan payment, or other 
transaction adds or changes data. The volatility caused by constant transaction 
processing makes data analysis difficult—and the demands to process millions of 
transactions per second consume the database’s processing power. In contrast, data 
in warehouses are relatively stable, as needed for analysis. Therefore, select data 
are moved from databases to a warehouse. Specifically, data are:
1. Extracted from designated databases.
2. Transformed by standardizing formats, cleaning the data, integrating them.
3. Loaded into a data warehouse.
These three procedures—extract, transform, and load—are referred to by their 
initials ETL (Figure 3.14). In a warehouse, data are read-only; that is, they do not 
change until the next ETL.
Three technologies involved in preparing raw data for analytics include ETL, 
change data capture (CDC), and data deduplication (“deduping the data”). CDC 
processes capture the changes made at data sources and then apply those changes 
throughout enterprise data stores to keep data synchronized. CDC minimizes the 
resources required for ETL processes by only dealing with data changes. Deduping 
processes remove duplicates and standardize data formats, which helps to minimize 
storage and data synch.

3.2     Data Warehouse and Big Data Analytics     91  
BUILDING A DATA 
WAREHOUSE
Figure 3.15 diagrams the process of building and using a data warehouse. The orga-
nization’s data are stored in operational systems (left side of the figure). Not all data 
are transferred to the data warehouse. Frequently, only summary data are trans-
ferred. The warehouse organizes the data in multiple ways—by subject, functional 
area, vendor, and product. As shown, the data warehouse architecture defines the 
flow of data that starts when data are captured by transaction systems; the source 
data are stored in transactional (operational) databases; ETL processes move data 
from databases into data warehouses or data marts, where the data are available for 
access, reports, and analysis.
REAL TIME SUPPORT 
FROM ACTIVE DATA 
WAREHOUSE
Early data warehouse technology primarily supported strategic applications that 
did not require instant response time, direct customer interaction, or integration 
with operational systems. ETL might have been done once per week or once per 
month. But, demand for information to support real time customer interaction and 
operations leads to real time data warehousing and analytics—known as an active 
data warehouse (ADW). Massive increases in computing power, processing speeds, 
and memory made ADW possible. ADW are not designed to support executives’ 
Business Intelligence Management
Analytics
Reporting
Queries
Data Mining
Information
Data Marts
Data Mart
Data
Warehouse
Data
Warehouse
Business
Intelligence
Environment
ETL
processes
Transaction
Systems
Operational
Databases
Figure 3.15 Database, data warehouse and marts, and BI architecture.
Figure 3.14 Data enter 
databases from transaction 
systems. Data of interest are 
extracted from databases, 
transformed to clean and 
standardize them, and 
then loaded into a data 
warehouse. These three 
processes are called ETL.
© Vallepu/Shutterstock 

92  Chapter 3     Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management
strategic decision making, but rather to support operations. For example, shipping 
companies like DHL use huge fleets of trucks to move millions of packages. Every 
day and all day, operational managers make thousands of decisions that affect the 
bottom line, such as: “Do we need four trucks for this run?” “With two drivers 
delayed by bad weather, do we need to bring in extra help?” Traditional data ware-
housing is not suited for immediate operational support, but active data warehous-
ing is. For example, companies with an ADW are able to:
• Interact with a customer to provide superior customer service.
• Respond to business events in near real time.
• Share up-to-date status data among merchants, vendors, customers, and 
associates.
Here are some examples of how two companies use ADW:
Capital One. Capital One uses its ADW to track each customer’s “profitability 
score” to determine the level of customer service to provide that person. Higher-
cost personalized service is only given to those with high scores. For instance, when 
a customer calls Capital One, he or she is asked to enter a credit card number, which 
is linked to a profitability score. Low-profit customers get a voice response unit 
only; high-profit customers are connected to a live customer service representative 
(CSR) because the company wants to minimize the risk of losing those customers.
Travelocity. If you use Travelocity, an ADW is finding the best travel deals 
especially for you. The goal is to use “today’s data today” instead of “yesterday’s 
data today.” The online travel agency’s ADW analyzes your search history and des-
tinations of interest; then predicts travel offers that you would most likely purchase. 
Offers are both relevant and timely to enhance your experience, which helps close 
the sale in a very competitive market. For example, when a customer is searching 
flights and hotels in Las Vegas, Travelocity recognizes the interest—the customer 
wants to go to Vegas. The ADW searches for the best-priced flights from all car-
riers, builds a few package deals, and presents them in real time to the customer. 
When customers see a personalized offer they are already interested in, the ADW 
helps generate a better customer experience. The real time data-driven experience 
increases the conversion rate and sales.
Data warehouse content can be delivered to decision makers throughout the 
enterprise via the cloud or company-owned intranets. Users can view, query, and 
analyze the data and produce reports using Web browsers. These are extremely 
economical and effective data delivery methods.
Data Warehousing Supports Action 
as Well as Decisions
Many organizations built data warehouses because they were frustrated with incon-
sistent data that could not support decisions or actions. Viewed from this perspec-
tive, data warehouses are infrastructure investments that companies make to support 
ongoing and future operations, such as:
• Marketing and sales. Keeps people informed of the status of products, mar-
keting program effectiveness, and product line profitability; and allows them 
to take intelligent action to maximize per-customer profitability.
• Pricing and contracts. Calculates costs accurately in order to optimize 
pricing of a contract. Without accurate cost data, prices may be below or 
too near to cost; or prices may be uncompetitive because they are too high.
• Forecasting. Estimates customer demand for products and services.
• Sales. Calculates sales profitability and productivity for all territories 
and regions; analyzes results by geography, product, sales group, or 
individual.

3.2     Data Warehouse and Big Data Analytics     93  
• Financial. Provides real time data for optimal credit terms, portfolio analysis, 
and actions that reduce risk or bad debt expense.
Table 3.3 summarizes several successful applications of data warehouses.
BIG DATA ANALYTICS 
AND DATA DISCOVERY
Data analytics help users discover insights. These insights combined with human 
expertise enable people to recognize meaningful relationships more quickly or easily; 
and furthermore, realize the strategic implications of these situations. Imagine try-
ing to make sense of the fast and vast data generated by social media campaigns on 
Facebook or by sensors attached to machines or objects. Low-cost sensors make it 
possible to monitor all types of physical things—while analytics make it possible to 
understand those data in order to take action in real time. For example, sensors data 
can be analyzed in real time:
• To monitor and regulate the temperature and climate conditions of perish-
able foods as they are transported from farm to supermarket.
• To sniff for signs of spoilage of fruits and raw vegetables and detect the risk 
of E. coli contamination.
• To track the condition of operating machinery and predict the probability 
of failure.
• To track the wear of engines and determine when preventive maintenance 
is needed.
TABLE 3.3 
Data Warehouse Applications by Industry
Industry 
Applications
Airline 
 Crew assignment, aircraft deployment, analysis of 
route profi tability, customer loyalty promotions
Banking and fi nancial  
 Customer service, trend analysis, product and 
service services promotions, reduction of IS 
expenses
Credit card 
 Customer service, new information service for a 
fee, fraud detection
Defense contracts 
 Technology transfer, production of military 
applications
E-business 
 Data warehouses with personalization capabilities, 
marketing/shopping preferences allowing for 
up-selling and cross-selling
Government 
Reporting on crime areas, homeland security
Health care 
 Reduction of operational expenses
Investment and insurance 
 Risk management, market movements analysis, 
customer tendencies analysis, portfolio 
management
Retail chain 
 Trend analysis, buying pattern analysis, pricing 
policy, inventory control, sales promotions, optimal 
distribution channel decision

94  Chapter 3     Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management
Machine-generated sensor data are becoming a larger proportion of big data 
(Figure 3.16), according to a research report by IDC (Lohr, 2012b). It is predicted 
that these data will increase to 42 percent of all data by 2020, representing a signifi-
cant increase from the 11 percent level of 2005.
The value of analyzing machine data was recognized by General Electric (GE) 
Company, the United States’ largest industrial company. Since 2011 GE has been put-
ting sensors on everything from gas turbines to hospital beds. GE’s mission is to design 
the software for gathering data, and the algorithms for analyzing them to optimize cost 
savings and productivity gains. Across the industries that it covers, GE estimates effi-
ciency opportunities will slash costs by as much as $150 billion (Lohr, 2012a). 
Federal health reform efforts have pushed health-care organizations toward 
big data and analytics. These organizations are planning to use big data analytics to 
support revenue cycle management, resource utilization, fraud prevention, health 
management, and quality improvement. 
Hadoop and MapReduce
Big data volumes exceed the processing capacity of conventional database 
infrastructures. A widely used processing platform is Apache Hadoop (hadoop.
apache.org/). It places no conditions on the structure of the data it can process. 
Hadoop distributes computing problems across a number of servers. Hadoop 
implements MapReduce in two stages:
1.  Map stage: MapReduce breaks up the huge dataset into smaller subsets; then dis-
tributes the subsets among multiple servers where they are partially processed.
2.  Reduce stage: The partial results from the map stage are then recombined and 
made available for analytic tools.
Figure 3.16 Machine-
generated data from physical 
objects are becoming a much 
larger portion of big data 
and analytics.
© Kittichais/iStockphoto 

3.2     Data Warehouse and Big Data Analytics     95  
To store data, Hadoop has its own distributed file system, HaDoop File Systems 
(HDFS), which functions in three stages:
• Loads data into HDFS.
• Performs the MapReduce operations.
• Retrieves results from HDFS.
Figure 3.17 diagrams how Facebook uses database technology and Hadoop. IT 
at Work 3.3 describes how First Wind has applied big data analytics to improve the 
operations of its wind farms and to support sustainability of the planet by reducing 
environmentally damaging carbon emissions.
Figure 3.17 Facebook’s 
MySQL database and 
Hadoop technology provide 
customized pages for its 
members.
Wind power can play a major role in meeting America’s ris-
ing demand for electricity—as much as 20 percent by 2030. 
Using more domestic wind power would reduce the nation’s 
dependence on foreign sources of natural gas and also 
decrease carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions that contribute to 
adverse climate change.
First Wind is an independent North American renew-
able energy company focused on the development, financ-
ing, construction, ownership, and operation of utility-scale 
power projects in the United States. Based in Boston, First 
Wind has developed and operates 980 megawatts (MW) of 
generating capacity at 16 wind energy projects in Maine, 
New York, Vermont, Utah, Washington, and Hawaii. First 
Wind has a large network of sensors embedded in the wind 
turbines, which generate huge volumes of data continu-
ously. The data are transmitted in real time and analyzed 
on a 24/7 real time basis to understand the performance of 
each wind turbine.
Sensors collect massive amounts of data on the tem-
perature, wind speeds, location, and pitch of the blades. 
The data are analyzed to study the operation of each turbine 
in order to adjust them to maximum efficiency. By analyzing 
sensor data, highly refined measurements of wind speeds 
are possible. In wintry conditions, turbines can detect when 
they are icing up, and speed up or change pitch to knock off 
the ice. In the past, when it was extremely windy, turbines in 
the entire farm had been turned off to prevent damage from 
rotating too fast. Now First Wind can identify the specific 
portion of turbines that need to be shut down. Based on 
certain alerts, decisions often need to be taken within a few 
seconds.
Upgrades on 123 turbines on two wind farms have 
improved energy output by 3 percent, or about 120 megawatt 
hours per turbine per year. That improvement translates to 
$1.2 million in additional revenue a year from these two 
farms.
Sources: Compiled from Lohr (2012a), FirstWind.com (2014), and U.S. 
Department of Energy (2008).
Questions
1. What are the benefits of big data analytics to First Wind?
2.  What are the benefits of big data analytics to the environ-
ment and the nation?
3.  How do big data analytics impact the performance of 
wind farms?
IT at Work 3 .3
Industrial Project Relies on Big Data Analytics
MySQL databases capture and
store Facebook’s data.
Results are transferred back into
MySQL for use in pages that are
loaded for members. 
Members see customized Facebook
pages.
Data are loaded into Hadoop where
processing occurs, such as identifying
recommendations for you based on
your friends’ interests.

96  Chapter 3     Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management
Questions
1.  Why are human expertise and judgment important to data analytics? 
Give an example.
2. What is the relationship between data quality and the value of analytics?
3. Why do data need to be put into a meaningful context?
4. What are the differences between databases and data warehouses?
5. Explain ETL and CDC.
6. What is an advantage of an active data warehouse (ADW)?
7. Why might a company invest in a data mart?
8. How can manufacturers and health care benefi t from data analytics?
9. Explain how Hadoop implements MapReduce in two stages.
As you read, DBMSs support queries to extract data or get answers from huge 
databases. But in order to perform queries, you must first know what to ask for or 
what you want answered. In data mining and text mining, it is the opposite. Data 
and text mining are used to discover knowledge that you did not know existed in 
the databases.
Business analytics describes the entire function of applying technologies, algo-
rithms, human expertise, and judgment. Data and text mining are specific analytic 
techniques.
3.3  Data and Text Mining
CREATING BUSINESS 
VALUE
Enterprises invest in data mining tools to add business value. Business value falls 
into three categories, as shown in Figure 3.18.
Here are brief cases illustrating the types of business value created by data and 
text mining.
1.  Using pattern analysis, Argo Corporation, an agricultural equipment manufacturer 
based in Georgia, was able to optimize product confi guration options for farm 
machinery and real time customer demand to determine the optimal base confi gu-
rations for its machines. As a result, Argo reduced product variety by 61 percent 
and cut days of inventory by 81 percent while still maintaining its service levels.
2.  The mega-retailer Walmart wanted its online shoppers to fi nd what they were 
looking for faster. Walmart analyzed clickstream data from its 45 million monthly 
online shoppers; then combined that data with product and category-related 
popularity scores. The popularity scores had been generated by text mining the 
retailer’s social media streams. Lessons learned from the analysis were integrated 
into the Polaris search engine used by customers on the company’s website. 
Polaris has yielded a 10 to 15 percent increase in online shoppers completing a 
purchase, which equals roughly $1 billion in incremental online sales.
3.  McDonald’s bakery operation replaced manual equipment with high-speed 
photo analyses to inspect thousands of buns per minute for color, size, and sesame 
seed distribution. Automatically, ovens and baking processes adjust instantly 
to create uniform buns and reduce thousands of pounds of waste each year. 
Another food products company also uses photo analyses to sort every french 
fry produced in order to optimize quality.
4.  Infi nity Insurance discovered new insights that it applied to improve the per-
formance of its fraud operation. The insurance company text mined years of 

3.3     Data and Text Mining     97  
adjuster reports to look for key drivers of fraudulent claims. As a result, the 
company reduced fraud by 75 percent, and eliminated marketing to customers 
with a high likelihood of fraudulent claims.
DATA AND TEXT 
MINING
Data mining software enables users to analyze data from various dimensions or 
angles, categorize them, and find correlations or patterns among fields in the data 
warehouse. Up to 75 percent of an organization’s data are nonstructured word-
processing documents, social media, text messages, audio, video, images and diagrams, 
faxes and memos, call center or claims notes, and so on. Text mining is a broad 
category that involves interpreting words and concepts in context. Any customer 
becomes a brand advocate or adversary by freely expressing opinions and attitudes 
that reach millions of other current or prospective customers on social media. Text 
mining helps companies tap into the explosion of customer opinions expressed 
online. Social commentary and social media are being mined for sentiment analysis 
or to understand consumer intent. Innovative companies know they could be more 
successful in meeting their customers’ needs, if they just understood them better. 
Tools and techniques for analyzing text, documents, and other nonstructured con-
tent are available from several vendors.
Combing Data and Text Mining
Combining data and text mining can create even greater value. Palomäki and 
Oksanen (2012) pointed out that mining text or nonstructural data enables organi-
zations to forecast the future instead of merely reporting the past. They also noted 
that forecasting methods using existing structured data and nonstructured text from 
both internal and external sources provide the best view of what lies ahead.
Figure 3.18 Business value 
falls into three buckets.
Making more informed decisions at the time they need to be made
Discovering unknown insights, patterns, or relationships
Automating and streamlining or digitizing business processes
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) 
was established in 1958 to prevent strategic surprise from 
negatively impacting U.S. national security and to create stra-
tegic surprise for U.S. adversaries by maintaining the techno-
logical superiority of the U.S. military. One DARPA office is 
the Information Innovation Office (I2O). I2O aims to ensure 
U.S. technological superiority in all areas where information 
can provide a decisive military advantage. This includes intel-
ligence, surveillance, reconnaissance, and operations support. 
Figure 3.19 is an example. Nexus 7 is one of DARPA’s intel-
ligence systems.
Nexus 7, Data Mining System
Nexus 7 is a massive data mining system put into use by the 
U.S. military in Afghanistan to understand Afghan society, 
and to look for signs of weakness or instability. The classified 
program ties together “everything from spy radars to fruit 
prices” in order to read the Afghan social situation and help 
IT at Work 3 .4
U.S. Military Uses Data Mining Spy Machine for Cultural Intelligence

98  Chapter 3     Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management
the U.S. military plot its strategy. DARPA describes Nexus 
7 as both a breakthrough data analysis tool and an oppor-
tunity to move beyond its traditional, long-range research 
role into a more active wartime mission. Nexus 7 gathers 
information that can reveal exactly where a town is working 
and where it is broken; and where the traffic piles up and 
where it flows free.
Cultural Intelligence
On the military’s classified network, DARPA technologists 
describe Nexus 7 as far-reaching and revolutionary, taking 
data from many agencies to produce population-centric, 
cultural intelligence. For example, Nexus 7 searches the 
vast U.S. spy apparatus to figure out which communities in 
Afghanistan are falling apart and which are stabilizing, which 
are loyal to the government in Kabul, and which are falling 
under the influence of militants.
A small Nexus 7 team is currently working in Afghanistan 
with military-intelligence officers, while a much larger group 
in Virginia with a “large-scale processing capacity” handles 
the bulk of the data crunching, according to DARPA. “Data 
in the hands of some of the best computer scientists working 
side by side with operators provides useful insights in ways 
that might not have otherwise been realized” (Shachtman, 
2011).
Sources: Compiled from DARPA.mil (2012), Shachtman (2011), and 
Defense Systems (2011).
Questions
1. What is Nexus 7?
2.  How does data mining help I2O achieve its mission?
3. What are Nexus 7’s data sources?
4.  According to DARPA, what benefit does Nexus 7 provide 
that could not be realized without it?
Text Analytics Procedure
With text analytics, information is extracted from large quantities of various types 
of textual information. The basic steps involved in text analytics include:
1.  Exploration. First, documents are explored. This might occur in the form of sim-
ple word counts in a document collection, or by manually creating topic areas to 
categorize documents after reading a sample of them. For example, what are the 
major types of issues (brake or engine failure) that have been identifi ed in recent 
automobile warranty claims? A challenge of the exploration effort is misspelled 
or abbreviated words, acronyms, or slang.
2.  Preprocessing. Before analysis or the automated categorization of content, the 
text may need to be preprocessed to standardize it to the extent possible. As in 
traditional analysis, up to 80 percent of preprocessing time can be spent preparing 
and standardizing the data. Misspelled words, abbreviations, and slang may need 
to be transformed into consistent terms. For instance, BTW would be standard-
ized to “by the way” and “left voice message” could be tagged as “lvm.”
3.  Categorizing and Modeling. Content is then ready to be categorized. Catego-
rizing messages or documents from information contained within them can be 
achieved using statistical models and business rules. As with traditional model 
development, sample documents are examined to train the models. Additional 
documents are then processed to validate the accuracy and precision of the 
model, and fi nally new documents are evaluated using the fi nal model (scored). 
Models can then be put into production for the automated processing of new 
documents as they arrive.

3.4     Business Intelligence     99  
Quicken Loans, Inc. is the largest online mortgage lender and second largest overall 
retail lender in the United States. The Detroit-based company closed more than 
$70 billion in home loans in 2012, which was more than double the $30 billion figure 
in 2011. In 2013 Quicken Loans continued its explosive growth, closing a company 
record $80 billion in home loan volume. The company also grew its loan servicing 
capabilities to become the 11th largest mortgage servicer in the nation, with more 
than $138 billion in home loans in its portfolio.
In 2014 FORTUNE Magazine ranked Quicken Loans one of the top 5 places to 
work nationwide, which marked the 11th consecutive year it ranked in the top 30 of 
Fortune’s benchmark workplace culture study. For the fourth consecutive year, the 
company was named by J.D. Power as the highest in customer satisfaction among 
all home loan lenders in America.
One key success factor is BI. At the 2013 Data Warehousing Institute’s (TDWI) 
Best Practices Awards that recognized companies for their world-class BI and data 
warehousing solutions, Quicken managers explained:
This growth can be attributed to the success of our online lending plat-
form. Our scalable, technology-driven loan platform has allowed us to 
handle a large surge in loan applications while keeping closing times for 
the majority of our loans at 30 days or less. (TDWI, 2013)
Using BI, the company has increased the speed from loan application to close, 
which allows it to meet client needs as thoroughly and quickly as possible. Over 
almost a decade, performance management has evolved from a manual process of 
report generation to BI-driven dashboards and user-defined alerts that allow busi-
ness leaders to proactively deal with obstacles and identify opportunities for growth 
and improvement.
The field of BI started in the late 1980s and has been a key to competitive 
advantage across industries and in enterprises of all sizes. What started as a tool to 
support sales, marketing, and customer service departments has widely evolved into 
an enterprisewide strategic platform. While BI systems are used in the operational 
management of divisions and business processes, they are also used to support 
strategic corporate decision making. The dramatic change that has taken effect 
over the last few years is the growth in demand for operational intelligence across 
multiple systems and businesses—increasing the number of people who need access 
to increasing amounts of data. Complex and competitive business conditions do not 
leave much slack for mistakes.
3.4  Business Intelligence
Text analytics can help identify the ratio of positive/negative posts relating to 
the promotion. It can be a powerful validation tool to complement other primary 
and secondary customer research and feedback management initiatives. Companies 
that improve their ability to navigate and text mine the boards and blogs relevant 
to their industry are likely to gain a considerable information advantage over their 
competitors.
Questions
1. Describe data mining.
2. How does data mining generate or provide value? Give an example.
3. What is text mining?
4. Explain the text mining procedure.

100  Chapter 3     Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management
BUSINESS BENEFITS 
OF BI
BI provides data at the moment of value to a decision maker—enabling it to 
extract crucial facts from enterprise data in real time or near real time. A BI solu-
tion with a well-designed dashboard, for example, provides retailers with better 
visibility into inventory to make better decisions about what to order, how much, 
and when in order to prevent stock-outs or minimize inventory that sits on ware-
house shelves.
Companies use BI solutions to determine what questions to ask and find 
answers to them. BI tools integrate and consolidate data from various internal and 
external sources and then process them into information to make smart decisions. 
BI answers questions such as these: Which products have the highest repeat sales 
rate in the last six months? Do customer likes on Facebook relate to product pur-
chase? How does the sales trend break down by product group over the last five 
years? What do daily sales look like in each of my sales regions?
According to TDWI, BI “unites data, technology, analytics, and human knowl-
edge to optimize business decisions and ultimately drive an enterprise’s success. 
BI programs usually combine an enterprise data warehouse and a BI platform or 
tool set to transform data into usable, actionable business information” (TDWI, 
2014). For many years, managers have relied on business analytics to make better-
informed decisions. Multiple surveys and studies agree on BI’s growing importance 
in analyzing past performance and identifying opportunities to improve future 
performance.
COMMON CHALLENGES: 
DATA SELECTION AND 
QUALITY
Companies cannot analyze all of their data—and much of them would not add 
value. Therefore, an unending challenge is how to determine which data to use for 
BI from what seems like unlimited options (Schroeder, 2013). One purpose of a 
BI strategy is to provide a framework for selecting the most relevant data without 
limiting options to integrate new data sources. Information overload is a major 
problem for executives and for employees. Another common challenge is data quality, 
particularly with regard to online information, because the source and accuracy 
might not be verifiable.
ALIGNING BUSINESS 
STRATEGY WITH BI 
STRATEGY
Reports and dashboards are delivery tools, but they may not be delivering business 
intelligence. To get the greatest value out of BI, the CIO needs to work with the 
CFO and other business leaders to create a BI governance program whose mission 
is to achieve the following (Acebo et al., 2013):
1. Clearly articulate business strategies.
2.  Deconstruct the business strategies into a set of specifi c goals and objectives—
the targets.
3.  Identify the key performance indicators (KPIs) that will be used to measure 
progress toward each target.
4. Prioritize the list of KPIs.
5. Create a plan to achieve goals and objectives based on the priorities.
6. Estimate the costs needed to implement the BI plan.
7. 
 Assess and update the priorities based on business results and changes in busi-
ness strategy.
After completing these activities, BI analysts can identify the data to use in BI 
and the source systems. This is a business-driven development approach that starts 
with a business strategy and work backward to identify data sources and the data 
that need to be acquired and analyzed.
Businesses want KPIs that can be utilized by both departmental users and 
management. In addition, users want real time access to these data so that they 
can monitor processes with the smallest possible latency and take corrective action 

3.4     Business Intelligence     101  
whenever KPIs deviate from their target values. To link strategic and operational 
perspectives, users must be able to drill down from highly consolidated or summa-
rized figures into the detailed numbers from which they were derived to perform 
in-depth analyses.
BI ARCHITECTURE 
AND ANALYTICS
BI architecture is undergoing technological advances in response to big data and 
the performance demands of end-users (Watson, 2012). BI vendors are facing the 
challenges of social, sensor, and other newer data types that must be managed 
and analyzed. One technology advance that can help handle big data is BI in the 
cloud. Figure 3.19 lists the key factors contributing to the increased use of BI. It 
can be hosted on a public or private cloud. With a public cloud, a service provider 
hosts the data and/or software that are accessed via an Internet connection. For 
private clouds, the company hosts its own data and software, but uses cloud-based 
technologies.
For cloud-based BI, a popular option offered by a growing number of BI tool 
vendors is software as a service (SaaS). MicroStrategy offers MicroStrategy Cloud, 
which provides fast deployment with reduced project risks and costs. This cloud 
approach appeals to small and midsize companies that have limited IT staff and 
want to carefully control costs. The potential downsides include slower response 
times, security risks, and backup risks.
Competitive Analytics in Practice: CarMax
CarMax, Inc. is the nation’s largest retailer of used cars and for a decade has 
remained one of FORTUNE Magazine’s 100 Best Companies to Work For. CarMax 
was the fastest retailer in U.S. history to reach $1 billion in revenues. In 2013 the 
company had $11 billion in revenues, representing a 9.6 percent increase above the 
Figure 3.19 Four factors 
contributing to increased use 
of BI.
Figure 3.20 CarMax is the 
United States’ largest used-
car retailer and a Fortune 500 
company.
have created demand for 
effortless 24/7 access to
insights.
Smart Devices
Everywhere
when they provide insight
that supports decisions
and action.
Data are Big
Business
help to ask questions that
were previously unknown
and unanswerable.
Advanced Bl and
Analytics
are providing low-cost and
flexible solutions.
Cloud Enabled Bl
and Analytics
Bloomberg/Getty Images

102  Chapter 3     Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management
prior year’s results. The company grew rapidly because of its compelling customer 
offer—no-haggle prices and quality guarantees backed by a 125-point inspection 
that became an industry benchmark—and auto financing. In 2014 CarMax recruited 
for more than 1,200 employee positions in locations across the country in response 
to continued growth. CarMax currently operates 131 used car superstores in 
64 markets.
CarMax continues to enhance and refine its information systems, which it 
believes to be a core competitive advantage. CarMax’s IT includes:
• A proprietary IS that captures, analyzes, interprets, and distributes data 
about the cars CarMax sells and buys.
• Data analytics applications that track every purchase; number of test drives 
and credit applications per car; color preferences in every demographic and 
region.
• Proprietary store technology that provides management with real time data 
about every aspect of store operations, such as inventory management, 
pricing, vehicle transfers, wholesale auctions, and sales consultant produc-
tivity.
• An advanced inventory management system that helps management antici-
pate future inventory needs and manage pricing.
Throughout CarMax, analytics are used as a strategic asset and insights gained 
from analytics are available to everyone who needs them.
Questions
1. How has BI improved performance management at Quicken Loans? 
2. What are the business benefi ts of BI?
3.  What are two data-related challenges that must be resolved for BI to 
produce meaningful insight?
4. What are the steps in a BI governance program?
5. What is a business-driven development approach? 
6. What does it mean to drill down, and why is it important?
7. What four factors are contributing to increased use of BI?
8. How did BI help CarMax achieve record-setting revenue growth?
All organizations create and retain business records. A record is documentation of 
a business event, action, decision, or transaction. Examples are contracts, research 
and development, accounting source documents, memos, customer/client com-
munications, hiring and promotion decisions, meeting minutes, social posts, texts, 
e-mails, website content, database records, and paper and electronic files. Business 
documents such as spreadsheets, e-mail messages, and word-processing documents 
are a type of record. Most records are kept in electronic format and maintained 
throughout their life cycle—from creation to final archiving or destruction by an 
electronic records management (ERM) system.
ERM systems consist of hardware and software that manage and archive 
electronic documents and image paper documents; then index and store them 
according to company policy. For example, companies may be required by law 
to retain financial documents for at least seven years, product designs for many 
3.5  Electronic Records Management

3.5     Electronic Records Management     103  
LEGAL DUTY TO RETAIN 
BUSINESS RECORDS
Companies need to be prepared to respond to an audit, federal investigation, law-
suit, or any other legal action against them. Types of lawsuits against companies 
include patent violations, product safety negligence, theft of intellectual property, 
breach of contract, wrongful termination, harassment, discrimination, and many 
more.
Because senior management must ensure that their companies comply with 
legal and regulatory duties, managing electronic records (e-records) is a strategic 
issue for organizations in both the public and private sectors. The success of ERM 
depends greatly on a partnership of many key players, namely, senior manage-
ment, users, records managers, archivists, administrators, and most importantly, IT 
personnel. Properly managed, records are strategic assets. Improperly managed or 
destroyed, they become liabilities.
ERM BEST PRACTICES
Effective ERM systems capture all business data and documents at their first 
touchpoint—data centers, laptops, the mailroom, at customer sites, or remote offices. 
Records enter the enterprise in multiple ways—from online forms, bar codes, sensors, 
websites, social sites, copiers, e-mails, and more. In addition to capturing the entire 
document as a whole, important data from within a document can be captured and 
stored in a central, searchable repository. In this way, the data are accessible to support 
informed and timely business decisions.
In recent years, organizations such as the Association for Information 
and Image Management (AIIM; ww.aiim.org), National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA), and ARMA International (formerly the Association of 
Records Managers and Administrators; www.arma.org) have created and published 
industry standards for document and records management. Numerous best practices 
articles, and links to valuable sources of information about document and records 
management, are available on their websites. IT at Work 3.5 describes ARMA’s 
generally accepted recordkeeping principles.
ERM BENEFITS
Departments or companies whose employees spend most of their day filing or 
retrieving documents or warehousing paper records can reduce costs significantly 
with ERM. These systems minimize the inefficiencies and frustration associated 
with managing paper documents and workflows. However, they do not create a 
paperless office as had been predicted.
An ERM can help a business to become more efficient and productive by:
• Enabling the company to access and use the content contained in 
documents.
• Cutting labor costs by automating business processes.
• Reducing the time and effort required to locate information the business 
needs to support decision making.
• Improving the security of content, thereby reducing the risk of intellectual 
property theft.
• Minimizing the costs associated with printing, storing, and searching for 
content.
decades, and e-mail messages about marketing promotions for a year. The major 
ERM tools are workflow software, authoring tools, scanners, and databases. 
ERM systems have query and search capabilities so documents can be identified 
and accessed like data in a database. These systems range from those designed 
to support a small workgroup to full-featured, Web-enabled enterprisewide 
systems.

104  Chapter 3     Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management
When workflows are digital, productivity increases, costs decrease, compli-
ance obligations are easier to verify, and green computing becomes possible. 
Green computing is an initiative to conserve our valuable natural resources 
by reducing the effects of our computer usage on the environment. You can 
read about green computing and the related topics of reducing an organiza-
tion’s  carbon footprint, sustainability, and ethical and social responsibility in 
Chapter 14.
ERM FOR DISASTER 
RECOVERY, BUSINESS 
CONTINUITY, AND 
COMPLIANCE
Businesses also rely on their ERM system for disaster recovery and business con-
tinuity, security, knowledge sharing and collaboration, and remote and controlled 
access to documents. Because ERM systems have multilayered access capabili-
ties, employees can access and change only the documents they are authorized to 
handle.
When companies select an ERM to meet compliance requirements, they should 
ask the following questions:
1.  Does the software meet the organization’s needs? For example, can the DMS be 
installed on the existing network? Can it be purchased as a service?
2.  Is the software easy to use and accessible from Web browsers, offi ce applications, 
and e-mail applications? If not, people will not use it.
3.  Does the software have lightweight, modern Web and graphical user interfaces 
that effectively support remote users?
Generally accepted recordkeeping principles are a frame-
work for managing business records to ensure that they sup-
port an enterprise’s current and future regulatory, legal, risk 
mitigation, environmental, and operational requirements.
The framework consists of eight principles or best prac-
tices, which also support information governance. These 
principles were created by ARMA International and legal and 
IT professionals.
• 
 Principle of Accountability. An organization will assign 
a senior executive to oversee a recordkeeping program; 
adopt policies and procedures to guide personnel; and 
ensure program audit ability.
• 
 Principle of Transparency. The processes and activi-
ties of an organization’s recordkeeping program will be 
documented in an understandable manner and available 
to all personnel and appropriate parties.
• 
 Principle of Integrity. A recordkeeping program will be 
able to reasonably guarantee the authenticity and reli-
ability of records and data.
• 
 Principle of Protection. The recordkeeping program 
will be constructed to ensure a reasonable level of 
protection to records and information that are private, 
confidential, privileged, secret, or essential to business 
continuity.
• 
 Principle of Compliance. The recordkeeping program 
will comply with applicable laws, authorities, and the 
organization’s policies.
• 
 Principle of Availability. Records will be maintained 
in a manner that ensures timely, efficient, and accurate 
retrieval of needed information.
• 
 Principle of Retention. Records and data will be main-
tained for an appropriate time based on legal, regula-
tory, fiscal, operational, and historical requirements.
• 
 Principle of Disposition. Records will be securely dis-
posed of when they are no longer required to be main-
tained by laws or organizational policies.
IT at Work 3 .5
Generally Accepted Recordkeeping Principles

3.5     Electronic Records Management     105  
4.  Before selecting a vendor, it is important to examine workfl ows and how data, 
documents, and communications fl ow throughout the company. For example, 
know which information on documents is used in business decisions. Once those 
needs and requirements are identifi ed, they guide the selection of technology 
that can support the input types—that is, capture and index them so they can be 
archived consistently and retrieved on-demand.
IT at Work 3.6 describes how several companies currently use ERM. Simply 
creating backups of records is not sufficient because the content would not be 
organized and indexed to retrieve them accurately and easily. The requirement 
to manage records—regardless of whether they are physical or digital—is not 
new.
Questions
1. What are business records?
2. Why is ERM a strategic issue rather than simply an IT issue?
3.  Why might a company have a legal duty to retain records? Give an 
example.
4.  Why is creating backups an insuffi cient way to manage an organization’s 
documents?
5. What are the benefi ts of ERM?
Here are a few examples of how companies use ERM:
• 
The Surgery Center of Baltimore stores all medical 
records electronically, providing instant patient informa-
tion to doctors and nurses anywhere and at any time. 
The system also routes charts to the billing department, 
which can then scan and e-mail any relevant information 
to insurance providers and patients. The ERM system 
helps maintain the required audit trail, including the 
provision of records when they are needed for legal 
purposes. How valuable has ERM been to the center? 
Since it was implemented, business processes have been 
expedited by more than 50 percent, the costs of these 
processes have been significantly reduced, and the 
morale of office employees in the center has improved 
noticeably.
• 
American Express (AMEX) uses TELEform, developed 
by Alchemy and Cardiff Software, to collect and process 
more than 1 million customer satisfaction surveys every 
year. The data are collected in templates that consist of 
more than 600 different survey forms in 12 languages 
and 11 countries. AMEX integrated TELEform with 
AMEX’s legacy system, which enables it to distribute 
processed results to many managers. Because the 
survey forms are now readily accessible, AMEX has 
reduced the number of staff who process these forms 
from 17 to 1, thereby saving the company more than 
$500,000 a year.
• 
The University of Cincinnati provides authorized access 
to the personnel files of 12,000 active employees and 
tens of thousands of retirees. The university receives 
more than 75,000 queries about personnel records every 
year and then must search more than 3 million records 
to answer these queries. Using a microfilm system to find 
answers took days. The solution was an ERM that digi-
tized all paper and microfilm documents, without help 
from the IT department, making them available via the 
Internet and the university’s intranet. Authorized employees 
access files using a browser.
IT at Work 3 .6
ERM Applications

106  Chapter 3     Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management
Key Terms
active data warehouse 
(ADW)
business analytics
business intelligence (BI)
business record
business-driven 
 development approach
centralized database
change data capture (CDC)
data entity
data mart
data mining
data warehouse
database
database management 
system (DBMS)
decision model
declarative language
distributed database 
system
electronic records 
management (ERM)
extract, transform, load 
(ETL)
enterprise data warehouse 
(EDW)
eventual consistency
fault tolerance
HaDoop
information overload
immediate consistency
latency
MapReduce
market share
master data management 
(MDM)
NoSQL
online transaction-
processing (OLTP) 
systems
online analytical-processing 
(OLAP) systems
operating margin
petabyte
relational database
relational management 
system (RDBMS)
sentiment analysis
scalability
structured query language 
(SQL)
text mining
volatile
1. Visit YouTube.com and search for SAS Enterprise 
Miner Software Demo in order to assess the features 
and benefi ts of SAS Enterprise Miner. The URL is 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nj4L5RFvkMg.
a. View the SAS Enterprise Miner Software demo, 
which is about 7 minutes long.
b. Based on what you learn in the demo, what skills or 
expertise are needed to build a predictive model?
c. At the end of the demo, you hear the presenter 
say that “SAS Enterprise Miner allows end-users 
to easily develop predictive models and to 
generate scoring to make better decisions about 
future business events.” Do you agree that SAS 
Enterprise Miner makes it easy to develop such 
models? Explain.
d. Do you agree that if an expert develops 
predictive models, it will help managers make 
better decisions about future business events? 
Explain.
e. Based on your answers to (c), (d), and (e), under 
what conditions would you recommend SAS 
Enterprise Miner?
2. Research two electronic records management 
vendors, such as Iron Mountain.
EXPLORE: Online and Interactive Exercises 
Assuring Your Learning
 1. What are the functions of databases and data ware-
houses?
 2. How does data quality impact business performance?
 3. List three types of waste or damages that data 
 errors can cause.
 4. What is the role of a master reference fi le?
 5. Give three examples of business processes or opera-
tions that would benefi t signifi cantly from having 
detailed real time or near real time data and identify 
the benefi ts.
 6. What are the tactical and strategic benefi ts of big 
data analytics?
 7. Explain the four V’s of data analytics.
 8. Select an industry. Explain how an organization in 
that industry could improve consumer satisfaction 
through the use of data warehousing.
 9. Explain the principle of 90/90 data use.
 10. Why is master data management (MDM) important 
in companies with multiple data sources?
 11. Why would a company invest in a data mart instead 
of a data warehouse?
 12. Why is data mining important?
 13. What are the operational benefi ts and competitive 
advantages of business intelligence?
 14. How can ERM decrease operating costs?
DISCUSS: Critical Thinking Questions

Assuring Your Learning     107  
1. Visit Oracle.com. Click the Solutions tab to open the 
menu; then click Data Warehousing under Technology 
Solutions.
a. Select one of the Customer Highlights.
b. Describe the customer’s challenges, why it 
 selected a particular Oracle solution, and how 
that solution met their challenge.
2. Visit the Microsoft SQL Server website at Microsoft.
com/SQLserver.
a. Click the CloudOS tab and select Customer 
Stories.
b. Filter the customer stories by selecting Business 
Intelligence and Data Discovery.
c. Summarize each company’s business problems 
or challenges and why it selected a particular 
solution.
d. What were the benefi ts of the BI solution?
3. Visit Teradata.com. Click Resources and review 
Video News, and select one of the videos related 
to analytics. Explain the benefi ts of the solution 
chosen.
4. Spring Street Company (SSC) wanted to reduce the 
“hidden costs” associated with its paper-intensive 
processes. Employees jokingly predicted that if 
the windows were open on a very windy day, total 
chaos would ensue as thousands of papers started 
to fl y. If a fl ood, fi re, or windy day occurred, the 
business would literally grind to a halt. The com-
pany’s accountant, Sam Spring, decided to calculate 
the costs of its paper-driven processes to identify 
their impact on the bottom line. He recognized that 
several employees spent most of their day fi ling or 
retrieving documents. In addition, there were the 
monthly costs to warehouse old paper records. Sam 
measured the activities related to the handling of 
printed reports and paper fi les. His average esti-
mates were as follows:
a. Dealing with a fi le: It takes an employee 
12 minutes to walk to the records room, locate 
a fi le, act on it, refi le it, and return to his or 
her desk. Employees do this 4 times per day 
(5 days per week).
b. Number of employees: 10 full-time employees 
perform the functions.
c. Lost document replacement: Once per day, a 
document gets “lost” (destroyed, misplaced, or 
covered with massive coffee stains) and must be 
recreated. The total cost of replacing each lost 
document is $200.
d. Warehousing costs: Currently, document storage 
costs are $75 per month.
Sam would prefer a system that lets employees 
fi nd and work with business documents without leav-
ing their desks. He’s most concerned about the human 
resources and accounting departments. These person-
nel are traditional heavy users of paper fi les and would 
greatly benefi t from a modern document management 
system. At the same time, however, Sam is also risk 
averse. He would rather invest in solutions that would 
reduce the risk of higher costs in the future. He recog-
nizes that the U.S. PATRIOT Act’s requirements that 
organizations provide immediate government access to 
records apply to SSC. He has read that manufacturing 
and government organizations rely on effi cient docu-
ment management to meet these broader regulatory 
imperatives. Finally, Sam wants to implement a disaster 
recovery system.
Prepare a report that provides Sam with the 
data he needs to evaluate the company’s costly paper-
intensive approach to managing documents. You will 
need to conduct research to provide data to prepare 
this report. Your report should include the following 
information:
1. How should SSC prepare for an ERM if it decides to 
implement one?
2. Using the data collected by Sam, create a spread-
sheet that calculates the costs of handling paper at 
SSC based on average hourly rates per employee of 
$28. Add the cost of lost documents to this. Then, add 
the costs of warehousing the paper, which increases 
by 10 percent every month due to increases in vol-
ume. Present the results showing both monthly totals 
and a yearly total. Prepare graphs so that Sam can 
easily identify the  projected growth in warehousing 
costs over the next three years.
3. How can ERM also serve as a disaster recovery 
system in case of fi re, fl ood, or break-in?
4. Submit your recommendation for an ERM  solution. 
Identify two vendors in your  recommendation.
ANALYZE & DECIDE: Apply IT Concepts to Business Decisions
a. What are the retention recommendations made 
by the vendors? Why?
b. What services or solutions does each vendor 
offer?
3. View the “Edgenet Gain Real time Access to Retail 
Product Data with In-Memory Technology” video 
on YouTube. Explain the benefi t of in-memory 
technology.

108  Chapter 3     Data Management, Big Data Analytics, and Records Management
CASE 3.2
Business Case: Financial Intelligence Fights Fraud
The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN; 
fi ncen.gov) is a bureau of the Treasury Department and the 
fi nancial intelligence unit of the United States. The bureau 
reports to the undersecretary for terrorism and fi nancial 
intelligence. FinCEN’s mission is to safeguard the fi nancial 
system from abuses of fi nancial crimes, to institute anti-
money laundering (AML) programs, and to promote national 
security through the collection, analysis, and dissemination 
of fi nancial intelligence.
Constrained by Defi cient Data Analytics
Prior to 2008, FinCEN was not able to effectively gather data, 
analyze them, and deliver them to users. Data that fi nancial 
institutions had to report to FinCEN suffered from incon-
sistent quality and lack of validation and standardization. 
When trying to analyze its data, FinCEN was limited to small 
datasets and simple routines. The bureau could not conduct 
analysis across massive datasets and lacked capabilities for 
proactive analysis and trend prediction.
 
Reporting data to agencies was done using numerous 
offl ine systems. Data had to be cleaned and transformed, 
thus delaying user access. Analytics and reporting defi cien-
cies made it diffi cult for FinCEN to quickly detect new and 
emerging threats and aid in disrupting criminal enterprises.
FinCEN Upgrades Data Analytics and 
Query Capabilities
In 2008 FinCEN launched a major effort to upgrade its ana-
lytics capabilities, IT infrastructure, and databases. Upgraded 
analytics were needed to better collect and analyze data from 
multiple sources and provide them to federal, state, and local 
law enforcement and regulatory authorities.
 
Then in May 2010 FinCEN launched the Bank Secrecy 
Act (BSA) IT Modernization (IT Mod) program and further 
improved its IT infrastructure. The IT Mod program has 
improved data quality and the ability of 9,000 authorized users 
to access, search, and analyze data. The bureau provides 
federal, state, and local law enforcement and regulators with 
direct access to BSA data. These users make  approximately 
18,000 queries of the extensive database each day. 
 
Additional milestones achieved by FinCEN were:
• 
Converted 11 years of data from its legacy system to 
FinCEN’s new System of Record. FinCEN is able to elec-
tronically receive, process, and store all FinCEN reports. 
• 
Deployed a new advanced analytics tool that provides 
FinCEN analysts with improved analytic and examination 
capabilities.
• 
Released the FinCEN Query Web-based app, a new 
search tool accessed by FinCEN analysts, law enforce-
ment, intelligence, and regulatory users as of September 
2012. FinCEN Query provides real time access to over 
11 years of BSA data.
Predictive Capabilities Attack Crimes
Consulting fi rm Deloitte helped FinCEN with the massive 
critical tasks of deploying systems and populating data, 
providing user access, and ensuring system security. Effective 
data analytics identify patterns and relationships that reveal 
potential illicit activity. This intelligence has increased the 
speed and ability to detect money launderers and terrorist 
fi nanciers and disrupt their criminal activity.
Sources: Compiled from FinCEN.gov (2014), Fact Sheet Bank Secrecy 
Act (BSA) IT Modernization (IT Mod) Program (2013), and Deloitte (2014).
Questions
1. Explain FinCEN’s mission and responsibilities.
2. What data and IT problems were limiting FinCEN’s ability 
to fi ght fi nancial crime?
3. Describe the IT upgrades and capabilities needed by 
FinCEN in order to achieve its mission.
4. On what does fi nancial intelligence depend?
5. Why is the ability to identify patterns and relationships 
critical to national security?
6. Research recent fi nancial crimes that FinCEN has detected 
and disrupted. Explain the role of data analytics in crime 
detection.
CASE 3.3
Video Case: Hertz Finds Gold in Integrated Data
Finding CRM gold after integrating customer data, Hertz is 
dominating the global rental car market by giving customers 
unique, real time offers through multiple channels, with 
upwards of 80,000 during peak times. Visit Teradata.com and 
search for the video “Hertz: Finding Gold in Integrated Data.” 
1. Describe Hertz’s new strategy and data solution.
2. How did Hertz strengthen customer loyalty?
3. What did Hertz need to do to its data prior to 
implementing its new solution?
4. Describe the potential short-term and longer-term business 
benefi ts of integrated data.

References     109  
Acebo, A., J. Gallo, J. Griffi n, & B. Valeyko. “Aligning Business 
Strategy with BI Capabilities.” Business Intelligence Journal, 
2013. 
Breuer, P., F. Forina, & J. Moulton. “Beyond the Hype: Capturing 
Value from Big Data and Advanced Analytics.” McKinsey & 
Company. April 2013. 
MIT Sloan Management Review, Improvisations, February 2, 2012.
Brown, B., M. Chui, & J. Manyika. “Are You Ready for the Era 
of ‘Big Data?’” McKinsey Quarterly, October 2011. 
Burns, E. “Coca-Cola Overcomes Challenges to Seize BI 
Opportunities.” TechTarget.com. August 2013. 
BusinessIntelligence.com. “How Coca-Cola Takes a Refreshing 
Approach on Big Data.” July 18, 2013a. 
BusinessIntelligence.com. “Coca-Cola’s Juicy Approach to Big 
Data.”July 29, 2013b. http://businessintelligence.com/
bi-insights/coca-colas-juicy-approach-to-big-data/
CNNMoney, The Coca-Cola Co (NYSE:KO) 2014. 
DARPA.mil, 2012. 
Defense Systems. “DARPA Intell Program Sent to Afghanistan 
to Spy.” July 21, 2011.
Deloitte.com. “Case Study: Checkmate—Delivering Next-Gen 
Financial Intelligence at FinCEN.” February 19, 2014. 
Fernandez, J. “Big Companies, Big Data.” Research-Live.com, 
October 4, 2012.
Ferguson, M. “Data Ownership and Enterprise Data Manage-
ment: Is Your Data Under Control?” DataFlux.com, 2012. 
FinCEN.gov, 2014. 
FirstWind web site, 2014. Hammond, T. “Top IT Job Skills for 
2014: Big Data, Mobile, Cloud, Security.” TechRepublic.com, 
January 31, 2014. 
HealthCanal. “Where Do You Start When Developing a New 
Medicine?” March 27, 2014. 
ibm.com. “IBM Big Data Success Stories.” 2011. 
Kitamura, M. “Big Data Partnerships Tackle Drug Develop-
ment Failures.” Bloomberg News, March 26, 2014. 
Lohr, S. “Looking to Industry for the Next Digital Disruption.” 
The New York Times. November 23, 2012a. 
Lohr, S. “Big Data: Rise of the Machines.” The New York 
Times, December 31, 2012b.
Neill, J. “Big Data Demands Big Context.” HBR Blog Network, 
December 3, 2013. 
NIH (National Institute of Health). Accelerating Medicines 
Partnership. February 2014. http://www.nih.gov/science/amp/
index.htm 
Palomäki, P. & M. Oksanen. “Do We Need Homegrown 
Information Models in Enterprise Architectures?” Business 
Intelligence Journal. Vol. 17, no. 1, March 19, 2012.
Rowe, N. “Handling Paper in a Digital Age: The Impact of 
Document Management.” Aberdeen Research Report. 
February 1, 2012. aberdeen.com/research/7480/ra-document-
processing-management/content.aspx
Shachtman, N. “Inside Darpa’s Secret Afghan Spy Machine.” 
Wired, July 21, 2011.
Schroeder, H. “The Art and Science of Transformation for New 
Business Intelligence.” Cost Management, September/October 
2013.
The Data Warehousing Institute (TDWI). “Winners: TDWI 
Best Practices Awards 2013.” Business Intelligence Journal 18, 
no. 3, 2013.
The Data Warehousing Institute (TDWI). tdwi.org/portals/
business-intelligence.aspx, 2014.
U.S. Department of Energy. “Wind Energy Could Produce 
20 Percent of U.S. Electricity By 2030.” Energy.gov. May 
12, 2008. energy.gov/articles/wind-energy-could-produce-
20-percent-us-electricity-2030* Watson, H. J. “This Isn’t Your 
Mother’s BI Architecture.” Business Intelligence Journal. 
Vol. 17, no. 1, March, 2012.
Zynapse, “New Strategies for Managing Master Data.” 
zynapse.com. September 10, 2010.
References

110
Chapter Snapshot
The basic technology that makes global communication 
possible is the Internet Protocol, or IP. Each device attached 
to a network has a unique IP address that enables it to send 
and receive files. Files are broken down into blocks known 
as packets in order to be transmitted over a network to 
their destination, which also has a unique IP address. Most 
networks use IP Version 4 (IPv4). In April 2014 ARIN, the 
group that oversees Internet addresses, reported that IPv4 
Networks for Effi cient 
Operations and 
Sustainability
4
Chapter
1.  Describe data networks, their quality-of-service (QOS) 
issues, and how IP addresses and APIs function. Identify 
opportunities to apply networked devices to improve 
operational efficiency and business models.
2.  Describe wireless 3G and 4G networks, mobile network 
infrastructure, and how they support worker productivity, 
business operations, and strategy.
3.  Evaluate performance improvements from virtual 
collaboration and communication technologies, and 
explain how they support group work.
4.  Describe how companies can contribute to sustainability, 
and green, social, and ethical challenges related to the 
use and operations of IT networks.
Chapter Snapshot
Case 4.1 Opening Case: Sony Builds an IPv6 
Network to Fortify Competitive Edge
4.1 Data Networks, IP Addresses, and APIs
4.2 Wireless Networks and Mobile Infrastructure
4.3  Collaboration and Communication 
Technologies
4.4 Sustainability and Ethical Issues
Key Terms
Assuring Your Learning
• Discuss: Critical Thinking Questions 
• Explore: Online and Interactive Exercises 
•  Analyze & Decide: Apply IT Concepts 
to Business Decisions 
Case 4.2 Business Case: Google Maps API 
for Business
Case 4.3 Video Case: Fresh Direct Connects 
for Success
References
Learning Outcomes

111
CASE 4.1 OPENING CASE
Sony Builds an IPv6 Network to Fortify Competitive Edge
IPv4
IPv6
32 bit address
0000.0000.0000.0000
128 bit address
0000.0000.0000.0000.0000.0000.0000.0000
Figure 4.1 IPv4 addresses have 4 groups of four alphanumeric characters, which 
allows for 232 or roughly 4.3 billion unique IP address. IPv6 addresses have 
8 groups of alphanumerics, which allows for 2128, or 340 trillion, trillion, trillion 
addresses. IPv6 offers also enhanced quality of service that is needed by the 
latest in video, interactive games, and e-commerce.
addresses were running out—making it urgent that enterprises move to the newer IPv6 
(Figure 4.1). Enterprises need to prepare for the 128-bit protocol because switching 
from IPv4 to IPv6 is not trivial.
 
Networking is undergoing tremendous change. The convergence of access tech-
nologies, cloud, advanced 4G networks, multitasking mobile operating systems, and 
collaboration platforms continues to change the nature of work, the way we do busi-
ness, how machines interact, and other things not yet imagined. The downsides of 
such massive use of energy-dependent wired and wireless networks are their carbon 
footprints and damage to the environment as well as personal privacy. Intelligently 
planned sustainability efforts can reduce the depletion of the earth’s natural resources 
significantly. Efforts to protect what is left of personal privacy are less successful.
Internet Protocol (IP) is 
the method by which data 
are sent from one device to 
another via a network.
IP address. Every device that 
communicates with a network 
must have a unique identify-
ing IP address. An IP address 
is comparable to a telephone 
number or home address.
IP Version 4 (IPv4) has 
been Internet protocol for 
over three decades, but 
has reached the limits of 
its design. It is difficult to 
configure, it is running out 
of addressing space, and it 
provides no features for site 
renumbering to allow for 
an easy change of Internet 
Service Provider (ISP), among 
other limitations.
Figure 4.2 Sony Corporation 
overview.
SONY’S RAPID 
BUSINESS GROWTH
In the early 2000s, Sony Corporation had been engaged in strategic mergers and 
acquisitions to strengthen itself against intensifying competition. By 2007 Sony’s 
enterprise network (internal network) had become too complex and incapable 
Sony Corporation
Global Reach
Network Solution
Sony aims to accelerate global
collaboration and business across
business units to achieve goal of
“One Sony.”
Cisco Enterprise IPv6 network
integrated with IPv4 network. 
Consumer electronics equipment
and services; music, pictures,
computer entertainment.
More versatile network
Network without communications
constraints, supporting “One Sony”
through information systems.
Brand
Business Results

112  Chapter 4     Networks for Efficient Operations and Sustainability
TABLE 4.1 
Opening Case Overview
Company 
Sony Corporation, Sony.com
Location  
 Headquartered in Tokyo, Japan. Over 700 total 
network sites worldwide.
Industries 
 One of the largest consumer electronics and enter-
tainment companies in the world, including audio/
video equipment, semiconductors, computers, 
and video games. Also engaged in production and 
distribution of recorded music, motion picture, 
and video.
Business challenges 
•  Network expansion required too much time due 
to complexity of enterprise network.
 
•  Networking TCO (total cost of ownership) was 
continually increasing.
 
•  Numerous constraints on networks obstructing 
communication between companies in Sony 
Group.
Network technology 
Integrated its IPv4 networks with new IPv6 
solution  
 solutions from Cisco. The integrated IPv4/IPv6 
network has been used by Sony as infrastructure 
for the development of new products and enterprise-
wide collaboration.
 
 
Sony also upgraded its Cisco switches at the 
corporate data center, campuses, and remote offi ces 
to handle concurrent IPv4 and IPv6 traffi c.
NETWORK 
LIMITATIONS
of supporting communication, operations, and further business growth. The 
enterprise network was based on IPv4. A serious limitation was that the IPv4 
network could not provide real time collaboration among business units and 
group companies.
Expansion efforts were taking too long because of the complicated structure 
of the network, and total cost of ownership (TCO) was increasing. Also, a number 
of technical limitations were blocking internal communications.
Many of the Sony Group companies had developed independently—and had inde-
pendent networks. Devices connected to the independent networks were using the 
same IP addresses. That situation is comparable to users having duplicate telephone 
numbers—making it impossible to know which phone was being called. Also, 
phones with the same number could not call each other.
Once these networks were integrated, the duplicate IP address caused traffic-
routing conflicts. Routing conflicts, in turn, led to the following problems:
1. Sony’s employee communication options were severely limited, which harmed 
productivity.
2. File sharing and real time communication were not possible.
3. Introducing cloud services was diffi cult and time-consuming.

4.1     Data Networks, IP Addresses, and APIs     113  
MIGRATION TO IPV6 
NETWORKS: AN 
INVESTMENT IN 
THE FUTURE
To eliminate these limitations, Sony decided to invest in IPv6-based networks in 
2006; it then launched a full-scale effort in 2008. With its virtually unlimited number 
of IP addresses, IPv6 would support Sony’s long-term, next-generation information 
and communications technology (ICT) infrastructure strategy and improve collabo-
ration and productivity.
Migrating from IPv4 to IPv6 involved 700 sites, hundreds of thousands of net-
working devices, and hundreds of thousands of network users spread around the 
globe. During the transition, Sony realized that it was necessary to support both IP 
protocols. That is, the IPv6 would supplement and coexist with the existing enter-
prise IPv4 network, rather than replace it. Running both protocols on the same 
network at the same time was necessary because Sony’s legacy devices and apps 
only worked on IPv4.
Sony selected Cisco as a key partner in the migration and integration of IPv4 
and IPv6 traffic because of the maturity of its IPv6 technology. The integrated net-
work has been used by Sony as infrastructure for product development. Sony also 
upgraded its Cisco network switches at the corporate data center, campuses, and 
remote offices to handle concurrent IPv4 and IPv6 traffic.
BUSINESS RESULTS
The use of IPv6 eliminated the issue of conflicting IP addresses, enabling Sony 
employees in all divisions to take advantage of the productivity benefits of real time 
collaboration applications. Other business improvements are:
• Flexibility to launch new businesses quickly
• Reduced TCO of enterprise network
• Network without communications constraints, supporting “One Sony” through 
information systems
Sources: Compiled from Cisco (2014a; 2014b), Khedekar (2012), and AT&T (2012).
Questions
1. Why might IPv6 be a business continuity issue for organizations?
2. Explain how Sony’s IPv4 enterprise network was restricting the 
productivity of its workers.
3. What problems did duplicate IP addresses cause at Sony? Give an 
analogy.
4. Why did Sony need to run both protocols on its network instead of 
replacing IPv4 with IPv6?
5. Describe the strategic benefi t of Sony’s IPv6 implementation.
6. Do research to determine the accuracy of this prediction: “Today, 
almost everything on the Internet is reachable over IPv4. In a few years, 
both IPv4 and IPv6 will be required for universal access.”
Managers now need to understand the technical side of networks, IP addressing, 
and APIs in order to make intelligent investment decisions that impact operations 
and competitive position. Enterprises run on networks—wired and mobile—and 
depend upon their ability to interface with other networks and applications. 
4.1  Data Networks, IP Addresses, and APIs
IP Version 6 (IPv6) is 
replacing IPv4 because it 
has run out of IP addresses.

114  Chapter 4     Networks for Efficient Operations and Sustainability
Networks are changing significantly with the shift to IPv6 and the build-out of 5G 
networks. 5G will offer huge gains in both speed and capacity over existing 4G 
networks—along with opportunities at the operations and strategic levels. At the 
2014 Mobile World Congress in Barcelona, Neelie Kroes, the vice president of the 
European Commission, discussed how deploying 5G networks could reduce high-
level youth unemployment across Europe. In the short term, the 5G infrastructure 
build-out would create new jobs. In the longer term, 5G would create entirely 
new markets and economic opportunities driven by superior mobile capabilities in 
industries ranging from health care to automotive (Basulto, 2014).
5G (fifth generation), the 
next-generation mobile 
communications network.
FUNDAMENTALS OF 
DATA NETWORKS
The capacity and capabilities of data networks provide opportunities for more 
automated operations and new business strategies. M2M communications over 
wireless and wired networks automate operations, for instance, by triggering 
action such as sending a message or closing a valve. The speed at which data can 
be sent depends on the network’s bandwidth. Bandwidth characteristics are shown 
in Figure 4.3.
Bandwidth is the capacity or 
throughput per second of a 
network.
TECH NOTE 4.1 4G and 5G Networks in 2018
More Mobile Network Traffi c and Users
Cisco predicts that by 2018, global mobile data traffi c will have increased 11 times 
from current levels. Much of that traffi c will be driven by billions of devices talking 
to other devices wirelessly. This includes a major increase in M2M communications 
and the number of wearable technology devices. The number of mobile data con-
nections will total more than 10 billion by 2018—8 billion of which will be personal 
mobile devices and 2 billion M2M connections.
Faster Mobile Network Speeds
Cisco expects that the average global mobile network speed will almost double from 
1.4 Mbps in 2013 to 2.5 Mbps by 2018. And 5G networks are promising speeds that 
will be 100 times faster than mid-2014 speeds.
Figure 4.3 Network 
bandwidth.
Bandwidth is the communication
capacity of a network.
Bandwidth is the amount of data that
passes through a network connection
over time as measured in bits per
second (bps).
Bandwidth is used in both
directions—for uploads and
downloads.
Very large data transfers reduce
availability for everyone on the
network.
Network speed depends on
amount of traffic. Data flows
quickly and smoothly when 
traffic volume on the network
is small relative to its capacity.

4.1     Data Networks, IP Addresses, and APIs     115  
Figure 4.4 Four drivers of 
global mobile traffi c through 
2018.
Figure 4.5 Basic functions 
of business networks.
FUNCTIONS 
SUPPORTED BY 
BUSINESS NETWORKS
Figure 4.5 describes the basic functions of business networks: communication, 
mobility, collaboration, relationships, and search. These functions depend on net-
work switches and routers—devices that transmit data packets from their source 
to their destination based on IP addresses. A switch acts as a controller, enabling 
networked devices to talk to each other efficiently. For example, switches connect 
computers, printers, and servers within an office building. Switches create a net-
work. Routers connect networks. A router links computers to the Internet, so users 
HIGH DEMAND FOR 
HIGH-CAPACITY 
NETWORKS
As described in Tech Note 4.1, global mobile data traffic is increasing. The four 
drivers of that demand are shown in Figure 4.4. Demand for high-capacity networks 
is growing at unprecedented rates. Examples of high-capacity networks are wireless 
mobile, satellite, wireless sensor, and VoIP (voice over Internet Protocol) such as 
Skype. Voice over IP (VoIP) networks carry voice calls by converting voice (analog 
signals) to digital signals that are sent as packets. With VoIP, voice and data trans-
missions travel in packets over telephone wires. VoIP has grown to become one of 
the most used and least costly ways to communicate. Improved productivity, flex-
ibility, and advanced features make VoIP an appealing technology.
Over 10 billion
2.5 megabits per second (Mbps)
Almost 5 billion
70% of mobile traffic
By 2018
More Mobile
Connections
Faster Mobile
Speeds
More Mobile
Users
More Mobile
Video
Communication
Mobility
Provides secure, trusted,
and reliable access from any
mobile device anywhere at
satisfactory download and
upload speeds.
Relationships
Manages interaction with
customers, supply chain
partners, shareholders,
employees, regulatory
agencies, and so on.
Search
Able to locate data, contracts,
documents, spreadsheets, and other
knowledge within an organization 
easily and efficiently.
Collaboration
Supports teamwork
that may be synchronous
or asynchronous;
brainstorming; and
knowledge and
document sharing.
Provides sufficient capacity for human
and machine-generated transmissions.
Delays are frustrating, such as when
large video files pause during download
waiting for the packets to arrive.
Buffering means the network cannot
handle the speed at which the video is
being delivered and therefore stops to
collect packets.

116  Chapter 4     Networks for Efficient Operations and Sustainability
can share the connection. Routers act like a dispatcher, choosing the best paths for 
packets to travel.
Investments in data networks, IP addresses, routers, and switches are business 
decisions because of their impact on productivity, security, user experiences, and 
customer service.
QUALITY OF SERVICE
An important management decision is the network’s quality of service (QoS), 
especially for delay-sensitive data such as real time voice and high-quality video. 
The higher the required QoS, the more expensive the technologies needed to man-
age organizational networks. Bandwidth-intensive apps are important to business 
processes, but they also strain network capabilities and resources. Regardless of the 
TECH NOTE 4.2 Circuit and Packet Switching
All generations of networks are based on switching. Prior to 4G, networks included 
circuit switching, which is slower than packet switching. 4G was fi rst to be fully 
packet switched, which signifi cantly improved performance. The two basic types of 
switching are:
Circuit switching: A circuit is a dedicated connection between a source and destina-
tion. In the past, when a call was placed between two landline phones, a circuit or 
connection was created that remained until one party hung up. Circuit switching 
is older technology that originated with telephone calls; it is ineffi cient for digital 
transmission.
Packet switching: Packet switching transfers data or voice in packets. Files are bro-
ken into packets, numbered sequentially, and routed individually to their destina-
tion. When received at the destination, the packets are reassembled into their proper 
sequence.
Wireless networks use packet switching and wireless routers whose antennae trans-
mit and receive packets. At some point, wireless routers are connected by cables to 
wired networks, as shown in Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6 Network cables 
plug into a wireless router. 
The antennae create wireless 
access points (WAP).
© Metta digital/Alamy

4.1     Data Networks, IP Addresses, and APIs     117  
type of traffic, networks must provide secure, predictable, measurable, and some-
times guaranteed services for certain types of traffic. For example, QoS technolo-
gies can be applied to create two tiers of traffic:
• Prioritize traffic: Data and apps that are time-delay-sensitive or latency-
sensitive apps, such as voice and video, are given priority on the network.
• Throttle traffic: In order to give latency-sensitive apps priority, other types 
of traffic need to be held back (throttled).
The ability to prioritize and throttle network traffic is referred to as traffic shaping 
and forms the core of the hotly debated Net neutrality issue, which is discussed in 
IT at Work 4.1.
In 2014 the battle over the complicated issue of net neu-
trality heated up. Net neutrality is a principle that Internet 
Service Providers (ISPs) and their regulators treat all Internet 
traffic the same way. On the opposing side of that issue is 
traffic shaping. Traffic shaping creates a two-tier system for 
specific purposes such as:
1. Time-sensitive data are given priority over traffic that 
can be delayed briefly with little-to-no adverse effect. 
Companies like Comcast argue that Net neutrality rules 
hurt consumers. Certain applications are more sensi-
tive to delays than others, such as streaming video and 
Internet phone services. Managing data transfer makes 
it possible to assure a certain level of performance or 
QoS.
2. In a corporate environment, business-related traffic may 
be given priority over other traffic, in effect, by paying 
a premium price for that service. Proponents of traffic 
shaping argue that ISPs should be able to charge more 
to customers who want to pay a premium for priority 
service.
Specifically, traffic is shaped by delaying the flow of less 
important network traffic, such as bulk data transfers, P2P 
file-sharing programs, and BitTorrent traffic.
Traffic shaping is hotly debated by those in favor of Net 
neutrality. They want a one-tier system in which all Internet 
data packets are treated the same, regardless of their con-
tent, destination, or source. In contrast, those who favor the 
two-tiered system argue that there have always been differ-
ent levels of Internet service and that a two-tiered system 
would enable more freedom of choice and promote Internet-
based commerce.
Federal Communications Commission’s 
2010 Decision
On December 21, 2010, the Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC) approved a compromise that created two 
classes of Internet access: one for fixed-line providers and 
the other for the wireless Net. In effect, the new rules are 
Net semi-neutrality. The FCC banned any outright blocking 
of and “unreasonable discrimination” against websites or 
applications by fixed-line broadband providers. But the rules 
do not explicitly forbid “paid prioritization,” which would 
allow a company to pay an ISP for faster data transmission.
Net Semi-Neutrality Overturned in 2014
In January 2014 an appeals court struck down the FCC’s 
2010 decision. The court allowed ISPs to create a two-tiered 
Internet, but promised close supervision to avoid anticom-
petitive practices, and banned “unreasonable” discrimina-
tion against providers.
On April 24 FCC Chairman Tom Wheeler reported that 
his agency would propose new rules to comply with the 
court’s decision that would be finalized by December 2014. 
Wheeler stated that these rules “would establish that behavior 
harmful to consumers or competition by limiting the openness 
of the Internet will not be permitted” (Wheeler, 2014). But 
Wheeler’s proposal would allow network owners to charge 
extra fees to content providers. This decision has angered 
consumer advocates and Net neutrality advocates who view 
Wheeler with suspicion because of his past work as a lobbyist 
for the cable industry and wireless phone companies.
Sources: Compiled from Federal Communications Commission (fcc.
gov, 2014), Wheeler (2014), and various blog posts.
IT at Work 4 .1
Net Neutrality Debate Intensifies

118  Chapter 4     Networks for Efficient Operations and Sustainability
Questions
1. What is Net neutrality?
2. What tiers are created by traffic shaping?
3. Why did the battle over Net neutrality intensify in 2014?
4. Did the FCC’s 2010 ruling favor either side of the debate? 
Explain.
5. What has been a reaction to the 2014 appeals court deci-
sion? Explain.
NETWORK 
TERMINOLOGY
To be able to evaluate networks and the factors that determine their functionality, 
you need to be familiar with the following network basics:
• Bandwidth: Bandwidth depends on the network protocol. Common wire-
less protocols are 802.11b. 802.11g, 802.11n, and 802.16. For an analogy to 
bandwidth, consider a pipe used to transport water. The larger the diameter 
of the pipe, the greater the throughput (volume) of water that flows through 
it and the faster water is transferred through it.
• Protocol: Protocols are rules and standards that govern how devices on a 
network exchange data and “talk to each other.” An analogy is a country’s 
driving rules—whether to drive on the right or left side of the road.
• TCP/IP: Transmission control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP) is the 
basic communication protocol of the Internet. This protocol is supported 
by every major network operating system (OS) to ensure that all devices on 
the Internet can communicate. It is used as a communications protocol in a 
company’s private network for internal uses.
• Fixed-line broadband: Describes either cable or DSL Internet connections.
• Mobile broadband: Describes various types of wireless high-speed Internet 
access through a portable modem, telephone, or other device.
• 3G: 3G networks support multimedia and broadband services, do so over a 
wider distance, and at faster speeds than prior 1G and 2G generations. 3G 
networks have far greater ranges because they use large satellite connec-
tions to telecommunication towers.
• 4G: 4G mobile network standards enable faster data transfer rates. 4G net-
works are digital, or IP, networks.
Overall, 2G networks were for voice, 3G networks for voice and data, and 4G net-
works for broadband Internet connectivity.
TECH NOTE 4.3 Origin of the Internet, e-mail, and TCP/IP
The Advanced Research Projects Agency network (ARPAnet) was the fi rst real net-
work to run on packet-switching technology. In October 1969 computers at Stanford 
University, UCLA, and two other U.S universities connected for the fi rst time—
making them the fi rst hosts on what would become the Internet. ARPAnet was 
designed for research, education, and government agencies. ARPAnet provided a 
communications network linking the country in the event that a military attack or 
nuclear war destroyed conventional communications systems.
 
In 1971 e-mail was developed by Ray Tomlinson, who used the @ symbol to 
separate the username from the network’s name, which became the domain name.
Broadband (short for broad 
bandwidth) means high- 
capacity or high-speed 
network.

4.1     Data Networks, IP Addresses, and APIs     119  
 
On January 1, 1983, ARPAnet computers switched over to the TCP/IP protocols 
developed by Vinton Cerf. A few hundred computers were affected by the switch. 
The original ARPAnet protocol had been limited to 1,000 hosts, but the adoption of 
the TCP/IP standard made larger numbers of hosts possible. The number of Internet 
hosts reached nearly 1 billion by 2013.
3G AND 4G
4G delivers average realistic download rates of 3 Mbps or higher (as opposed to 
theoretical rates, which are much higher). In contrast, today’s 3G networks typically 
deliver average download speeds about one-tenth of that rate. Even though individ-
ual networks, ranging from 2G to 3G, started separately with their own purposes, 
soon they will be converted to the 4G network.
4G is based purely on the packet-based IP—unlike 2G and 3G that have a 
circuit-switched subsystem. Users can obtain 4G wireless connectivity through one 
of the following standards:
1. WiMAX is based on the IEEE 802.16 standard. IEEE 802.16 specifi cations are:
• Range: 30 miles (50 km) from base station
• Speed: 70 megabits per second (Mbps)
• Line-of-sight not needed between user and base station
 
WiMAX operates on the same basic principles as Wi-Fi in that it transmits data 
from one device to another via radio signals.
2. Long-Term Evolution (LTE) is a GSM-based technology that is deployed by 
Verizon, AT&T, and T-Mobile. LTE capabilities include:
• Speed: Downlink data rates of 100 Mbps and uplink data rates of 50 Mbps
Improved network performance, which is measured by its data transfer capacity, 
provides fantastic opportunities for mobility, mobile commerce, collaboration, 
supply chain management, remote work, and other productivity gains.
BUSINESS USES 
OF NEAR-FIELD 
COMMUNICATION
Near-field communication (NFC) enables two devices within close proximity to 
establish a communication channel and transfer data through radio waves. NFC are 
location-aware technologies that are more secure than other wireless technologies 
like Bluetooth and Wi-Fi. Unlike RFID, NFC is a two-way communication tool.
Location-aware NFC technology can be used to make purchases in restaurants, 
resorts, hotels, theme parks and theaters, at gas stations, and on buses and trains. 
Here are some examples of NFC applications and their potential business value.
• The Apple iWatch wearable device with NFC communication capabilities 
could be ideal for mobile payments. Instead of a wallet, users utilize their 
iWatch as a credit card or wave their wrists to pay for their Starbucks coffee. 
With GPS and location-based e-commerce services, retailers could send a 
coupon alert to the iWatch when a user passes their store. Consumers would 
then see the coupon and pay for the product with the iWatch.
• Ticketmaster Spain teamed up with Samsung to offer NFC tickets to a Dum 
Dum Girls concert in Madrid. Consumers needed to download the NFC 
Ticketmaster app from the Samsung app store to purchase a ticket, which 
was then stored in their phone for secure entry at the door.
• International fresh produce distributor Total Produce plans to give consum-
ers access to videos, recipes, and interactive games about the benefits of a 
healthy diet via NFC tag–equipped SmartStands located in supermarkets 

120  Chapter 4     Networks for Efficient Operations and Sustainability
and convenience stores. “We can upload a new video to these units instantly 
to respond to opportunities; a barbecue-themed video on a sunny afternoon, 
a pumpkin carving video for Halloween or a recipe video to complement an 
in-store price promotion,” says Vince Dolan, European marketing manager 
at Total Produce. “Similarly, we can update grower videos to reflect changes 
in product range at any time” (Boden, 2014).
• Passengers on public transportation systems can pay fares by waving an 
NFC smartphone as they board.
Mashup of GPS and Bluetooth
The mashup of GPS positioning and short-range wireless technologies, such as 
Bluetooth and Wi-Fi, can provide unprecedented intelligence. These technologies 
create opportunities for companies to develop solutions that make a consumer’s life 
better. They could, for example, revolutionize traffic and road safety. Intelligent 
transport systems being developed by car manufacturers allow cars to communicate 
with each other and send alerts about sudden braking. In the event of a collision, 
the car’s system could automatically call emergency services. The technology could 
also apply the brakes automatically if it was determined that two cars were getting 
too close to each other.
Advancements in networks, devices, and RFID sensor networks are changing 
enterprise information infrastructures and business environments dramatically. The 
preceding examples and network standards illustrate the declining need for a physi-
cal computer, as other devices provide access to data, people, or services at any 
time, anywhere in the world, on high-capacity networks.
Fans attending gigs by The Wild Feathers were given gui-
tar picks embedded with an NFC tag. Warner Music had 
distributed the guitar picks for fans to enter a competition, 
share content via social media, and vote at the gig simply 
by tapping with an NFC phone. NFC-embedded picks were 
inserted into the band’s promotional flyers at six European 
venues. Each pick was encoded with a unique URL and also 
printed with a unique code for iPhone users to enable track-
ing and monitoring.
Marketing Campaign Success Shows 
an Exciting Future for NFC
The tags generated a high response rate. Over 65 percent of 
the NFC guitar picks had registered in the competition. And 
35 percent of the fans had shared content on social media—
spending an average of five minutes on the site.
NFC is being used in marketing campaigns because 
the technology offers slick one-tap interaction. NFC allows 
brands to engage with their customers in unique ways and 
create exciting user experiences. With millions of NFC-
equipped smartphones set to reach users over the next few 
years and the technology’s advantages for shoppers and 
businesses, NFC is emerging as a major technology.
Questions
1. Assume you attended a concert and were given a bro-
chure similar to the one distributed to fans at The Wild 
Feathers concert. Would you use the guitar pick or com-
parable NFC-embedded item to participate in a contest? 
To post on Facebook or tweet about the concert? Explain 
why or why not.
2. How can NFC be applied to create an interesting user 
experience at a sporting event? At a retail store or coffee 
shop?
3. Refer to your answers in Question 2. What valuable 
information could be collected by the NFC tag in these 
businesses?
IT at Work 4.2
NFC-Embedded Guitar Picks
Mashup is a general term 
referring to the integration 
of two or more technologies.

4.1     Data Networks, IP Addresses, and APIs     121  
APPLICATION 
PROGRAM INTERFACES 
AND OPERATING 
SYSTEMS
When software developers create applications, they must write and compile the 
code for a specific operating system (OS). Figure 4.7 lists the common OSs. Each 
OS communicates with hardware in its own unique way; each OS has a specific API 
that programmers must use. Video game consoles and other hardware devices also 
have APIs that run software programs.
What Is an API?
An API consists of a set of functions, commands, and protocols used by program-
mers to build software for an OS. The API allows programmers to use predefined 
functions or reusable codes to interact with an OS without having to write a soft-
ware program from scratch. APIs simplify the programmer’s job.
APIs are the common method for accessing information, websites, and data-
bases. They were created as gateways to popular apps such as Twitter, Facebook, 
and Amazon and enterprise apps provided by SAP, Oracle, NetSuite, and many 
other vendors.
Automated API
The current trend is toward automatically created APIs that are making innovative 
IT developments possible. Here are two examples of the benefits of automated APIs:
• Websites such as the European Union Patent office have mappings of every 
one of their pages to both URLs for browser access and URLs for REST 
APIs. Whenever a new page is published, both access methods are sup-
ported.
• The startup SlashDB offers the capability to automatically create an API 
to access data in a SQL database. This API simplifies many of the details 
of SQL usage and makes it much easier for developers to get at the data 
(Woods, 2013a and 2013b).
Application program inter-
face (API). An interface is the 
boundary where two sepa-
rate systems meet. An API 
provides a standard way for 
different things, such as 
software, content, or web-
sites, to talk to each other in 
a way that they both under-
stand without extensive 
programming.
TECH NOTE 4.4 Spotify Released Its API to Developers
In early 2012 the digital music service Spotify released its API to developers. The 
developers quickly created hundreds of apps that fans are using to discover and share 
new music. The most popular new app is Tunigo, which uses its music experts to curate 
playlists targeted to various moods. The Tunigo service was so successful that Spotify 
bought it and made it part of Browse. Browse is the in-house curation department 
that searches Spotify’s catalog and continuously delivers new playlists (Dean, 2013).
 
Browse lets you search for specifi c playlists based on your mood. These playlists 
are created by other users and selected by Spotify staffers. Users have created over 
1 billion playlists, which grow and morph every day.
Android
iOS
Windows Phone
Common Mobile OS
Windows
Mac OS X
Linux
Common Desktop OS
Figure 4.7 Common mobile 
and desktop operating 
systems. Each computer 
OS provides an API for 
programmers. Mobile 
OSs are designed around 
touchscreen input.

122  Chapter 4     Networks for Efficient Operations and Sustainability
API Value Chain in Business
APIs deliver more than half of all the traffic to major companies like Twitter and 
eBay. APIs are used to access business assets, such as customer information or a 
product or service, as shown in Figure 4.8. IT developers use APIs to quickly and 
easily connect diverse data and services to each other. APIs from Google, Twitter, 
Amazon, Facebook, Accuweather, Sears, and E*Trade are used to create many 
thousands of applications. For example, Google Maps API is a collection of APIs 
used by developers to create customized Google Maps that can be accessed on a 
Web browser or mobile devices.
The API value chain takes many forms because the organization that owns the 
business asset may or may not be the same as the organization that builds the APIs. 
Different people or organizations may build, distribute, and market the applica-
tions. At the end of the chain are end-users who benefit from the business asset. 
Often, many APIs are used to create a new user experience.
The business benefits of APIs are listed in Table 4.2.
 
The power of Spotify was demonstrated in 2013 when it won a challenge with 
Pink Floyd to gain access to the group’s entire music collection: every track from 
every album the band had ever released. The Pink Floyd collection became part of 
Spotify’s streaming music service when the tracks were offi cially “unlocked” in June 
2013. The challenge was for the song “Wish You Were Here” to be streamed by fans 
over 1 million times in just a few days. Pink Floyd members fulfi lled the deal.
Figure 4.8 API value chain 
in business.
TABLE 4.2 
Business Benefi ts of APIs
APIs are channels to new customers and markets: APIs enable partners to 
use business assets to extend the reach of a company’s products or services to 
customers and markets they might not reach easily.
APIs promote innovation: Through an API, people who are committed to a 
challenge or problem can solve it themselves.
APIs are a better way to organize IT: APIs promote innovation by allowing 
everyone in a company to use each other’s assets without delay.
APIs create a path to lots of Apps: Apps are going to be a crucial channel 
in the next 10 years. Apps are powered by APIs. Developers use APIs and 
combinations of APIs to create new user experiences.
API
Developers
Provides quick,
easy access to
business assets.
Applications
created using
APIs
Use APIs to
create new
business.
Business Assets
Data
information
products
services
Customers, employees,
and end-users use the
business apps that give
them access to assets.

4.2     Wireless Networks and Mobile Infrastructure     123  
In the 21st-century global economy, advanced wireless networks are a foundation 
on which global economic activity takes place. Current 3G and 4G networks and 
technologies provide that foundation, moving entire economies. For any nation to 
stay competitive and prosperous, it is imperative that investment and upgrades in 
these technologies continue to advance to satisfy demand.
Global mobile data traffic is forecasted to increase nearly 11-fold between 
2013 and 2018. Mobile data traffic will grow at a compound annual growth rate 
(CAGR) of 61 percent from 2013 to 2018, reaching 15.9 exabytes (EB) per month 
by 2018, according to the Cisco Visual Networking Index (VNI): Global Mobile 
Data Traffic Forecast Update, 2013–2018. Mobile data traffic will reach the following 
milestones:
1. The average mobile connection speed will surpass 2 Mbps by 2016.
2. Smartphones will reach 66 percent of mobile data traffi c by 2018.
3. Monthly mobile tablet traffi c will surpass 2.5 EB per month by 2018.
4. Tablets will exceed 15 percent of global mobile data traffi c by 2016.
5. 4G traffi c will be more than half of total mobile traffi c by 2018.
6. There will be more traffi c offl oaded from cellular networks and onto Wi-Fi net-
works than remains on cellular networks by 2018.
7. In addition to supporting mobile users, increased bandwidth is needed to sup-
port the numerous industrial applications that leverage wireless technologies—
primarily the smart grid, or smart energy, and health-care segments.
With a combination of smart meters, wireless technology, sensors, and soft-
ware, the smart grid allows utilities to accurately track power grids and cut back 
on energy use when the availability of electricity is stressed. And consumers 
gain insight into their power consumption to make more intelligent decisions 
about how to use energy. A fully deployed smart grid has the potential of saving 
between $39.69 and $101.57, and up to 592 pounds of carbon dioxide emissions, 
per consumer per year in the United States, according to the Smart Grid Consumer 
Collaborative (SGCC).
Wireless hospitals and remote patient monitoring, for example, are grow-
ing trends. Tracking medical equipment and hospital inventory, such as gurneys, 
is done with RFID tagging at a number of hospitals. Remote monitoring apps 
are making health care easier and more comfortable for patients while reaching 
patients in remote areas.
4.2  Wireless Networks and Mobile Infrastructure
Questions
 1. Why has IPv6 become increasingly important?
 2. What is an IP address?
 3. What are bandwidth and broadband?
 4. Briefl y described the basic network functions.
 5. What is the difference between circuit switching and packet switching?
 6. What is the difference between 3G and 4G?
 7. What are the mobile network standards?
 8. Explain the Net neutrality debate.
 9. What are two applications of NFC?
10. What are the benefi ts of APIs?

124  Chapter 4     Networks for Efficient Operations and Sustainability
In the small city of Santander on Spain’s Atlantic coast, 
Mayor Iñigo de la Serna raised $12 million, mostly from 
the European Commission, to launch SmartSantander. 
SmartSantander is a smart city experiment that is improving 
the quality of life, reducing energy consumption, and engag-
ing its citizens in civic duties.
10,000 Sensors Embedded
The city implemented wireless sensor networks and embed-
ded 10,000 sensors in its streets and municipal vehicles to 
monitor garbage collection, crime, and air quality and manage 
street lighting for better energy efficiency. Sensors communi-
cate with smartphone apps to inform drivers and commuters 
on parking availability, bus delays, road closures, and the 
current pollen count in real time. Parking apps direct drivers 
to available spaces via cell phone alerts. Drivers benefit from 
a reduction in the time and annoyance of finding parking 
spots. Anyone can feed his or her own data into the system 
by, for example, snapping a smartphone photo of a pothole 
or broken streetlight to notify the local government that a 
problem needs to be fixed.
Build-Out of Smart City Applications
This mobile technology can help cities contribute to a greener 
planet. Municipal landscape sprinklers can send facts to city 
agencies for analysis to conserve water usage. Sensors can 
monitor weather and pollen counts as well as water and 
power leaks.
Police State
The data streams and mobile apps that keep citizens 
informed also keep the government informed. What is the 
difference between a smart city and a police state? Consider 
how data collected from sensors mounted outside a bar to 
track noise levels might be used.
• 
Scenario #1. Instances of loud noises and squealing tires 
are transmitted to local police. The city uses the informa-
tion to enforce public nuisance laws and make arrests.
• 
Scenario #2: People who live in the neighborhood show 
civic leaders what is keeping them up at night and 
receive help in resolving the problem.
• 
Scenario #3: Landlords could use data showing less noise 
and cleaner air to promote their apartments or office 
buildings.
The Dark Side of Smart
The wireless networks and sensors need to be maintained. 
Thousands of batteries embedded in roadways could have 
expensive and disruptive maintenance requirements.
Parking space alerts might create other annoyances. If 
everyone becomes aware of a parking spot up the street, the 
rush of cars converging on a few open locations could lead 
to rage and defeat the purpose of such an alert.
Sources: Compiled from O’Connor (2013) and Edwards (2014).
Questions
1. What are the benefits of a smart city?
2. What are the potential abuses of data collected in this way?
3. Consider the dark side of smart. Are you skeptical of the 
benefits of a smart city?
4. Would you want to live in a smart city? Explain.
5. How would you prevent Santander from becoming a 
police state?
IT at Work 4 .3
Smart City or Police State?
STRATEGIC BUILD-
OUT OF MOBILE 
CAPABILITIES
Enterprises are moving away from the ad hoc adoption of mobile devices and 
network infrastructure to a more strategic planning build-out of their mobile capa-
bilities. As technologies that make up the mobile infrastructure evolve, identifying 
strategic technologies and avoiding wasted investments require more extensive 
planning and forecasting. Factors to consider are the network demands of multi-
tasking mobile devices, more robust mobile OSs, and their applications.
Mobile Infrastructure
Mobile infrastructure consists of the integration of technology, software, support, 
security measures, and devices for the management and delivery of wireless com-
munications.

4.2     Wireless Networks and Mobile Infrastructure     125  
TECH NOTE 4.5 Wi-Fi Networking Standards
• 802.11b. This standard shares spectrum with 2.4-GHz cordless phones, 
microwave ovens, and many Bluetooth products. Data are transferred at 
distances up to 100 meters or 328 feet.
Wi-Fi and Bluetooth
Bluetooth is a short-range—up to 100 meters or 328 feet—wireless communications 
technology found in billions of devices, such as smartphones, computers, medical 
devices, and home entertainment products. When two Bluetooth-enabled devices 
connect to each other, this is called pairing.
Wi-Fi is the standard way computers connect to wireless networks. Nearly all 
computers have built-in Wi-Fi chips that allow users to find and connect to wireless 
routers. The router must be connected to the Internet in order to provide Internet 
access to connected devices.
Wi-Fi technology allows devices to share a network or Internet connection 
without the need to connect to a commercial network. Wi-Fi networks beam packets 
over short distances using part of the radio spectrum, or they can extend over larger 
areas, such as municipal Wi-Fi networks. However, municipal networks are not com-
mon because of their huge costs. See Figure 4.9 for an overview of how Wi-Fi works.
Bluetooth is a short-range 
wireless communications 
technology.
Wi-Fi is the standard way 
computers connect to 
wireless networks.
Figure 4.9 Overview of Wi-Fi.
Wireless Network
Acess Point
Cable/DSL
Modem
Antenna
Radio
Waves
Directional Antenna
and PC Card
Laptop(s) or Desktop(s)
1
2
3
Radio-equipped access point connected to the Internet
(or via a router). It generates and receives radio waves
(up to 400 feet).
Several client devices, equipped with PC cards, generate 
and receive radio waves.
Router is connected to the Internet via a cable or 
DSL modem, or is connected via a satellite.
Wireless Network
PC Card
2
1
3
Satellite
Internet
PC
Router

126  Chapter 4     Networks for Efficient Operations and Sustainability
Figure 4.10 WiMAX/Wi-Fi 
network.
Notebook with
built-in
WiMAX adapter
Wi-Fi
hotspots
Base station
WiMAX
hub
Internet
WiMAX
network
WIRELESS WIDE AREA 
NETWORKS
There are three general types of mobile networks: wide area networks (WANs), 
WiMAX, and local area networks (LANs). WANs for mobile computing are known as 
wireless wide area networks (WWANs). The range of a WWAN depends on the trans-
mission media and the wireless generation, which determines which services are avail-
able. Two components of wireless infrastructures are wireless LANs and WiMAX.
LANs
Wireless LANs use high-frequency radio waves to communicate between comput-
ers, devices, or other nodes on the network. A wireless LAN typically extends an 
existing wired LAN by attaching a wireless AP to a wired network.
WiMAX
Wireless broadband WiMAX transmits voice, data, and video over high-frequency 
radio signals to businesses, homes, and mobile devices. It was designed to bypass 
traditional telephone lines and is an alternative to cable and DSL. WiMAX is 
based on the IEEE 802.16 set of standards and the metropolitan area network 
(MAN) access standard. Its range is 20 to 30 miles and it does not require a clear 
line of sight to function. Figure 4.10 shows the components of a WiMAX/Wi-Fi 
network.
• 802.11a. This standard runs on 12 channels in the 5-GHz spectrum in North 
America, which reduces interference issues. Data are transferred about 5 times 
faster than 802.11b, improving the quality of streaming media. It has extra 
bandwidth for large files. Since the 802.11a and b standards are not interopera-
ble, data sent from an 802.11b network cannot be accessed by 802.11a networks.
• 802.11g. This standard runs on three channels in the 2.4-GHz spectrum, but 
at the speed of 802.11a. It is compatible with the 802.11b standard.
• 802.11n. This standard improves upon prior 802.11 standards by adding 
multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) and newer features. Frequency 
ranges from 2.4 GHz to 5 GHz with a data rate of about 22 Mbps, but perhaps 
as high as 100 Mbps.

4.3     Collaboration and Communication Technologies     127  
TECH NOTE 4.6 Mobile Network Evaluation Factors
When evaluating mobile network solutions, there are four factors to consider. They 
are:
1. Simple: Easy to deploy, manage, and use.
2. Connected: Always makes the best connection possible.
3. Intelligent: Works behind the scenes, easily integrating with other systems.
4. Trusted: Enables secure and reliable communications.
Questions
1. What factors are contributing to mobility?
2. Why is strategic planning of mobile networks important?
3. How does Wi-Fi work?
4. What is a WLAN?
5. Why is WiMAX important?
6. What factors should be considered when selecting a mobile network?
Now more than ever, business gets done through information sharing and col-
laborative planning. Business performance depends on broadband data networks 
for communication, mobility, and collaboration. For example, after Ford Motor 
Company began relying on UPS Logistics Group’s data networks to track millions 
of cars and trucks and to analyze any potential problems before they occur, Ford 
realized a $1 billion reduction in vehicle inventory and $125 million reduction in 
inventory carrying costs annually.
People need to work together and share documents. Teams make most of the 
complex decisions in organizations. And organizational decision making is difficult 
when team members are geographically spread out and working in different time 
zones.
Messaging and collaboration tools include older communications media such 
as e-mail, videoconferencing, fax, and texts—and blogs, Skype, Web meetings, 
and social media. Yammer is an enterprise social network that helps employees 
collaborate across departments, locations, and business apps. These private social 
sites are used by more than 400,000 enterprises worldwide. Yammer functions as a 
communication and problem-solving tool and is rapidly replacing e-mail. You will 
read about Yammer is detail in Chapter 7.
4.3  Collaboration and Communication Technologies
VIRTUAL 
COLLABORATION
Leading businesses are moving quickly to realize the benefits of virtual collabora-
tion. Several examples appear below.
Information Sharing Between Retailers and Their Suppliers
One of the most publicized examples of information sharing exists between Procter & 
Gamble (P&G) and Walmart. Walmart provides P&G with access to sales informa-
tion on every item Walmart buys from P&G. The information is collected by P&G 

128  Chapter 4     Networks for Efficient Operations and Sustainability
on a daily basis from every Walmart store, and P&G uses that information to man-
age the inventory replenishment for Walmart.
Retailer–Supplier Collaboration: Asda Corporation
Supermarket chain Asda (asda.com) has rolled out Web-based electronic data 
interchange (EDI) technology to 650 suppliers. Web EDI technology is based on 
the AS2 standard, an internationally accepted HTTP-based protocol used to send 
real time data in multiple formats securely over the Internet. It promises to improve 
the efficiency and speed of traditional EDI communications, which route data over 
third-party, value-added networks (VANs).
Lower Transportation and Inventory Costs 
and Reduced Stockouts: Unilever
Unilever’s 30 contract carriers deliver 250,000 truckloads of shipments annually. 
Unilever’s Web-based database, the Transportation Business Center (TBC), pro-
vides these carriers with site specification requirements when they pick up a shipment 
at a manufacturing or distribution center or when they deliver goods to retailers. 
TBC gives carriers all of the vital information they need: contact names and phone 
numbers, operating hours, the number of dock doors at a location, the height of the 
dock doors, how to make an appointment to deliver or pick up shipments, pallet 
configuration, and other special requirements. All mission-critical information that 
Unilever’s carriers need to make pickups, shipments, and deliveries is now available 
electronically 24/7.
Reduction of Product Development Time
Caterpillar, Inc. is a multinational heavy-machinery manufacturer. In the traditional 
mode of operation, cycle time along the supply chain was long because the process 
involved paper–document transfers among managers, salespeople, and technical 
staff. To solve the problem, Caterpillar connected its engineering and manufactur-
ing divisions with its active suppliers, distributors, overseas factories, and customers 
through an extranet-based global collaboration system. By means of the collabora-
tion system, a request for a customized tractor component, for example, can be 
transmitted from a customer to a Caterpillar dealer and on to designers and sup-
pliers, all in a very short time. Customers also can use the extranet to retrieve and 
modify detailed order information while the vehicle is still on the assembly line.
GROUP WORK AND 
DECISION PROCESSES
Managers and staff continuously make decisions as they develop and manufacture 
products, plan social media marketing strategies, make financial and IT invest-
ments, determine how to meet compliance mandates, design software, and so on. 
By design or default, group processes emerge, referred to as group dynamics, and 
those processes can be productive or dysfunctional.
Group Work and Dynamics
Group work can be quite complex depending on the following factors:
• Group members may be located in different places or work at different 
times.
• Group members may work for the same or different organizations.
• Needed data, information, or knowledge may be located in many sources, 
several of which are external to the organization.
Despite the long history and benefits of collaborative work, groups are not 
always successful.

4.3     Collaboration and Communication Technologies     129  
Online Brainstorming in the Cloud
Brainstorming ideas is no longer limited to a room full of people offering their 
ideas that are written on a whiteboard or posters. Companies are choosing an 
alternative—online brainstorming applications, many of them cloud-based. An 
advantage is the avoidance of travel expenses if members are geographically 
dispersed, which often restricts how many sessions a company can afford to hold. 
The following are two examples of online brainstorming apps:
• Evernote (evernote.com) is a cloud-based tool that helps users gather and 
share information, and brainstorm ideas. One function is Synch, which keeps 
Evernote notes up-to-date across a user’s computers, phones, devices and the 
Web. See Figure 4.11. A free version of Evernote is available for download.
• iMindmap Online, from UK-based ThinkBuzan (thinkbuzan.com), relies on 
mind mapping and other well-known structured approaches to brainstorm-
ing. iMindmap Online helps streamline work processes, minimize informa-
tion overload, generate new ideas, and boost innovation.
INTRANETS, 
EXTRANETS, AND 
VIRTUAL PRIVATE 
NETWORKS
Intranets are used within a company for data access, sharing, and collaboration. 
They are portals or gateways that provide easy and inexpensive browsing and 
search capabilities. Colleges and universities rely on intranets to provide services 
to students and faculty. Using screen sharing and other groupware tools, intranets 
can support team work.
An extranet is a private, company-owned network that can be logged into 
remotely via the Internet. Typical users are suppliers, vendors, partners, or custom-
ers (Figure 4.12). Basically, an extranet is a network that connects two or more 
companies so they can securely share information. Since authorized users remotely 
access content from a central server, extranets can drastically reduce storage space 
on individual hard drives.
A major concern is the security of the transmissions that could be intercepted 
or compromised. One solution is to use virtual private networks (VPNs), which 
encrypt the packets before they are transferred over the network. VPNs consist of 
encryption software and hardware that encrypt, send, and decrypt transmissions, as 
shown in Figure 4.13. In effect, instead of using a leased line to create a dedicated, 
physical connection, a company can invest in VPN technology to create virtual 
Figure 4.11 Evernote 
brainstorming, note taking, 
and archiving software 
website.
© NetPhotos/Alamy

130  Chapter 4     Networks for Efficient Operations and Sustainability
Figure 4.12 Example of an 
AT&T extranet used by a 
customer to access account 
information.
© Ian Dagnall/Alamy
Figure 4.13 Virtual private 
networks (VPNs) create 
encrypted connections to 
company networks.
© tungphoto/iStockphoto
Being profit-motivated without concern for damage to the environment is unaccept-
able. Society expects companies to generate a profit and to conduct themselves in 
an ethical, socially responsible, and environmentally sustainable manner. Four fac-
tors essential to preserving the environment are shown in Figure 4.14. Sustainability 
grows more urgent every year as carbon emissions contribute to climate changes 
that are threatening quality of life—and possibly life itself.
4.4  Sustainability and Ethical Issues
connections routed through the Internet from the company’s private network to the 
remote site or employee. Extranets can be expensive to implement and maintain 
because of hardware, software, and employee training costs if hosted internally 
rather than by an application service provider (ASP).
Questions
1. Why is group work challenging?
2. What might limit the use of in-person brainstorming?
3. How can online brainstorming tools overcome those limits?
4. What is the difference between an intranet and an extranet?
5. How does a virtual private network (VPN) provide security?

4.4     Sustainability and Ethical Issues     131  
Figure 4.14 The 4 Rs of 
environmental sustainability.
GLOBAL TEMPERATURE 
RISING TOO MUCH 
TOO FAST
At the United Nations’ 2009 climate conference in Copenhagen, climatologists 
estimated that countries must keep the global mean temperature (GMT) from ris-
ing by more than 2 C (3.6 F) above the preindustrial GMT in order to avoid pro-
found damage to life on the earth. Damage includes water and food scarcity, rising 
sea levels, and greater incidence and severity of disease. Only three years later, 
GMT had already increased by 0.7 C, or 1.3 F. In 2012 IEA chief economist Faith 
Birol warned that this trend is perfectly in line with a temperature increase of 6 C 
by 2050, which would have devastating impacts on the planet. Since 2005 the Prince 
of Wales’ Corporate Leaders Group on Climate Change has lobbied for more 
aggressive climate legislation within the United Kingdom, the European Union, 
and internationally. It holds that carbon emission reductions between 50 percent 
and 85 percent are necessary by 2050 to prevent the global temperature from rising 
too much too fast because of the greenhouse effect, as shown in Figure 4.15.
TECH NOTE 4.7 NASA’s Greenhouse Gas Emission Warnings
According to NASA (climate.nasa.gov), CO2 and other greenhouse gases (GHGs) 
trap the sun’s heat within the earth’s atmosphere, warming it and keeping it at habit-
able temperatures. Scientists have concluded that increases in CO2 resulting from 
human activities have thrown the earth’s natural carbon cycle off balance, increasing 
global temperatures and changing the planet’s climate.
 
GHG emissions worldwide hit record highs in 2011, according to the Interna-
tional Energy Agency (IEA). The IEA’s preliminary estimates indicate that global 
emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) from fossil-fuel combustion spiked to 31.6 giga-
tonnes (Gt) in 2011, an increase of 1 Gt or 3.2 percent from the 2010 level (Lemonick, 
2012). One Gt equals 1 billion metric tons. GHG is now a serious a global concern. 
The main international treaty on climate change is the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
 
In 2010 parties to the UNFCCC agreed that future global warming should be 
limited to below 2 C (3.6 F) relative to the preindustrial level. Analysis suggests 
that meeting the 2 C target would require annual global emissions of GHG to peak 
© skegbydave/iStockphoto 

132  Chapter 4     Networks for Efficient Operations and Sustainability
Figure 4.16 Carbon cycle. 
The Orbiting Carbon 
Observatory-2 was 
launched in July 2014. The 
observatory is NASA’s fi rst 
satellite mission dedicated 
to studying CO2, which 
is a critical component of 
the earth’s carbon cycle 
driving changes in the 
earth’s climate. CO2 is 
also the largest human-
produced GHG. Courtesy 
of genomicscience.
energy.gov.
Figure 4.15 Illustration of the 
earth’s greenhouse effect.
GLOBAL WARMING
Global warming refers to the upward trend in GMT. It is one of the most compli-
cated issues facing world leaders. Figure 4.16 shows the relationship of fossil fuel, 
soil, water, atmosphere, and so on in the carbon cycle. Even though the global 
carbon cycle plays a central role in regulating CO2 in the atmosphere and thus the 
earth’s climate, scientists’ understanding of the interlinked biological processes 
that drive this cycle is limited. They know that whether an ecosystem will capture, 
store, or release carbon depends on climate changes and organisms in the earth’s 
biosphere. The biosphere refers to any place that life of any kind can exist on the 
earth and contains several ecosystems. An ecosystem is a self-sustaining functional 
unit of the biosphere; it exchanges material and energy between adjoining ecosys-
tems. Global warming occurs because of the greenhouse effect, which is the holding 
of heat within the earth’s atmosphere. GHGs such as CO2, methane (CH4), and 
nitrous oxide (N2O) absorb infrared radiation (IR), as diagrammed in Figure 4.17.
ICT’s Role in Global Warming
The IT industry sector is called the information and communications technology, or 
ICT, in emission reports. ICT has certainly supported economic growth in developed 
and developing countries and transformed societies, businesses, and people’s lives. 
But what impacts do our expanding IT and social media dependence have on global 
warming? How can business processes change or reduce GHGs? And what alternative 
© ImageZoo/Alamy
U.S. Department of Energy Genomic Science program (http://genomicscience.energy.gov)
before the year 2020 and decline signifi cantly thereafter, with emissions in 2050 reduced 
by 30 to 50 percent compared to 1990 levels.
 
Analyses by the United Nations Environment Programme and International 
Energy Agency warn that current policies are too weak to achieve the 2 C target.

4.4     Sustainability and Ethical Issues     133  
energy sources can be used to power the increasing demands for connectivity? Listed 
below are several reports and initiatives to help answer these questions.
Global e-Sustainability Initiative and the SMART 2020 Report
The Climate Group’s SMART 2020 Report is the world’s first comprehensive global 
study of the IT sector’s growing significance for the world’s climate. On behalf of 
the Global e-Sustainability Initiative (GeSI, gesi.org), Climate Group found that 
ICT plays a key role in reducing global warming. Transforming the way people and 
businesses use IT could reduce annual human-generated global emissions by 15 
percent by 2020 and deliver energy efficiency savings to global businesses of over 
500 billion euros, or $800 billion U.S. And using social media, for example, to 
inform consumers of the grams (g) of carbon emissions associated with the products 
they buy could change buyer behavior and ultimately have a positive eco-effect. Like 
food items that display calories and grams of fat to help consumers make healthier 
food choices, product labels display the CO2 emissions generated in the production 
of an item, as shown in Figure 4.18. By 2020 not only will people become more con-
nected, but things will, too—an estimated 50 billion machine-to-machine connec-
tions in 2020. A benefit of machine-to-machine connections is that they can relay 
data about climate changes that make it possible to monitor our emissions.
Figure 4.17 Greenhouse 
gases absorb infrared 
radiation (IR) emitted from 
the earth and reradiate it 
back, thus contributing to 
the greenhouse effect.
© Universal Images Group Limited/Alamy
Figure 4.18 Label showing 
the amount of CO2 emission 
generated by the production 
of an item.
© Alex Segre/Alamy

134  Chapter 4     Networks for Efficient Operations and Sustainability
Recommended Actions for the IT Sector
Analysis conducted by management consultants McKinsey & Company concludes 
the following:
• The IT sector’s own footprint of 2 percent of global emissions could double 
by 2020 because of increased use of tablets, smartphones, apps, and services. 
To help, rather than worsen, the fight against climate change, the IT sector 
must manage its own growing impact and continue to reduce emissions from 
data centers, telecom networks, and the manufacture and use of its products.
• IT has the unique ability to monitor and maximize energy efficiency both within 
and outside of its own industry sector to cut CO2 emissions by up to 5 times this 
amount. This represents a savings of 7.8 Gt of CO2 per year by 2020, which is 
greater than the 2010 annual emissions of either the United States or China.
The SMART 2020 Report gives a picture of the IT industry’s role in addressing 
global climate change and facilitating efficient and low-carbon development. The 
role of IT includes emission reduction and energy savings not only in the sector itself, 
but also by transforming how and where people work. The most obvious ways are 
by substituting digital formats—telework, video-conferencing, e-paper, and mobile 
and e-commerce—for physical formats. Researchers estimate that replacing physical 
products/services with their digital equivalents would provide 6 percent of the total 
benefits the IT sector can deliver. Greater benefits are achieved when IT is applied 
to other industries. Examples of those industries are smart building design and use, 
smart logistics, smart electricity grids, and smart industrial motor systems.
SUSTAINABILITY
YouTube reported that 100 hours of video are uploaded every minute in 2014—
more than double the 48 hours per minute in 2012. Over 6 billion hours of video are 
watched each month on YouTube—almost an hour for every person on the earth. 
Within 5 years, from 2008 through 2013, most U.S. households tripled the number 
of computing, gaming, consumer electronics, and mobile devices. Statistics about 
Twitter and other social services also show phenomenal growth. Almost all of these 
network activities are powered by the burning of fossil fuels. Today’s connected 
lifestyles will further harm the environment unless corrective actions are taken such 
as those listed in Figure 4.19.
Global Warming: A Hot Debate
Does our society have the capacity to endure in such a way that the 9 billion people 
expected on the earth by 2050 will all be able to achieve a basic quality of life? The 
Reducing barriers to the use
of public transport and
improving people’s experience
of the journey. For example,
smart ticketing and free Wi-Fi.
Facilitating car sharing and
eco-driving.
Encouraging and enforcing
speed limits by using average
speed cameras and intelligent
speed adaptation, which help
drivers to avoid fines and
stay safe.
Enabling home working and
using video conferencing and
e-commerce to reduce travel.
Figure 4.19 Recommendations for ICT from the Sustainable Development 
Commission (2010).

4.4     Sustainability and Ethical Issues     135  
answer is uncertain—and hotly debated. As you read, many scientists and experts 
are extremely alarmed by global warming and climate change, but other experts 
outright deny that they are occurring.
This debate may be resolved to some degree by NASA. A NASA spacecraft 
was designed to make precise measurements of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the earth’s 
atmosphere. The Orbiting Carbon Observatory-2 (OCO-2) was launched in July 
2014. The observatory is NASA’s first satellite mission dedicated to studying CO2, 
a critical component of the earth’s carbon cycle that is the most prevalent human-
produced GHG driving changes in the earth’s climate (Figure 4.16).
OCO-2 is a new tool for understanding both the sources of CO2 emissions and 
the natural processes that remove CO2 from the atmosphere, and how they are 
changing over time. The mission’s data will help scientists reduce uncertainties in 
forecasts of how much carbon dioxide is in the atmosphere and improve the accu-
racy of global climate change predictions.
According to NASA, since the start of the Industrial Revolution more than 
200 years ago, the burning of fossil fuels, as well as other human activities, have led 
to an unprecedented buildup in this GHG, which in 2014 was at its highest level in 
at least 800,000 years. Human activities have increased the level of CO2 by more 
than 25 percent in just the past half century.
It is possible that we are living far beyond the earth’s capacity to support human 
life. While sustainability is about the future of our society, for businesses, it is also 
about return on investment (ROI). Businesses need to respect environmental lim-
its, but also need to show an ROI.
Sustainability Through Climate Change Mitigation
There are no easy or convenient solutions to carbon emissions from the fossil fuels 
burned to power today’s tech dependencies. But there are pathways to solutions, 
and every IT user, enterprise, and nation plays a role in climate change mitigation. 
Climate change mitigation is any action to limit the magnitude of long-term climate 
change. Examples of mitigation include switching to low-carbon renewable energy 
sources and reducing the amount of energy consumed by power stations by increasing 
their efficiency. There have been encouraging successes. For example, investments 
in research and development (R&D) to reduce the amount of carbon emitted by 
power stations for mobile networks are paying off. Announced in April 2014, a break-
through in the design of signal amplifiers for mobile technology will cut 200 mega-
watts (MW) from the load of power stations, which will reduce CO2 emissions by 
0.5 million tonnes a year (Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, 2014).
Mobile, Cloud, and Social Carbon Footprint
No one sees CO2 being emitted from their Androids or iPhones. But wired and 
mobile networks enable limitless data creation and consumption—and these activi-
ties increase energy consumption. Quite simply, the surge in energy used to power 
data centers, cell towers, base stations, and recharge devices is damaging the envi-
ronment and depleting natural resources. It is critical to develop energy systems 
that power our economy without increasing global temperatures beyond 2 C. To 
do their part to reduce damaging carbon emissions, some companies have imple-
mented effective sustainability initiatives.
Sustainability Initiatives
Communications technology accounts for approximately 2 percent of global 
carbon emissions; it is predicted that this figure will double by 2020 as end-
user demand for high-bandwidth services with enhanced quality of experience 
explodes worldwide. Innovative solutions hold the key to curbing these emissions 
and reducing environmental impact.

136  Chapter 4     Networks for Efficient Operations and Sustainability
Network service providers as well as organizations face the challenges of 
energy efficiency, a smaller carbon footprint, and eco-sustainability. To deal with 
these challenges, wired and wireless service providers and companies need to 
upgrade their networks to next-generation, all-IP infrastructures that are opti-
mized and scalable. The network must provide eco-sustainability in traffic trans-
port and deliver services more intelligently, reliably, securely, efficiently and at the 
lowest cost.
For example, Alcatel-Lucent’s High Leverage Network (HLN) can reduce total 
cost of ownership (TCO) by using fewer devices, creating an eco-sustainable choice 
for service providers. Fewer devices mean less power and cooling, which reduces 
the carbon footprint. HLN can also handle large amounts of traffic more efficiently 
because the networks are intelligent, sending packets at the highest speed and most 
efficiently.
ETHICAL 
CONSIDERATIONS OF 
HYPER-CONNECTED 
HUMANS
The complexity of a connected life will increase as we move to the new era of nano-
sensors and devices, virtual spaces, and 3D social networks exchanging zillions of 
bytes of data. Managers and workers need to consider ethical and social issues, such 
as quality of life and working conditions. Individuals will experience both positive 
and negative impacts from being linked to a 24/7 workplace, working in virtual 
teams, and being connected to handhelds whose impact on health can be damag-
ing. A 2008 study by Solutions Research Group found that always being connected 
is a borderline obsession for many people. According to the study, 68 percent of 
Americans may suffer from disconnect anxiety—feelings of disorientation and ner-
vousness when deprived of Internet or wireless access for a period of time. Consider 
this development and its implications.
Driving while distracted is a crime. Texting while driving is comparable to 
driving under the influence (DUI), according to safety experts. Several studies indi-
cate that the use of mobile devices is a leading cause of car crashes. At any given 
moment, more than 10 million U.S. drivers are talking on handheld cell phones, 
according to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Why is this a 
problem? Mobiles are a known distraction, and the NHTSA has determined that 
driver inattention is a primary or contributing factor in as many as 25 percent of all 
police-reported traffic accidents. This does not include the thousands of accidents 
not reported to the authorities.
In most or all states, distracted driving is a crime that carries mandatory fines 
(Figure 4.20). For example, in California and New York State, drivers charged with 
this crime face fines and have their driving license suspended. If driving while dis-
tracted causes injury or death to others, violators face jail time.
The importance of understanding ethical issues has been recognized by the 
Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB International, 
aacsb.edu). For business majors, the AACSB International has defined Assurance 
Figure 4.20 Texting while 
driving is a crime and 
potentially fatal.
© ZUMA Wire Service/Alamy

4.4     Sustainability and Ethical Issues     137  
of Learning Requirements for ethics at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. 
In Standard 15: Management of Curricula (AACSB, 2006), the association identi-
fies general knowledge and skill learning experiences that include “ethical under-
standing and reasoning abilities” at the undergraduate level. At the graduate level, 
Standard 15 requires learning experiences in management-specific knowledge and 
skill areas to include “ethical and legal responsibilities in organizations and society” 
(AACSB, 2006).
Additions and Life Out of Control
The technologies covered in this chapter blur work, social, and personal time. IT 
keeps people connected with no real off switch. Tools that are meant to improve 
the productivity and quality of life in general can also intrude on personal time. 
Managers need to be aware of the huge potential for abuse by expecting a 24/7 
response from workers.
The report Looking Further with Ford—2014 Trends identifies trends in 
how the technology explosion will affect consumer choices and behaviors. Sheryl 
Connelly, Ford global trend and futuring manager, summarized what was learned: 
“There is no escaping the impact—both positive and negative—of the rapid pace 
of technology. . . . We are seeing a consumer culture that is increasingly mindful of 
the need to nurture society’s valuable and irreplaceable resources” (Ford Motors, 
2013). Four trends were discussed in this report:
1. Micro Moments: With so much information at our fi ngertips, downtime has given 
way to fi lling every moment with bite-sized chunks of information, education, 
and entertainment—seemingly packing our lives with productivity.
2. Myth of Multitasking: In an increasingly screen-saturated, multitasking mod-
ern world, more and more evidence is emerging to suggest that when we do 
everything at once, we sacrifi ce the quality—and often safety—of each thing 
we do.
3. Vying for Validation: In a world of hyper-self-expression, chronic public journal-
ing, and other forms of digital expression, consumers are creating a public self 
that may need validation even more than their authentic self.
4. Sustainability: The world has been fi xated on going green, and now attention is 
shifting beyond recycling and eco-chic living to a growing concern for the power 
and preciousness of the planet’s water.
In our hyper-connected world, people are always on, collaborating, communi-
cating, and creating—and not always aware of how technology impacts them. We 
need to learn how to harness that energy and connection to develop the next gen-
eration of critical, thoughtful thinkers.
Questions
1. Why do some experts warn that carbon emission reductions between 
50 percent and 85 percent are necessary by 2050?
2. What contributes to the rise of global mean temperature?
3. What is the greenhouse effect?
4. How does the use of mobile devices contribute to the level of green-
house gases?
5. What is ICT’s role in global warming?
6. Why is global warming hotly debated?
7. Explain the goal of sustainability.
8. Explain the characteristics of a life out of control.

138  Chapter 4     Networks for Efficient Operations and Sustainability
Key Terms
3G
4G
5G
application program 
interface (API)
bandwidth
Bluetooth
carbon footprint
circuit switching
climate change
climate change mitigation
extranet
fi xed-line broadband
greenhouse gases 
(GHGs)
group dynamics
information and commu-
nications technology 
(ICT)
Internet Protocol (IP)
intranet
IP address
IP Version 4 (IPv4)
IP Version 6 (IPv6)
latency-sensitive apps
local area network (LAN)
Long-Term Evolution 
(LTE)
mashup
mobile broadband
near-fi eld communication 
(NFC)
Net neutrality
Net semi-neutrality
packet
packet switching
protocol
quality of service (QoS)
router
sustainability
switch
traffi c shaping
transmission control 
protocol/Internet 
protocol (TCP/IP)
virtual private network 
(VPN)
voice over IP (VoIP)
wide area network (WAN)
Wi-Fi
WiMAX
Assuring Your Learning
 1. Explain how network capacity is measured.
 2. How are devices identifi ed to a network?
 3. Explain how digital signals are transmitted.
 4. Explain the functions of switches and routers.
 5. QoS technologies can be applied to create two tiers 
of traffi c. What are those tiers? Give an example of 
each type of traffi c.
 6. Typically, networks are confi gured so that down-
loading is faster than uploading. Explain why.
 7. What are signifi cant issues about 4G wireless 
networks?
 8. What are two 4G wireless standards?
 9. How is network performance measured?
 10. Discuss two applications of near-fi eld communica-
tion (NFC).
 11. What are the benefi ts of APIs?
 12. Describe the components of a mobile communica-
tion infrastructure.
 13. What is the range of WiMAX? Why does it not 
need a clear line of sight?
 14. Why are VPNs used to secure extranets?
 15. How can group dynamics improve group work? 
How can it disrupt what groups might accomplish?
 16. What are the benefi ts of using software to conduct 
brainstorming in the cloud (remotely)?
 17. How do mobile devices contribute to carbon 
emissions?
 18. Discuss the ethical issues of anytime-anywhere 
accessibility.
 19. What health and quality-of-life issues are associ-
ated with social networks and a 24/7 connected 
lifestyle?
 20. Is distracted driving an unsolvable problem? Explain.
DISCUSS: Critical Thinking Questions
 21. Visit the Alcatel-Lucent website (www.alcatel-lucent.
com) and search for “eco-sustainability strategy.”
a. Read about Alcatel’s eco-sustainability strategy.
b. Describe how the company is developing eco-
sustainable networks. In your opinion, is this an 
effective strategy? Explain.
c. Explain how the company is enabling a low- 
carbon economy. What is its most signifi cant 
contribution to sustainability?
 22. Visit the Google apps website. Identify three types of 
collaboration support and their value in the workplace.
 23. Compare the various features of broadband 
wireless networks (e.g., 3G, Wi-Fi, and WiMAX). 
Visit at least three broadband wireless network 
vendors.
a. Prepare a list of capabilities for each network.
b. Prepare a list of actual applications that each 
network can support.
c. Comment on the value of such applications to 
users. How can the benefi ts be assessed?
EXPLORE: Online and Interactive Exercises

CASE 4.2     Business Case     139  
24. Visit Youtube.com and search for tutorials on the 
latest version of iMindMap.  Watch a few of the 
tutorials. As an alternative, watch the video at http://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=UVt3Qu6Xcko&list=PL
A42C25431E4EA4FF.  Describe the potential value 
of sharing maps online and synching maps with other 
computers or devices. What is your opinion of the 
ease or complexity of the iMindMap interface?
25. Visit Google Green at www.google.com/green/
bigpicture. Describe Google’s efforts to minimize 
the environmental impact of its services. Do you 
believe that Google can reduce its carbon footprint 
beyond zero, as the company claims? Explain your 
answer.
ANALYZE & DECIDE: Apply IT Concepts to Business Decisions
CASE 4.2
Business Case: Google Maps API for Business
A restaurant owner has a website where customers can place 
orders for delivery. When a customer inputs a delivery address, 
a software script verifi es whether the address is within the 
delivery range of the restaurant. If the address is not in the 
delivery range, the site does not let the customer check out 
and sends a message informing the customer that he or she 
is outside of the delivery range. The script requests informa-
tion from Google Maps via an API to calculate whether or not 
the address was in the range. The free version, called Google 
Maps API, allows up to 2,500 requests per day from a single 
IP address and is limited to noncommercial purposes.
 
The owner needs to purchase a Google Maps API for 
Business license because any requests in excess of 2,500 will 
be ignored. The Google Maps API for Business provides bet-
ter resolution, scale, and enhanced features and support to 
businesses that add maps to their websites, mobile apps, 
or asset-tracking applications.
Directions and Routing Features
The Google Maps API delivers the full power of Google’s 
routing engine to applications. Among other features, it:
• 
Generates routes between up to 23 locations for driving, 
walking, or cycling.
• 
Generates routes to avoid toll roads or highways.
• 
Reduces travel time by calculating the optimal order to 
visit each location.
• 
Calculates travel time and distance between locations, 
for example, to offer users a way to fi lter search results by 
drive time.
Data Visualization
The Google Maps API lets managers visualize data using heat 
maps, symbols, and custom styles. For U.S. maps, companies 
have access to a demographics layer containing up-to-date 
census data provided by Nielsen and 5-year projections of 
many data fi elds. The demographics layer may only be used 
on intranets or internal websites.
Advanced Analytics
The Google Maps API for Business offers an analytics tool 
that shows how visitors interact with the maps—for example, 
how many visitors switched to satellite view, what they 
zoomed, and which map features were used the most. Using 
this information, businesses can customize the user experi-
ence based on their preferences and better engage with 
customers.
Automobile Association
Google Maps is the most widely used online mapping service 
in the world, with more than 800,000 sites using the Google 
Maps API and over 250 million active users on mobile devices 
alone. In the United Kingdom, the Automobile Association 
(AA) provides roadside assistance and directions to motor-
ists. AA invested in the Google Maps API for Business to offer 
interactive route planning and improve visitors’ experiences. 
The value AA derived from the API was a 12 percent increase 
in the number of routes downloaded, hitting an average of 
4 million downloads per week of its routing or trip-planning 
service. Approximately 20 percent of site visitors remained 
on the site for at least fi ve minutes—up from only six percent 
prior to implementation. The API also cuts the time and cost 
of IT support for the mapping platform.
Questions
1. Describe Google Maps API.
2. Why do you think Google provides free noncommercial 
use of its Maps API?
3. How many times have you used a website’s mapping 
feature for directions or to calculate distance? How did 
having a familiar interface improve your experience?
4. Google claims that its Maps API helps a company’s 
customers and employees make better business and 
purchasing decisions by visualizing important informa-
tion on a familiar map. Explain how data visualization 
provides these benefi ts. Give two examples in your 
explanation.

140  Chapter 4     Networks for Efficient Operations and Sustainability
CASE 4.3
Video Case: Fresh Direct Connects for Success
Visit and explore the Fresh Direct website at www.freshdirect.
com to learn about the company. Visit the Cisco website at 
www.cisco.com. Search for the video “Fresh Direct  Produce.” 
The URL is www.cisco.com/cisco/web/solutions/small_
business/resource_center/index.html. Watch the video to 
learn how Fresh Direct uses network technology to  connect 
employees, suppliers, and customers. Meet CEO Davis 
Yung and see how Cisco wireless technology gives his team 
constant connectivity to meet customer demands (video runs 
2:50  minutes).
Questions
1. Describe how network technology enables Fresh Direct’s 
business model.
2. What factors are critical to Fresh Direct’s performance?
AT&T Enterprise. “Sony Builds an IPv6 Network for the 
Future.” AT&T VPN Services Case Study. October 16, 2012. 
business.att.com/content/customertestimonial/sony-case-
study-IP-VPN.pdf
Basulto, D. “Five Reasons to Get Excited About 5G Networks.” 
The Washington Post, February 27, 2014.
Boden, R. “Total Produce Pushes Fruit and Veg with NFC in 
Supermarkets.” NFC World, April 15, 2014. 
Cisco. Cisco Visual Networking Index (VNI): Global Mobile 
Data Traffi c Forecast Update, 2013–2018. February 5, 2014a.
Cisco. “Sony Adopts Cisco Solution for Global IPv6 Project.” 
Cisco Public Information, Customer Case Study. 2014b.
Dean, J. “Let a Billion Streams Bloom.” Fast Company, 
November 2013.
Edwards, J. “The Connected Life.” Teradata Magazine, Q1, 2014.
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council. 
“New Design for Mobile Phone Masts Could Cut Carbon 
Emissions.” April 22, 2014.
Ford Motors. “Looking Further with Ford—2014 Trends.” 2013.
Khedekar, N. “IPv6 Demystifi ed—What You Should Know.” 
Tech 2 FirstPost, June 7, 2012.
O’Connor, M. C. “Santander: Test Bed for Smart Cities and 
Open Data Policies.” SmartPlanet.com, May 8, 2013.
Sustainable Development Commission. “Smarter Moves: 
How Information Communications Technology Can Promote 
Sustainable Mobility.” SDC Report. January 25, 2010.
Wheeler, T. “Setting the Record Straight on the FCC’s Open 
Internet Rules.” FCC blog, April 24, 2014.
Woods, D. “The Strengths and Limits of Automatically Created 
APIs.” CITO Research, September 20, 2013a.
Woods, D. “The Strengths and Limits of Automatically 
Created APIs.” CITO Research, October 2, 2013b.
References

Chapter Snapshot
Managers no longer question whether their networks 
will be attacked, but how much damage will be done, 
how long the investigation will take, and how much 
the investigation and fines will cost. After detecting a 
network hack, credit card-processing company Global 
Payments, Inc. spent 14 months investigating the resulting 
data breach that exposed 1.5 million U.S. debit and credit 
card accounts. Global’s damages totaled $93 million, bro-
ken down as follows: $36 million in fraud losses and fines 
and $77 million for the investigation, remediation, credit 
1. Describe today’s most destructive cyberthreats, data 
breaches, targeted attacks, malware, and other IT 
security risks facing organizations and why they are 
so difficult to defend against.
2. Explain why cyber risk management is a business priority; 
outline an organizational model for cybersecurity; and 
describe the cybersecurity process.
3. Explain why mobile devices, apps, and cloud-based 
services are high-risk attack vectors, the importance of 
BYOD (bring your own devices) policies, and the defenses 
needed to counteract exposure to mobile malware.
4. Describe the characteristics of fraud and how enterprises 
can defend against and detect fraudulent activities.
5. Explain how internal controls help ensure compliance 
with industry and federal regulations. Assess the ability 
to maintain business operations in the event of a 
network crash, debilitating hacker attack, or other IT 
disruption.
Learning Outcomes
141
Chapter Snapshot
Case 5.1 Opening Case: BlackPOS Malware 
Steals Target’s Customer Data
5.1 The Face and Future of Cyberthreats
5.2 Cyber Risk Management
5.3 Mobile, App, and Cloud Security
5.4 Defending Against Fraud
5.5 Compliance and Internal Control
Key Terms
Assuring Your Learning
• Discuss: Critical Thinking Questions
• Explore: Online and Interactive Exercises
•  Analyze & Decide: Apply IT Concepts 
to Business Decisions
Case 5.2 Business Case: Lax Security at 
LinkedIn Exposed
Case 5.3 Video Case: Botnets, Malware Security, 
and Capturing Cybercriminals
References
Cybersecurity and 
Risk Management
5
Chapter

monitoring, and identity theft insurance for affected con-
sumers. In October 2013 a data breach at Adobe exposed 
the account information of up to 152 million users—the 
largest data breach in history. No costs have yet been 
reported, but according to the Ponemon 2013 Cost 
of Data Breach Study, the average cost of a breached 
account is $188 (Ponemon Institute, 2013). In August 
2014, fraudsters targeted customers of JPMorgan Chase, 
the No. 1 U.S. bank by assets. The massive phishing 
campaign, called Smash and Grab, was unusual because 
it collected customers’ login data and also infected PCs 
with Dyre, a banking trojan that lifted login data for 
other institutions. The bank was not able to identify who 
was behind the Smash and Grab attack.
In Chapter 5, you will learn about devastating cyber-
threats, data breaches, fraud, damages caused by cyber-
criminals’ aggressive tactics—and how organizations 
defend against them.
CASE 5.1 OPENING CASE
BlackPOS Malware Steals Target’s Customer Data
Target is a major discount retailer in the United States (Figure 5.1). Target’s man-
agement admitted that 40 million credit and debit card accounts were exposed 
between November 27 and December 15, 2013. During that peak holiday shopping 
season, hackers captured credit card data from the stores’ point-of-sale (POS) 
payment terminals (Figure 5.2).
Target disclosed the breach on December 19, 2013; then on January 10, 2014, 
the retailer also reported that hackers stole 40 million credit card numbers along 
with the personal information of another 70 million customers. The incident scared 
shoppers away, affecting the company’s profits throughout 2014.
142
Figure 5.1 Target data 
breach overview.
HOW THE ATTACK 
WAS CARRIED OUT
Several experts believe that POS malware bought from the criminal underground 
was responsible. Malware, short for malicious software, are computer programs 
whose code causes disruption, destruction, or other devious action. Malware named 
BlackPOS is sold on the black market for $1,800 or more. The malware is adver-
tised on Internet underground forums under the generic name Dump Memory 
Grabber by Ree. BlackPOS is malware designed to be installed on POS devices in 
2nd largest retail discounter in the
United States.
4Q 2013 profit dropped 46% and
sales revenue fell 5.3% after
breach was disclosed.
Company Profile
Hackers installed malware,
probably bought from a criminal
underground website, on Target’s
POS terminals to capture data
from credit and debit cards and
transmit back to the hackers.
Data Breach
Personal and financial data from
up to 70 million customers stolen
by hackers using malware.
Estimated the breach to cost
from $400 million to $450 million.
Extent of the Breach
and Costs
Target

CASE 5.1     Opening Case     143  
order to record data from credit and debit cards swiped through the infected device. 
Specifically, the malware identifies the process associated with the credit card 
reader and steals payment card Track 1 and Track 2 data from its memory. These 
are the data stored on the magnetic strip of payment cards that were used to clone 
or create counterfeit cards.
More feature-rich versions of BlackPOS selling for roughly $2,300 provide 
encryption support for stolen data. The BlackPOS creator is not confirmed, but 
experts tracking the malware suggest that the hacker may be based in Russia or 
Ukraine. The U.S. Secret Service estimated that the type of malware that led to 
Target’s breach has affected over 1,000 U.S. businesses.
Figure 5.2 POS payment 
terminal. Malware-infected 
POS terminals caused 
Target’s data breach.
FINANCIAL IMPACT OF 
THE DATA BREACH
In February 2014 Target reported that its 2013 fourth-quarter (4Q) profit dropped 
46 percent and sales revenue fell 5.3 percent. A few months later, in May 2014, 
Target estimated that technological changes to harden its IT security would cost 
more than $100 million in addition to $61 million incurred in breach-related 
expenses in Q4 2013. These costs and damages harmed the company’s profitability.
Gregg Steinhafel, chairman, president, and CEO of Target, tried to reassure 
customers and investors, saying, “As we plan for the new fiscal year, we will continue 
to work tirelessly to win back the confidence of our guests. . . . We are encouraged 
that sales trends have improved in recent weeks” (D’Innocenzio, 2014).
Six months after the breach, it still was not clear when Target would fully 
recover. A security analyst at the tech firm Gartner estimated the costs of the breach 
to range from $400 million to $450 million. That includes the bills associated with 
fines from credit card companies and services for its customers like free credit card 
report monitoring. Target also faced at least 70 lawsuits related to privacy invasion 
and negligence, alleging Target did not take proper steps to protect consumer data.
TARGET BRUSHED 
OFF WARNINGS
According to financial services firm Cowen Group’s note to investors, criminals 
were able to hack into Target’s database due to a lack of security, which might have 
been a result of underinvestment by senior management.
Target’s cybersecurity staff had also warned management to review the security 
of its payment card system at least two months before the breach. At the time of 
the warning, Target was updating the payment terminals, which makes them more 
vulnerable to attack, in preparation for the holiday season. Data security was not a 
top priority. Months before the attack, the federal government and private research 
firms were also warning companies about the emergence of new types of malware 
© Aleph Studio/Shutterstock

144  Chapter 5     Cybersecurity and Risk Management
(malicious computer code) targeting payment terminals. However, because of 
numerous security warnings that retailers receive every week, it is difficult to identify 
or decide which ones are the most urgent.
EXECUTIVE FALLOUT
On May 5, 2014, CEO Steinhafel resigned from all his positions effective immedi-
ately, after extensive discussions with the board of directors. Steinhafel had been 
CEO since 2008 and a Target employee for 35 years. The company stated that 
Steinhafel and board members had mutually decided that it was time for Target 
to continue under new leadership. Target shares were down close to 3 percent in 
morning trading following the news.
Steinhafel’s untimely exit was the second significant executive fallout from the 
data breach. In April 2014 Target’s CIO had also been replaced.
Sources: Compiled from D’Innocenzio (2014), Yadron et al. (2014), Krebs on Security (2014), Sharf 
(2014), O’Connor (2014), and Kratsas (2014).
Questions
1. Was cybersecurity a priority at Target? Explain.
2. How did lax security impact Target’s sales revenue and profi t performance?
3. According to experts, how was the data breach executed?
4. In addition to the data theft, what else was damaged by this incident?
5. Was this cybersecurity incident foreseeable? Was it avoidable?
6. Why might management not treat cyberthreats as a top priority?
7. Research recent news concerning this data breach. Has Target recovered 
from it? Explain.
8. Assuming that the CEO and CIO were forced to resign, what message 
does that send to senior management at U.S. companies?
Since 2013 the number of data records stolen by hackers has increased at an alarm-
ing rate, as shown in Figure 5.3. In fact, 2013 has been dubbed the “Year of the 
Breach” because there were 2,164 reported data breaches that exposed an estimated 
823 million records. Almost half of the 2013 breaches occurred in the United 
States, where the largest number of records were exposed—more than 540 million 
data records or 66 percent. Table 5.1 lists the top seven biggest data breaches 
5.1  The Face and Future of Cyberthreats
Figure 5.3 Number of 
reported data records 
breached worldwide, 
2009–2013.
900
600
800
700
300
400
500
200
100
0
2009
Million
2010
2011
2012
2013
193M
95M
413M
264M
823M

5.1     The Face and Future of Cyberthreats     145  
TABLE 5.1 
 Biggest Data Breaches Worldwide, 2013–2014, in Terms of Number 
of Data Records Breached
 
Number of
 
Data Records
Company 
Breached
eBay
Online auction
Attackers compromised several employees’ log-in credentials between 
Up to 145 million
February and March 2014 to gain access to the company’s network and, 
through it, compromised a database that contained customer names, 
encrypted passwords, email addresses, physical addresses, phone numbers, 
and dates of birth.
Michaels Stores
Retail stores
The POS systems at 54 Michaels stores were attacked by criminals using 
2.6 million payment
highly sophisticated malware between May 2013 and 
card numbers and
January 2014. 
expiration dates
Adobe
Software vendor
The stolen fi les contained active and inactive accounts for numerous 
150 million
Adobe products: Acrobat, Photoshop, ColdFusion, and CreativeCloud. 
The fi les hold Adobe IDs, e-mail addresses, passwords, credit/debit card 
numbers, expiration dates, and other PII (Personally Identifi able 
Information).
Target
2nd largest discount retailer in the United States 
110 million
UbiSoft
3rd largest gaming company in Europe and the United States 
58 million
Turkish Government
No antivirus software was installed on the hacked system. 
54 million
Evernote
Online note-taking service 
50 million
Living Social
Daily deals website 
50 million
Cupid Media
Popular dating service
The records of 56 Department of Homeland Security employees were 
42 million
stolen in this breach.

146  Chapter 5     Cybersecurity and Risk Management
worldwide in 2013. The consequences of lax cybersecurity include damaged repu-
tations, financial penalties, federal and state government fines, lost market share, 
falling share prices, and consumer backlash.
The main cause of a data breach is hacking, but the reason hacking is so suc-
cessful is negligence—management not doing enough to defend against cyber-
threats. Even high-tech companies and market leaders, as shown in Table 5.1, 
appear to be detached from the value of the confidential data they store and the 
threat that highly motivated hackers will try to steal them. As you will read in this 
section, robust data security is not the responsibility of IT alone, but the ongoing 
duty of everyone in an organization.
Hacks of high-tech companies like LinkedIn, Google, Amazon, eBay, and 
Sony, and top security agencies like the CIA and FBI are proof that no one is 
safe. Cyberwarriors are too well funded and motivated. Countering cyber-threats 
demands diligence, determination, and investment. IT at Work 5.1 illustrates the 
self-destructing and encryption features of a secure smartphone in order to protect 
conversations, transmissions, and stored data effectively.
Boeing Co. is an aerospace and defense contractor known 
for its fighter planes, jets, and satellites (Figure 5.4). It pos-
sesses advanced technology that prevents its products from 
being hacked. Boeing made the unusual decision to build a 
smartphone that provides complete security against hacking 
and spying by governments or well-financed adversaries. 
The Black smartphone, released in 2014, is an Android 
phone manufactured as a sealed device, with both epoxy 
around the casing and screws with tamper-proof covering. 
The phone encrypts voice and data communication and, if 
tampered with, self-destructs. For instance, any attempt to 
open the Black’s casing deletes all data and software on the 
device and leaves it inoperable.
Boeing Black’s Security Features
Manufactured in the United States, Black uses dual SIM 
cards to enable it to access multiple cell networks instead of 
a single network. It can be configured to connect with bio-
metric sensors and to communicate via satellite. Due to the 
phone’s security features, Boeing released few details about 
the wireless network operators or manufacturer it was work-
ing with. The advanced features needed to achieve this level 
of cybersecurity include:
• 
Encryption to store sensitive information securely
• 
Hardware root of trust to ensure software authenticity
IT at Work 5 .1
Black—the Self-Destructing Smartphone
Figure 5.4 Boeing Co. is 
best known as a jet and 
fi ghter plane manufacturer. 
The company expanded 
into the secure smartphone 
market with the release of 
Black.
© Jordan Tan/Shutterstock

5.1     The Face and Future of Cyberthreats     147  
• 
Hardware crypto engine to protect both stored and 
transmitted data
• 
Embedded secure components to enable trusted operations
• 
Trusted platform modules to provide secure key storage
• 
Secure boot to maintain device image integrity
Boeing applied the defense-in-depth model to Black to 
ensure that if one layer of security was compromised, other 
layers would continue to secure the device, its data, and 
transmissions. Multilayered defense-in-depth models are 
absolutely necessary.
Assessing the Value of Smartphone Security
According to Boeing’s filings with the U.S. Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC), Black is designed for 
use by government agencies and contractors who need to 
secure their communication and data. It is also for companies 
aiming to keep their data away from the prying tactics of the 
NSA or other spying organizations. Black enables the secure 
access and exchange of critical data and communications on 
a trusted mobile device.
It is believed that the use of a secure smartphone like 
Black might have prevented a recent leaked telephone call 
that undercut Washington’s diplomacy in Ukraine. A senior 
U.S. State Department officer and ambassador to Ukraine 
apparently used unencrypted cell phones for a call about 
political developments in Ukraine that became public—and 
caused embarrassment. All State Department government-
owned BlackBerry devices have data encryption, but not 
voice encryption.
Sources: Compiled from Hosenball (2014), Westcott (2014), 
Boeing.com (2014), and Gallagher (2014).
Questions
1. Why do you think government-issued smartphones are a 
target for data theft and transmission theft?
2. What security precautions is Boeing taking with respect 
to the manufacture and sale of Black?
3. What security features are built into Black?
4. Why is voice encryption an important digital security 
measure?
5. Why is a defense-in-depth model vital to a security smart-
phone such as Black?
BATTLING 
CYBERTHREATS IS 
THE COST OF DOING 
BUSINESS
Cybersecurity experts warn that battling distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) 
and malware attacks has become part of everyday business for all organizations. 
Hackers, hactivists, crime syndicates, the military, militant groups, industrial spies, 
disgruntled employees, fraudsters, and hostile governments will continue to attack 
networks for profit, fame, revenge, or an ideology; to wage warfare, terrorism, or an 
antiterrorism campaign; or to disable their target. For example, the Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response 
Team (ICS-CERT) warned that attacks against critical infrastructure are growing 
(Figure 5.5). There were more than 200 brute-force cyberattack incidents reported 
Figure 5.5 Six of the 18 national critical infrastructures (from upper left, 
clockwise): commercial facilities; defense industrial base; transportation systems; 
national monuments and icons; banking and fi nance; and agriculture and food.
© Zoonar/NREY/
Age Fotostock
© Zoonar/unknown/
Age Fotostock
© Blakeley/Age 
Fotostock
© Philip Lange/Age Fotostock
© Werner Nick/Age Fotostock
© alptraum/Age Fotostock

148  Chapter 5     Cybersecurity and Risk Management
between October and May 2013, surpassing the 198 total attacks in all of fiscal 
year 2012. More than half of the attacks were against the energy sector. Attacks on 
critical infrastructure could significantly disrupt the functioning of government and 
business—and trigger cascading effects far beyond the targeted sector and physical 
location of the incident.
International, federal, and state laws and industry regulations mandate that 
enterprises invest in cybersecurity defenses, audits, and internal controls to help 
secure confidential data, prevent attacks, and defend against fraud and unauthor-
ized transactions such as money laundering. To help keep managers updated on 
the latest cyberthreats and prioritize defenses, KPMG publishes its Data Loss 
Barometer. The annual report describes the latest trends and statistics for data 
losses worldwide. Key findings and predictions are listed in Table 5.2.
Social Engineering and BYOD
New cyberthreats are emerging and overtaking the familiar threats—viruses, lost 
disks, and DDoS attacks. Experts believe the greatest cybersecurity dangers over 
the next few years will involve persistent threats, mobile computing, and the use 
of social media for social engineering. Social engineering is also known as human 
hacking—tricking users into revealing their credentials and then using them to gain 
access to networks or accounts. From an IT security perspective, social engineering 
is a hacker’s clever use of deception or manipulation of people’s tendency to trust, 
be helpful, or simply follow their curiosity. Powerful IT security systems cannot 
defend against what appears to be authorized access.
Humans are easily hacked, making them and their social media posts high-risk 
attack vectors. For instance, it is often easy to get users to infect their corporate 
network or mobiles by tricking them into downloading and installing malicious apps 
or backdoors.
Another more recent vulnerability is bring your own device (BYOD). The 
BYOD trend is driven by employees using their own devices for business purposes 
because they are more powerful than those the company has provided. Another 
factor is mobility. More and more people are working from home and on the go—
putting an end to the formerly typical 9 to 5 workday. In consequence, employees 
do not want to juggle multiple devices. With BYOD, companies cut costs by not 
having to purchase and maintain mobile devices.
Of course, when an employee’s device is lost, the company can suffer a data 
breach if the device is not encrypted. In the past, and before the BYOD push, 
A distributed denial-of-
service (DDoS) attack bom-
bards a network or website 
with traffic (i.e., requests for 
service) to crash it and leave 
it vulnerable to other threats.
Hactivist is short for hacker-
activist or someone who 
does hacking for a cause. 
Hacking, regardless of 
motive, is a crime.
Critical infrastructure is 
defined as “systems and 
assets, whether physical or 
virtual, so vital to the United 
States that the incapacity or 
destruction of such systems 
and assets would have a 
debilitating impact on secu-
rity, national economic secu-
rity, national public health or 
safety, or any combination of 
those matters.”
TABLE 5.2 
KPMG Data Loss Barometer
Key fi ndings from KPMG Data Loss Barometer Report and its predictions for 
the next few years:
• Hacking is the number-one cause of data loss.
• Internal threats have reduced signifi cantly, while external threats are increasing 
signifi cantly.
• The most hacked sectors are technology, fi nancial services, retail, and media.
• Expect increased loss of data from mobile devices.
• Expect a steep rise in automated hacking and botnets.
• Expect less tolerant regulators and greater fi nes and negative consequences.
• Expect greater visibility and reporting of data loss as a result of less tolerant 
regulators.
Source: KPMG (2012).

5.1     The Face and Future of Cyberthreats     149  
employees would be at their desks on a land line and on a computer plugged into 
the wall with a network cable. This change in exposure requires greater investment 
to defend against BYOD risks.
Cybercrime Survey
Respondents to the 2013 U.S. State of Cybercrime Survey indicated that secu-
rity incidents increased 33 percent despite implementation of security practices. 
Current cybersecurity technologies and policies are simply not keeping pace with 
fast-evolving threats. Many threats and challenges that organizations face today 
were unimaginable 10 years ago. And longstanding threats such as fraud and iden-
tity theft still remain. Cyberthreats will continue to emerge, evolve, and worsen 
over the next 10 years and beyond. IT at Work 5.2 provides a summary of the 
2014 Global State of Information Security Survey. The results of Survey 2014 show 
that executives are responding to the need to fund enhanced security activities 
and have substantially improved technology safeguards, processes, and strategies. 
Unfortunately, adversaries have done better.
The 2014 Global State of Information Security Survey is 
conducted by the consulting firm PwC US (Pricewaterhouse
Coopers, pwc.com) and CIO and CSO magazines (PWC, 
2014). According to the annual global survey:
• 
Defending yesterday. While organizations have 
improved security significantly, they are not keeping 
pace with today’s determined adversaries. Too many rely 
on yesterday’s cybersecurity practices that are ineffective 
at combating today’s threats.
• 
Bigger attack surface. The attack surface—consisting of 
business partners, suppliers, customers, and others—has 
expanded due to larger volumes of data flowing through 
multiple channels. Protecting all data at an equally high 
level is no longer practical. Cybersecurity strategies need 
to classify and prioritize defenses.
• 
Implementing before securing. Popular technologies 
like cloud computing, mobile, and BYOD (bring your own 
device) are implemented before they are secured.
• 
Not ready for next-generation cyberthreats. Few organi-
zations are prepared to manage future threats. According 
to Gary Loveland, a principal in PwC’s security practice, 
“What’s needed is a new model of information security, 
one that is driven by knowledge of threats, assets, and 
the motives and targets of potential adversaries” (PWC, 
2014).
• 
Unsafe cloud. While 47 percent of respondents use 
cloud computing, only 18 percent include provisions for 
cloud in their security policy. SaaS is the most widely 
adopted cloud service, but PaaS shows strong growth.
• 
Unprepared for advanced persistent threats (APT). 
Among the most dangerous cyberthreats are advanced 
persistent threats (APT). APT is a stealth network attack in 
which an unauthorized person gains access to a network 
and remains undetected for a long time. Skilled hack-
ers launch APT attacks to steal data continuously (e.g., 
daily) over months or year—rather than to cause damage 
that would reveal their presence. APTs require a new 
information-protection model that focuses on continuous 
monitoring of network activity and high-value informa-
tion. Most U.S organizations lack these capabilities.
IT at Work 5 .2
Global State of Information Security Survey
HIGH-VISIBILITY 
CYBERCRIMINALS AND 
HACKTIVISTS
Advanced persistent threat (APT) attackers want to remain unnoticed so they 
can continue to steal data, as described in IT at Work 5.2. Profit-motivated cyber-
criminals often operate in stealth mode. In contrast, hackers and hacktivists with 
personal agendas carry out high-profile attacks.

150  Chapter 5     Cybersecurity and Risk Management
Hacktivists’ Motivations and Dangerous Pranks
These types of cybercriminals seemed to take on everyone from Sony and security 
firm RSA to the CIA (Central Intelligence Agency) and a Mexican drug cartel 
throughout 2011 and 2012. During the Arab Spring (street revolutions of 2013), 
hacktivists LulzSec and Anonymous showed how vulnerable anyone’s online pres-
ence was, even that of major governments. One of LulzSec’s specialties is finding 
websites with poor security, and then stealing and posting information from them 
online. Some of their attacks may seem more like Internet pranks than serious 
cyberwarfare, but they are still illegal.
Hacktivist Attacks and Victims
Hackers committed daring data breaches, compromises, data leaks, thefts, threats, 
and privacy invasions in 2012. Two cases are listed below.
Combined Systems, Inc. Proudly displaying its hacktivist flag, Anonymous 
took credit for knocking Combined Systems, Inc. offline and stealing personal 
data from its clients. Anonymous went after Combined Systems, which sells 
tear gas and crowd-control devices to law enforcement and military organiza-
tions, to protest war profiteers.
CIA. In February 2012, for the second time in less than a year, Anonymous 
launched a denial of service (DoS) attack that forced the CIA website offline. 
The CIA takedown followed a busy week for the hacktivists. Within 10 days, 
the group also went after Chinese electronics manufacturer Foxconn, American 
Nazi groups, antivirus firm Symantec, and the office of Syria’s president.
LulzSec is a hacker group 
and spin-off of the loosely 
organized hacking collective.
STEALTH, PROFIT-
MOTIVATED 
CYBERCRIMES
Most hack activities do not become headline-grabbers until after the incidents are 
detected and reported. However, victimized companies are reluctant to discuss 
them so statistics are scarce. Most data breaches go unreported, according to cyber-
security experts, because corporate victims fear that disclosure would damage their 
stock price, or because they never knew they were hacked in the first place.
Theft of Trade Secrets and Other Confidential Information
Theft of trade secrets has always been a threat from corporate moles, disgruntled 
employees, and other insiders. Of course, now it is easier to steal information 
remotely, mostly because of smartphones and the BYOD trend. Hackers’ preferred 
modus operandi is to break into employees’ mobile devices and leapfrog into 
employers’ networks––stealing secrets without a trace.
U.S. cybersecurity experts and government officials are increasingly concerned 
about breaches from other countries into corporate networks either through mobile 
devices or other means. Mike McConnell, former director of the National Security 
Agency (NSA), warned: “In looking at computer systems of consequence—in govern-
ment, Congress, at the Department of Defense, aerospace, companies with valuable 
trade secrets—we’ve not examined one yet that has not been infected by an advanced 
persistent threat” (Perlroth, 2012b). In the meantime, companies are leaking critical 
information, often without realizing it. Scott Aken, a former FBI agent who special-
izes in counterintelligence and computer intrusion, stated, “In most cases, companies 
do not realize they’ve been burned until years later when a foreign competitor puts out 
their very same product—only they’re making it 30 percent cheaper” (Perlroth, 2012b).
Do-Not-Carry Rules
U.S. companies, government agencies, and organizations are now imposing do-
not-carry rules, which are based on the assumption that devices will inevitably 
be compromised according to Mike Rogers, current chairman of the House 
Intelligence Committee. House members can bring only “clean” devices and are 

5.1     The Face and Future of Cyberthreats     151  
forbidden from connecting to the government’s network while abroad. Rogers said 
he travels “electronically naked” to ensure cybersecurity during and after a trip. IT 
at Work 5.3 describes the reasons for following do-not-carry rules.
OBJECTIVES OF 
CYBERSECURITY
Cybersecurity needs to accomplish the following:
• Make data and documents available and accessible 24/7 while simultaneously 
restricting access.
• Implement and enforce procedures and acceptable use policies (AUPs) for 
data, networks, hardware, and software that are company- or employee-
owned, as discussed in the opening case.
• Promote secure and legal sharing of information among authorized persons 
and partners.
• Ensure compliance with government regulations and laws.
• Prevent attacks by having network intrusion defenses in place.
• Detect, diagnose, and respond to incidents and attacks in real time.
• Maintain internal controls to prevent unauthorized alteration of data and 
records.
• Recover from business disasters and disruptions quickly.
Business policies, procedures, training, and disaster recovery plans as well as hard-
ware and software are critical cybersecurity.
When Kenneth G. Lieberthal, an expert at the Brookings 
Institution, travels to other countries, he follows a routine 
that seems straight from a secret agent movie. He leaves his 
smartphone and laptop at home. Instead, he brings loaner 
devices, which he erases before he leaves the United States 
and wipes clean the minute he returns. While traveling, he 
disables Bluetooth and Wi-Fi and never lets his phone out of 
his sight. While in meetings, he not only turns off his phone, 
but also removes the battery for fear his microphone could 
be turned on remotely.
Lieberthal connects to the Internet only through an 
encrypted, password-protected channel. He never types in a 
password directly, but copies and pastes his password from 
a USB thumb drive. By not typing his password, he eliminates 
the risk of having it stolen if key-logging software were to be 
installed on his device.
Questions
1. Many travelers might consider Lieberthal’s method too 
inconvenient. Clearly, his electronically clean methods 
are time-consuming and expensive. In your opinion, 
is there a trade-off between cybersecurity and conve-
nience? Explain.
2. Create a list of best cybersecurity practices for travelers 
based on Lieberthal’s methods.
IT at Work 5 .3
Traveling Electronically Clean
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce did not learn that it and its member organiza-
tions were the victims of a cybertheft for months until the FBI informed the Chamber 
that servers in China were stealing data from four of its Asia policy experts, individuals 
who frequently travel to Asia (Perlroth, 2012a). Most likely, the experts’ mobile 
devices had been infected with malware that was transmitting information and files 
back to the hackers. By the time the Chamber hardened (secured) its network, hackers 
had stolen at least six weeks of e-mails, most of which were communications with 
the largest U.S. corporations. Even later, the Chamber learned that its office printer 
and a thermostat in one of its corporate apartments were communicating with an 
Internet address in China. The Chamber did not disclose how hackers had infiltrated 
its systems, but its first step was to implement do-not-carry rules.

152  Chapter 5     Cybersecurity and Risk Management
In 2013 cyberthreats were at the top of US intelligence reports for the first time. 
Cyberthreats are now the number one type of danger facing the United States, 
according to current U.S. National Intelligence Director James Clapper, who coor-
dinates the CIA, NSA, and many other agencies.
Questions
 1. Why was 2013 dubbed the “Year of the Breach”?
 2. What causes or contributes to data breaches?
 3. Why are cybercriminals so successful?
 4. What was the biggest data breach in history?
 5. Describe the basic method of a distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) 
attack.
 6. What is a critical infrastructure? List three types of critical infrastructures.
 7. What are the motives of hactivists?
 8. What is the number-one cause of data loss or breaches?
 9. Why is social engineering a technique used by hackers to gain access 
to a network?
10. What are two BYOD security risks?
11. Explain why APT attacks are diffi cult to detect.
12. What are the objectives of cybersecurity?
Every enterprise has data that profit-motivated criminals want. Customer data, 
networks, websites, proprietary information systems, and patents are examples of 
assets—things of value that need to be protected. The greater the value of the asset 
to the company and to criminals, the greater the security needs to be. The smart 
strategy is to invest more to protect the company’s most valuable assets rather than 
try to protect all assets equally, as discussed in IT at Work 5.2. The IT security 
field—like sports and law—has its own terminology, which is summarized for quick 
reference in Table 5.3 and Figure 5.6.
5.2  Cyber Risk Management
Figure 5.6 Basic IT security 
concepts.
Threat
Someone or something that
can cause loss, damage,
or destruction.
Vulnerability
Weakness or flaw in a system that
allows an attack to be successful.
Companies’ IT security defenses
influence how vulnerable they are
to threats.
Asset
Something of value that needs to
protected.
Customer data, trade secrets,
proprietary formulas, & other 
intellectual property.
Exploit
A program (code) that allows attackers
to automatically break into a system
through a vulnerability.
To attack or take advantage of a
vulnerability.
Risk
Probability of a threat exploiting a
vulnerability and the resulting cost of
the loss, damage, disruption,
or destruction.
Risk = f(Threat, Vulnerability, Cost of
the impact)

5.2     Cyber Risk Management     153  
TABLE 5.3 
 Defi nitions of IT Security Terms
Term 
Defi nition
Threat 
Something or someone that may result in harm to an asset
Risk 
Probability of a threat exploiting a vulnerability
Vulnerability 
 A weakness that threatens the confi dentiality, integrity, or availability 
(CIA) of an asset
CIA triad (confi dentiality,  
Three key cybersecurity principles
integrity, availability)
Exploit 
Tool or technique that takes advantage of a vulnerability
Risk management 
 Process of identifying, assessing, and reducing risk to an acceptable 
level
Exposure 
 Estimated cost, loss, or damage that can result if a threat exploits a 
vulnerability
Access control 
 Security feature designed to restrict who has access to a network, IS, 
or data
Audit 
 Procedure of generating, recording, and reviewing a chronological 
record of system events to determine their accuracy
Encryption 
 Transforming data into scrambled code to protect them from being 
understood by unauthorized users
Plaintext or clear text 
Readable text
Ciphertext 
Encrypted text
Authentication 
 Method (usually based on username and password) by which an IS 
validates or verifi es that a user is really who he or she claims to be
Biometrics 
 Methods to identify a person based on a biological feature, such as a 
fi ngerprint or retina
Firewall 
 Software or hardware device that controls access to a private network 
from a public network (Internet) by analyzing data packets entering 
or exiting it
Intrusion detection 
A defense tool used to monitor network traffi c (packets) and 
system (IDS)  
 provide alerts when there is suspicious traffi c, or to quarantine 
suspicious traffi c
Fault tolerance 
 The ability of an IS to continue to operate when a failure occurs, but 
usually for a limited time or at a reduced level
Botnet (short for 
A network of hijacked computers that are controlled remotely—
Bot network)  
 typically to launch spam or spyware. Also called software robots. 
Botnets are linked to a range of malicious activity, including identity 
theft and spam.

154  Chapter 5     Cybersecurity and Risk Management
A threat is something or someone that can damage, disrupt, or destroy an asset. 
Vulnerabilities are gaps, holes, weaknesses, or flaws in corporate networks, IT secu-
rity defenses, user training, policy enforcement, data storage, software, operating 
systems, apps, or mobile devices that expose an organization to intrusions or other 
attacks. Vulnerabilities threaten the confidentiality, integrity, or availability (CIA) 
of data and information systems, as defined in Figure 5.7.
Vulnerabilities exist in networks, operating systems, apps, databases, mobile 
devices, and cloud environments. These vulnerabilities are attack vectors or entry 
points for malware, hackers, hactivists, and organized crime.
The term exploit has more than one meaning. An exploit is a hacker tool or 
software program used to break into a system, database, or device. An attack or 
action that takes advantage of a vulnerability is also called an exploit. Criminal and 
terrorist groups buy exploits from more than 25 underground forums or brokers. 
Exploits themselves are not against the law, and several legitimate firms also sell 
them. For example, in 2012 Massachusetts-based Netragard (netragard.com) sold 
more than 50 exploits to businesses and government agencies in the United States 
for prices ranging from $20,000 to more than $250,000.
Risk is the probability of a threat successfully exploiting a vulnerability and 
the estimated cost of the loss or damage. For example, car insurance premiums are 
based on risk calculations that take into consideration the probability of an accident 
and the cost of the damage.
Figure 5.7 Three objectives 
of data and information 
systems security.
TECH NOTE 5.1 Vulnerabilities in Microsoft Sidebar and Gadgets
In July 2012 Microsoft issued a security advisory warning of vulnerabilities in Gad-
gets and Sidebar:
We’ve discovered that some Vista and Win7 gadgets don’t adhere to 
secure coding practices and should be regarded as causing risk to the 
systems on which they’re run.
Hackers Exploit Gadget: How Did They Do That?
A vulnerability in Windows Gadgets makes it easy for hackers to gain access and 
run malware or a malicious app as if the hacker were the real user. That means, if the 
legitimate user is logged on with administrative (admin) user rights, then those rights 
give the attacker complete control of the system.
Confidentiality: No unauthorized data disclosure.
Integrity: Data, documents, messages, and other files
have not been altered in any unauthorized way.
Availability: Data is accessible when needed by those
authorized to do so.

5.2     Cyber Risk Management     155  
Security Solution: Fix It
An automated Fix It solution was posted on Microsoft’s support site. Clicking the 
Fix It button disabled the Windows Sidebar and Gadgets on Windows Vista and 
Windows 7 platforms, so the vulnerability could not be exploited.
Key Observation
Toolbars, gadgets, and any other add-ons are pieces of code, or software—and can 
create vulnerabilities or actually be malware. Many free add-ons, apps, and other 
downloads are trojans. These trojans look and function as you expect them to, but in 
stealth mode they track everything you do on the Internet and then send that infor-
mation to the creator of the malware.
HACKERS: INTERNET 
UNTOUCHABLES
How big is the threat of malware? IT security researchers discover roughly 70,000 
malicious programs every day. Why would so many hackers be spending so much 
time generating or launching these programs? The simple answers are that hacking 
is a profitable industry, a big part of underworld cybercrime, and a way for hactivists 
to protest. Hackers feel untouchable knowing that they face very low risk of capture 
and punishment.
Inside Look at How the Hacking Industry Operates
Hacking is an industry with its own way of operating, a workforce, and support services. 
Contract hackers are available for hire or complete hack attacks can be bought. Hacking 
help desks provide 24/7 support—making sophisticated attacks easier to arrange. 
Hackers use social networks and underground forums to share exploits, usernames, and 
passwords—the credentials needed to infect users’ personal and work accounts.
Organized crime groups quickly learned that cybercrimes have better payoffs 
than the drug trade and with almost no risk. They become virtually untouchable by 
law enforcement because no one sees the crime. It is not surprising then that almost 
every survey reaches the same troubling conclusion—the costs and frequency of 
cybercrimes are increasing. That means much stronger IT security practices and 
defenses are obviously needed. One of the greatest weaknesses is users who ignore 
the dangers of weak passwords. Password management is essential to security.
Users Set Themselves up for Cybermuggings
In July 2012 the hacker group D33Ds Company published almost half a million 
e-mail addresses and passwords on underground sites that allegedly had been 
stolen from Yahoo. D33Ds claims it hacked into Yahoo’s database by exploiting a 
common vulnerability that had not been patched. Here is a breakdown of the users 
whose passwords invited a cybermugging:
• 1,600 users used “1234546”
• 800 users used “password”
• 1,400 users used “mypassword” or “password” as the base word, such as 
“password1”
Weak passwords are clearly dangerous. If any password, such as for Adobe 
software, becomes known to hackers, they can try that e-mail/password combina-
tion at all popular sites like Facebook, Gmail, and so on and compromise not one 
but many of your accounts. Unfortunately, too many people are lazy and choose 
passwords that are easily guessable, short, common, or a word in the dictionary. 
Strong passwords contain a combination of upper- and lowercase letters, numbers, 
and punctuation marks, and are at least eight characters long.

156  Chapter 5     Cybersecurity and Risk Management
Internal Threats
Threats from employees, referred to as internal threats, are a major challenge large-
ly due to the many ways an employee can carry out malicious activity. Insiders may 
be able to bypass physical security (e.g., locked doors) and technical security (e.g., 
passwords) measures that organizations have put in place to prevent unauthorized 
access. Why? Because defenses such as firewalls, intrusion detection systems (IDS), 
and locked doors mostly protect against external threats. Despite the challenges, 
insider incidents can be minimized with a layered defense-in-depth strategy consist-
ing of security procedures, acceptable use policies, and technology controls.
Phishing and Web-based Threats
Companies increasingly adopt external, Web-based applications and employees 
bring consumer applications into the enterprise. Criminal enterprises are following 
the money on the Internet, a global market of potential victims.
Phishing is a deceptive method of stealing confidential information by pretend-
ing to be a legitimate organization, such as PayPal, a bank, credit card company, or 
other trusted source. Phishing messages include a link to a fraudulent phish website 
that looks like the real one. When the user clicks the link to the phish site, he or 
she is asked for a credit card number, social security number, account number, or 
password. Phishing remains successful and profitable for criminals.
Criminals use the Internet and private networks to hijack large numbers of PCs 
to spy on users, spam them, shake down businesses, and steal identities. But why 
are they so successful? The Information Security Forum (securityforum.org), a self-
help organization that includes many Fortune 100 companies, compiled a list of the 
top information problems and discovered that nine of the top ten incidents were the 
result of three factors:
1. Mistakes or human error
2. Malfunctioning systems
3. Misunderstanding the effects of adding incompatible software to an existing 
system
Unfortunately, these factors can too easily defeat cybersecurity technologies 
that companies and individuals use to protect their information. A fourth factor 
identified by the Security Forum is motivation, as described in IT at Work 5.4.
According to the U.S. Department of State (state.gov), orga-
nized crime rings rely on money laundering to fund their 
operations. This practice poses international and national 
security threats. It undermines free enterprise by crowding 
out the private sector, and it threatens the financial stability 
of nations.
Funds used to finance terrorist operations are very dif-
ficult to track. Despite this obscurity, by adapting methods 
used to combat money laundering, such as financial analysis 
and investigations, authorities can significantly disrupt the 
financial networks of terrorists and build a paper trail and 
base of evidence to identify and locate leaders of terrorist 
organizations and cells.
International organized crime syndicates, al-Qaeda–
affiliated groups, and other cybercriminals steal hundreds of 
billions of dollars every year. Cybercrime is safer and easier 
than selling drugs, dealing in black market diamonds, or 
robbing banks. Online gambling offers easy fronts for inter-
national money-laundering operations.
IT at Work 5 .4
Money Laundering, Organized Crime, and Terrorist Financing

5.2     Cyber Risk Management     157  
GOVERNMENT 
REGULATIONS
IT defenses must satisfy ever-stricter government and international regulations. 
Primary regulations are the United States’ Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX), Gramm-
Leach-Bliley Act (GLB), Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA), 
and USA PATRIOT Act; Japan’s Personal Information Protection Act; Canada’s 
Personal Information Protection and Electronic Document Act (PIPEDA); 
Australia’s Federal Privacy Act; the United Kingdom’s Data Protection Act; and 
global financial services’ Basel III. All mandate the protection of personally iden-
tifiable information (PII). The director of the Bureau of Consumer Protection at 
the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) warned that the agency would bring enforce-
ment action against small businesses lacking adequate policies and procedures to 
protect consumer data.
Two accepted models for IT governance are enterprise risk management (ERM) 
and Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology (COBIT). ERM 
is a risk-based approach to managing an enterprise that integrates internal control, 
the Sarbanes–Oxley Act mandates, and strategic planning. ERM is intended to be 
part of routine planning processes rather than a separate initiative. The ideal place 
to start is with buy-in and commitment from the board and senior leadership.
COBIT, which is described in IT at Work 5.5, is an internationally accepted IT 
governance and control framework for aligning IT with business objectives, deliver-
ing value, and managing associated risks. It provides a reference for management, 
users, and IS audit, control, and security practitioners.
INDUSTRY STANDARDS
Industry groups imposed their own standards to protect their customers and their 
members’ brand images and revenues. One example is the Payment Card Industry 
Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) created by Visa, MasterCard, American 
Express, and Discover. PCI is required for all members, merchants, or service pro-
viders that store, process, or transmit cardholder data. PCI DSS requires merchants 
IT governance is the supervision, monitoring, and control 
of an organization’s IT assets. The IT Governance Institute 
(itgi.org) publishes COBIT, which many companies use as 
their IT governance guide. COBIT can be downloaded from 
isaca.org.
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act requires that companies pro-
vide proof that their financial applications and systems are 
controlled (secured) to verify that financial reports can be 
trusted. This requires that IT security managers work with 
business managers to do a risk assessment to identify which 
systems depend on technical controls rather than on busi-
ness process controls. To meet COBIT, IT systems should be 
based on the following three principles:
• 
Principle of economic use of resources: This principle 
acknowledges that the cost of information security 
needs to be balanced with its benefits. It is the basic 
cost–benefit principle with which you are familiar. For 
example, you would not spend more to protect your 
auto, home, or other asset than they were worth. 
Because it is possible, for instance, for companies to set 
a very low value on the confidential data of customers 
and employers and therefore avoid basic information 
security defenses, the next two principles try to ensure 
that this does not happen.
• 
Principle of legality: This principle requires that compa-
nies invest in information security to meet minimum legal 
requirements. This is a basic security principle, just like 
having hand railings on stairways, fire extinguishers, and 
alarm systems.
• 
Accounting principles: These principles require that the 
integrity, availability, and reliability of data and informa-
tion systems be maintained.
IT at Work 5 .5
COBIT and IT Governance Best Practices

158  Chapter 5     Cybersecurity and Risk Management
and card payment providers to make certain their Web applications are secure. If 
done correctly, this could reduce the number of Web-related security breaches.
The purpose of the PCI DSS is to improve customers’ trust in e-commerce, 
especially when it comes to online payments, and to increase the Web security of 
online merchants. To motivate following these standards, the penalties for noncom-
pliance are severe. The card brands can fine the retailer, and increase transaction 
fees for each credit or debit card transaction. A finding of noncompliance can be 
the basis for lawsuits.
IT SECURITY DEFENSE-
IN-DEPTH MODEL
Defense-in-depth is a multilayered approach to information security. The basic 
principle is that when one defense layer fails, another layer provides protection. For 
example, if a wireless network’s security was compromised, then having encrypted 
data would still protect the data, provided that the thieves could not decrypt it.
The success of any type of IT project depends on the commitment and involve-
ment of executive management, also referred to as the tone at the top. The same 
is true of IT security. This information security tone makes users aware that inse-
cure practices and mistakes will not be tolerated. Therefore, an IT security model 
begins with senior management commitment and support, as shown in Figure 5.8. 
The model views information security as a combination of people, processes, and 
technology.
Step 1: Senior management commitment and support. Senior managers’ influence 
is needed to implement and maintain security, ethical standards, privacy practices, 
and internal control. IT security is best when it is top-driven. Senior managers 
decide how stringent infosec policies and practices should be in order to comply 
with laws and regulations. Financial institutions are subject to strict security and 
antimoney laundering (AML) rules because they face numerous national and 
international regulations and have high-value data. Advertising agencies and less 
regulated firms tend to have more lenient rules. Other factors influencing infosec 
policies are a corporation’s culture and how valuable their data are to criminals.
For instance, management may decide to forbid employees from using com-
pany e-mail accounts for nonwork purposes, accessing social media during work 
hours, or visiting gambling sites. These decisions will then become rules stated in 
company policy, integrated into procedures, and implemented with technology 
defenses. Sites that are forbidden, for instance, can be blocked by firewalls.
Step 2: Acceptable use policies and IT security training. Organizations need to put 
in place strong policies and processes that make responsibilities and accountabilities 
clear to all employees. An acceptable use policy (AUP) explains what management 
has decided are acceptable and unacceptable activities, and the consequences of 
noncompliance. Rules about tweets, texting, social media, e-mail, apps, and hard-
ware should be treated as extensions of other corporate policies—such as physical 
safety, equal opportunity, harassment, and discrimination. No policy can address 
Figure 5.8 IT security 
defense-in-depth model.
Step 4
Hardware and software
(kept up-to-date)
Step 3
IT security procedures
and enforcement
Step 2
Acceptable use policies
and IT security training
Step 1
Senior management
commitment and support

5.2     Cyber Risk Management     159  
every future situation, so rules need to be evaluated, updated, or modified. For 
example, if a company suffers a malware infection traced to an employee using an 
unprotected smartphone to connect to the company network, policies to restrict or 
prohibit those connections might be advisable.
Step 3: IT security procedures and enforcement. Secure procedures define how 
policies will be enforced, how incidents will be prevented, and how to respond to 
an incident. Here are the basic secure procedures to put in place:
1. Defi ne enforcement procedures. Rules that are defi ned in the AUP must be en-
forced and enforcement procedures must be applied consistently. Procedures for 
monitoring employee Internet and network usage are defi ned at this stage.
2. Designate and empower an internal incident response team (IRT). The IRT 
typically includes the CISO, legal counsel, senior managers, experienced com-
municators, and key operations staff. Minimizing the team size and bureaucracy 
can expedite decision making and response. Because there may be signifi cant 
liability issues, legal counsel needs to be involved in incident response planning 
and communication.
3. Defi ne notifi cation procedures. When a data breach occurs, the local police de-
partment, local offi ce of the FBI, Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 
the U.S. Secret Service, or other relevant agency needs to be notifi ed immedi-
ately. Federal and state laws or industry regulations may defi ne how and when 
affected people need to be notifi ed.
4. Defi ne a breach response communications plan. Effective incident response 
communication plans include personnel and processes with lists, channels, and 
social media needed to execute all communications that might be needed.
5. Monitor information and social media sources. Monitor Twitter, social media, 
and news coverage as a standard procedure to understand how people are re-
sponding to the incident and criticizing the company. Damage control proce-
dures may be needed.
When an incident occurs, the organization is ready to respond intelligently—
having the correct information to be honest, open, and accountable, and to commu-
nicate with consumers and other important audiences as quickly as possible.
Step 4: Hardware and software. The last step in the model is implementation of 
software and hardware needed to support and enforce the AUP and secure practic-
es. The selection of hardware and software defenses is based on risk, security bud-
get, AUP, and secure procedures. Every device that connects to an organization’s 
network; every online activity and mobile app of employees; and each file sent or 
received is an access point. Technology defense mechanisms need to be:
• able to provide strong authentication and access control.
• industrial-grade.
• appropriate for the types of networks and operating systems.
• installed and configured correctly.
• tested rigorously.
• maintained regularly.
Keep in mind that security is an ongoing unending process, and not a problem 
that can be solved with hardware or software. Hardware and software security 
defenses cannot protect against irresponsible business practices.
One of the biggest mistakes managers make is underestimating IT vulnerabilities 
and threats. Most workers use their laptops and mobiles for both work and leisure, 
and in an era of multitasking, they often do both at the same time. Yet offtime 
or offsite use of devices remains risky because, despite policies, employees continue 

160  Chapter 5     Cybersecurity and Risk Management
to engage in dangerous online and communication habits. Those habits make them 
a weak link in an organization’s otherwise solid security efforts. These threats can 
be classified as unintentional or intentional.
UNINTENTIONAL 
THREATS
Unintentional threats fall into three major categories: human error, environ-
mental hazards, and computer system failures.
• Human error can occur in the design of the hardware or information system. 
It can also occur during programming, testing, or data entry. Not changing 
default passwords on a firewall or failing to manage patches creates security 
holes. Human errors also include untrained or unaware users responding to 
phishing scams or ignoring security procedures. Human errors contribute to 
the majority of internal control and information security problems.
• Environmental hazards include volcanoes, earthquakes, blizzards, floods, 
power failures or strong fluctuations, fires (the most common hazard), 
defective air conditioning, explosions, radioactive fallout, and water-
cooling-system failures. In addition to the primary damage, computer 
resources can be damaged by side effects, such as smoke and water. Such 
hazards may disrupt normal computer operations and result in long wait-
ing periods and exorbitant costs while computer programs and data files 
are recreated.
• Computer systems failures can occur as the result of poor manufactur-
ing, defective materials, and outdated or poorly maintained networks. 
Unintentional malfunctions can also happen for other reasons, ranging from 
lack of experience to inadequate testing.
INTENTIONAL THREATS
Examples of intentional threats include data theft; inappropriate use of data (e.g., 
manipulating inputs); theft of mainframe computer time; theft of equipment and/
or programs; deliberate manipulation in handling, entering, processing, transfer-
ring, or programming data; labor strikes, riots, or sabotage; malicious damage to 
computer resources; destruction from viruses and similar attacks; and miscellaneous 
computer abuses and Internet fraud.
TYPES OF MALWARE
Viruses, worms, trojans, rootkits, backdoors, botnets, and keyloggers are types of 
malware. Technically, malware is a computer program or code that can infect any-
thing attached to the Internet and is able to process the code. Most viruses, trojans, 
and worms are activated when an attachment is opened or a link is clicked. But 
when features are automated, they may trigger malware automatically, too. For 
example:
• If an e-mail client, such as Microsoft Outlook or Gmail, is set to allow script-
ing, then virus infection occurs by simply opening a message or attachment.
• Viewing e-mail messages in HTML, instead of in plain text, can trigger virus 
infections.
Remote-access trojans, or RATS, create an unprotected backdoor into a sys-
tem through which a hacker can remotely control that system. As the name implies, 
a backdoor provides easy access to a system, computer, or account by eliminating 
the need to authenticate with a username and password. Whenever you store your 
username and password, you create a backdoor to that account.
A malware’s payload refers to the actions that occur after a system has been 
infected. The payload carries out the purpose of the malware. The payload could 
cause damage that is visible or operate in stealth mode so as to remain undetected. 
A vector is the specific method that malware uses to propagate, or spread, to other 
machines or devices. Malware may also replicate, or make copies of itself.

5.2     Cyber Risk Management     161  
Today’s malware is designed for long-term control of infected machines. 
Advanced malware sets up outbound communication channels in order to upload 
stolen data, download payloads, or do reconnaissance.
Malware creators use social engineering to maximize the range or impact of 
their viruses, worms, and so forth. For example, the ILoveYou worm used social 
engineering to entice people to open malware-infected e-mail messages. The 
ILoveYou worm attacked tens of millions of Windows computers in May 2000 
when it was sent as an e-mail attachment with the subject line: ILOVEYOU. Often 
out of curiosity, people opened the attachment named LOVE-LETTER-FOR-
YOU.TXT.vbs—releasing the worm. Within nine days, the worm had spread world-
wide, crippling networks, destroying files, and causing an estimated $5.5 billion in 
damages. Notorious hacker Kevin Mitnick, who served time in jail for hacking, used 
social engineering as his primary method to gain access to computer networks. In 
most cases, the criminal never comes face-to-face with the victim, but communi-
cates via the phone or e-mail.
Malware Reinfection, Signatures, Mutations, and Variants
When a host computer is infected, attempts to remove the malware may fail—and 
the malware may reinfect the host for these two reasons:
1. Malware is captured in backups or archives. Restoring the infected backup or 
archive also restores the malware.
2. Malware infects removable media. Months or years after the initial infection, 
the removable media may be accessed, and the malware could attempt to infect 
the host.
Most antivirus (AV) software relies on signatures to identify and then block 
malware. According to the Worldwide Malware Signature Counter, at the start of 
2013, there were an estimated 19 million malware signatures. Detecting and pre-
venting infections are not always a possibility. Zero-day exploits—malware so new 
their signatures are not yet known—are an example. Malware authors also evade 
detection by AV software and firewalls by altering malware code to create variants, 
which have new signatures. But not all procedures or AV tools are capable of 
removing every trace of the malware. Even if the malicious parts of the infection 
can be cleaned from a system, the remaining pieces of code could make the system 
unstable or exposed to future infection.
Data tampering is a common means of attack that is overshadowed by other 
types of attacks. It refers to an attack during which someone enters false or fraudu-
lent data into a computer, or changes or deletes existing data. Data tampering is 
extremely serious because it may not be detected. This is the method often used by 
insiders and fraudsters.
TARGETED ATTACKS 
ON ENTERPRISES
Corporate and government secrets are currently being stolen by APTs. Most APT 
attacks are launched through phishing. Typically, this type of attack begins with 
some reconnaissance on the part of attackers. This can include researching pub-
licly available information about the company and its employees, often from social 
networking sites. This information is then used to create targeted phishing e-mail 
messages. A successful attack could give the attacker access to the enterprise’s 
network.
APTs are designed for long-term espionage. Once installed on a network, APTs 
transmit copies of documents, such as Microsoft Office files and PDFs, in stealth 
mode. APTs collect and store files on the company’s network; encrypt them; then 
send them in bursts to servers often in China or Russia. This type of attack has 
been observed in other large-scale data breaches that exposed significant numbers 
of identities.

162  Chapter 5     Cybersecurity and Risk Management
APT Example: Operation Aurora
An attack named Operation Aurora proved to be very successful at targeting, 
exploiting, accessing, and stealing valuable intellectual property from its victims’ 
databases. Operation Aurora attacked in six steps, as described in Figure 5.9. 
Standard IT security technologies failed to prevent these six steps from occurring 
and users did not know they had been hacked. Once attackers gain access to inter-
nal systems (Step 6), they can steal corporate secrets.
Botnets
A botnet is a collection of bots, which are malware-infected computers. Those infected 
computers, called zombies, can be controlled and organized into a network of zombies 
on the command of a remote botmaster (also called bot herder). Storm worm, which is 
spread via spam, is a botnet agent embedded inside over 25 million computers. Storm’s 
combined power has been compared to the processing might of a supercomputer, and 
Storm-organized attacks are capable of crippling any website. Zombies can be com-
manded to monitor and steal personal or financial data—acting as spyware. Botnets are 
used to send spam and phishing e-mails and launch DDoS attacks. Botnets are extremely 
dangerous because they scan for and compromise other computers, which then can be 
used for every type of crime and attack against computers, servers, and networks.
Spear Phishing
Spear phishers often target select groups of people with something in common—they 
work at the same company, bank at the same financial institution, or attend the same 
university. The scam e-mails appear to be sent from organizations or people the 
potential victims normally receive e-mails from, making them even more deceptive.
Here is how spear phishing works:
1. Spear phish creators gather information about people’s companies and jobs 
from social media or steal it from computers and mobile devices, and then use 
that same information to customize messages that trick users into opening an 
infected e-mail.
2. Then they send e-mails that look like the real thing to targeted victims, offering 
all sorts of urgent and legitimate-sounding explanations as to why they need 
your personal data.
3. Finally, the victims are asked to click on a link inside the e-mail that takes them 
to a phony but realistic-looking website, where they are asked to provide pass-
words, account numbers, user IDs, access codes, PINs, and so on.
Figure 5.9 Overview of the 
six steps in Operation Aurora 
APT attack.
1.  A targeted user
receives a link in an
e-mail or text from
a “trusted” source.
4.  The exploit
downloads a binary
disguised as an
image and executes
the malicious payload.
5.  The payload sets
up a backdoor and
connects to C and C
servers in Taiwan.
6.  Attackers now
have complete
access to internal
systems. They are
now a persistent
threat.
2.  When the user
clicks the link, a
website hosted in
Taiwan loads. It
contains malicious
JavaScript.
3.  The user’s
browser downloads
and executes the
JavaScript, which
includes a zero-day
IE exploit.

5.3     Mobile, App, and Cloud Security     163  
IT Defenses
Since malware and botnets use many attack methods and strategies, multiple tools 
are needed to detect them and/or neutralize their effects. Three essential defenses 
are the following:
1. Antivirus Software: Antimalware tools are designed to detect malicious codes 
and prevent users from downloading them. They can also scan systems for the 
presence of worms, trojans, and other types of threats. This technology does not 
provide complete protection because it cannot defend against zero-day exploits. 
Antimalware may not be able to detect a previously unknown exploit.
2. Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs): As the name implies, an IDS scans for un-
usual or suspicious traffi c. An IDS can identify the start of a DoS attack by the 
traffi c pattern, alerting the network administrator to take defensive action, such 
as switching to another IP address and diverting critical servers from the path of 
the attack.
3. Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPSs): An IPS is designed to take immediate 
action—such as blocking specifi c IP addresses—whenever a traffi c-fl ow anomaly 
is detected. An application-specifi c integrated circuit–based (ASIC) IPS has the 
power and analysis capabilities to detect and block DDoS attacks, functioning 
somewhat like an automated circuit breaker.
Questions
 1. What are threats, vulnerabilities, and risk?
 2. Explain the three components of the CIA triad.
 3. What is an attack vector? Give an example.
  4. What is an exploit? Give an example.
  5. What is a contract hacker?
  6. Give an example of a weak password and a strong password.
  7. How are phishing attacks done?
  8. What are the four steps in the defense-in-depth IT security model?
  9. Defi ne and give an example of an unintentional threat.
10. Defi ne and give an example of an intentional threat.
11. List and defi ne three types of malware.
12. What are the risks caused by data tampering?
13. Defi ne botnet and explain its risk.
14. Explain spear phishing.
15. What are the functions of an IDS and IPS?
With the popularity of e-readers, netbooks, Google’s Chrome OS, Facebook, 
YouTube, Twitter, LinkedIn, and other social networks, IT security dangers are 
growing worse.
5.3  Mobile, App, and Cloud Security
CLOUD COMPUTING 
AND SOCIAL NETWORK 
RISKS
Social networks and cloud computing increase vulnerabilities by providing a single 
point of failure and attack for organized criminal networks. Critical, sensitive, and 
private information is at risk, and like previous IT trends, such as wireless networks, 
the goal is connectivity, often with little concern for security. As social networks 
increase their services, the gap between services and information security also 

164  Chapter 5     Cybersecurity and Risk Management
increases. E-mail viruses and malware have been declining for years as e-mail secu-
rity has improved. This trend continues as communication shifts to social networks 
and newer smartphones. Unfortunately, malware finds its way to users through 
security vulnerabilities in these new services and devices. Web filtering, user educa-
tion, and strict policies are key to preventing widespread outbreaks.
In Twitter and Facebook, users invite in and build relationships with others. 
Cybercriminals hack into these trusted relationships using stolen logins. Fake anti-
virus and other attacks that take advantage of user trust are very difficult to detect.
An overriding reason why these networks and services increase exposure to 
risk is the time-to-exploitation of today’s sophisticated spyware and mobile viruses. 
Time-to-exploitation is the elapsed time between when vulnerability is discovered 
and when it is exploited. That time has shrunk from months to minutes so IT staff 
have ever-shorter timeframes to find and fix flaws before they are compromised by 
an attack. Some attacks exist for as little as two hours, which means that enterprise 
IT security systems must have real time protection.
When new vulnerabilities are found in operating systems, applications, or wired 
and wireless networks, patches are released by the vendor or security organization. 
Patches are software programs that users download and install to fix a vulnerability. 
Microsoft, for example, releases patches that it calls service packs to update and fix 
vulnerabilities in its operating systems, including Vista, and applications, including 
Office 2010. Service packs can be downloaded from Microsoft’s website.
Left undetected or unprotected, vulnerabilities provide an open door for IT 
attacks and business disruptions and their financial damages. Despite even the best 
technology defenses, information security incidents will occur mostly because of 
users who do not follow secure computing practices and procedures.
BYOD
Users bringing their personal mobile devices and their own mobile apps to work and 
connecting them to the corporate network is part of the larger consumerization of 
information technology (COIT) trend. Bring your own device (BYOD) and bring 
your own apps (BYOA) are practices that move enterprise data and IT assets to 
employees’ mobiles and the cloud, creating a new set of tough IT security challenges. 
Figure 5.10 summarizes how apps, mobiles, and cloud services put organizations at a 
greater risk of cyberattack. Widely used apps that are outside of the organization’s 
firewall are Twitter, Google Analytics, Dropbox, WebEx, and Salesforce.com.
Enterprises take risks with BYOD practices that they never would consider 
taking with conventional computing devices. One possible reason is that new 
TECH NOTE 5.2 Android Botnet over SMS
A botnet of exploited Android phones was sending massive amounts of spam 
via Yahoo e-mail servers using the short messaging service (SMS) as the command 
and control (C&C) channel. Infected androids, or bots, log into the owner’s Yahoo 
Mail account to send spam. Most of the devices were located in Chile, Venezuela, 
Thailand, Indonesia, Lebanon, Philippines, Russia, and Saudi Arabia—that is, in 
countries where users are less likely to get their Android apps from the Google Play 
market, which automatically ensures that the apps are safe. Users downloading free 
phone apps from third-party app stores to avoid paying for legitimate versions were 
actually downloading the Android malware.
 
User should only download apps from trusted sources and also check the 
reviews to verify the apps are legitimate because there are many bogus apps.

5.3     Mobile, App, and Cloud Security     165  
devices, apps, and systems, such as the Windows Phone 7 platform, have been 
rolled out so quickly. As a result, smartphones are not being managed as secure 
devices, with fewer than 20 percent of users installing antimalware and 50 per-
cent using some type of data encryption. In fact, employees expected instant 
approval of (or at least no disapproval of) and support for their new iPads within 
hours of the product’s release.
BYOD raises serious and legitimate areas of concern. Hackers break into 
employees’ mobile devices and leapfrog into employers’ networks—stealing secrets 
without a trace. New vulnerabilities are created when personal and business data 
and communications are mixed together. All cybersecurity controls—authentication, 
access control, data confidentiality, and intrusion detection—implemented on 
corporate-owned resources can be rendered useless by an employee-owned device. 
Also, the corporation’s mobile infrastructure may not be able to support the 
increase in mobile network traffic and data processing, causing unacceptable delays 
or requiring additional investments.
Figure 5.10 Factors that 
expose companies and users 
to attack.
NEW ATTACK VECTORS
Mobile devices and apps, social media, and cloud services introduce even more 
attack vectors for malware, phishing, and hackers. By mid-2012, roughly 75 percent 
of U.S. organizations had adopted BYOD practices, but many rushed in without 
considering security. Mobiles rarely have strong authentication, access controls, and 
encryption even though they connect to mission-critical data and cloud services. 
Only 20 percent of Androids have a security app installed.
Malicious (Rogue) Mobile Apps
The number of malicious Android apps is growing at an alarming rate. According to the 
report Mobile Phone Biometric Security Analysis and Forecasts 2011–2015 (Egan, 2011), 
at least 5,000 new malicious Android apps were found in the first quarter of 2012 (Q1 
2012). During the next quarter (Q2 2012), 10,000 new rogue apps were found within 
one month—and by the end of the quarter, there were 40,000 rogue apps (TrendMicro 
TrendLabs, 2012). Almost all of these apps were found in unreliable third-party stores. 
But 17 rogue apps managed to get into Google Play and they were downloaded over 
700,000 times before being removed. Rogue mobile apps can serve up trojan attacks, 
other malware, or phishing attacks. 
Companies offering legitimate apps for online banking, retail shopping, gam-
ing, and other functions might not be aware of threats lurking in their app stores. 
And despite their best efforts, legitimate app store operators cannot reliably police 
their own catalogs for rogue apps.
With a single click on a malicious link, users can launch a targeted attack 
against their organizations.
Minimum Security Defenses for Mobiles
Minimum security defenses for mobile devices are mobile biometrics, rogue app 
monitoring, remote wipe capability, and encryption. For travelers, do-not-carry 
rules may be a necessary defense.
• Business operations are controlled by apps, systems,
  and networks that are so interconnected that
  anyone’s mobile device is an entry point for attacks.
• Cloud services have created vulnerabilities in systems
  and apps that are surprising even the experts.
Cloud services
create
vulnerabilities
Apps and mobiles
create attack
vectors

166  Chapter 5     Cybersecurity and Risk Management
Mobile biometrics, such as voice and fingerprint biometrics, can significantly 
improve the security of physical devices and provide stronger authentication for 
remote access or cloud services. When Apple acquired Siri, Inc. in 2010, the voice-
based personal assistant Siri was integrated into its operating system, iOS 5. Siri 
gave Apple the potential to move into voice biometrics. Voice biometrics is an 
effective authentication solution across a wide range of consumer devices including 
smartphones, tablets, and TVs. Future mobile devices are expected to have finger-
print sensors to add another authentication factor.
Another type of defense is rogue app monitoring to detect and destroy mali-
cious apps in the wild. Several vendors offer 24/7 monitoring and detection services 
to monitor major app stores and shut down rogue apps to minimize exposure and 
damage.
In the event of loss or theft of a device, a mobile kill switch or remote wipe 
capability is needed as well as encryption. All major smartphone platforms have 
some kind of remote erase capability and encryption option.
In response to mobile security threats, many U.S. companies and govern-
ment agencies are imposing do-not-carry rules on mobiles to prevent compromise. 
Travelers can bring only “clean” devices and are forbidden from connecting to the 
government’s network while abroad.
Questions
1. How do social networks and cloud computing increase vulnerability?
2. Why are patches and service packs needed?
3. What is consumerization of information technology (COIT)?
4. Why does BYOD raise serious and legitimate areas of concern?
5. What are two types of mobile biometrics?
6. Explain rogue app monitoring.
7. Why is a mobile kill switch or remote wipe capability important?
8. What are the purposes of do-not-carry rules?
Crime can be divided into two categories depending on the tactics used to carry out 
the crime: violent and nonviolent. Fraud is nonviolent crime because instead of a 
gun or knife, fraudsters use deception, confidence, and trickery. Fraudsters carry 
out their crime by abusing the power of their position or by taking advantage of the 
trust, ignorance, or laziness of others.
5.4  Defending Against Fraud
FRAUD
Occupational fraud refers to the deliberate misuse of the assets of one’s 
employer for personal gain. Internal audits and internal controls are essential 
to the prevention and detection of occupation frauds. Several examples are 
listed in Table 5.4.
High-profile cases of occupational fraud committed by senior executives 
such as Bernard Madoff have led to increased government regulation. However, 
increased legislation has not put an end to fraud. IT at Work 5.6 gives some insight 
into Madoff’s multibillion fraud that also led to the investigation of the agency 
responsible for fraud prevention—the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC, sec.gov/).

5.4     Defending Against Fraud     167  
TABLE 5.4 
Types and Characteristics of Organizational Fraud
 
Does This Fraud 
 
Impact Financial 
Type of Fraud 
Statements? 
Typical Characteristics
Operating  
No 
Occurs off the books. Median loss
management  
 
due to corruption: over 6 times
corruption 
 
greater than median loss due to 
 
 
misappropriation ($530,000 vs. 
 
 
$80,000).
Confl ict of  
No 
A breach of confi dentiality, 
interest 
 
such as revealing competitors’ 
 
 
bids; often occurs coincident 
 
 
with bribery.
Bribery 
No 
Uses positional power or money 
 
 
to infl uence others.
Embezzlement or  
 
Employee theft: employees’
“misappropriation” 
 
access to company property 
 
 
creates the opportunity for 
 
 
embezzlement.
Senior management  
Yes 
Involves a massive breach of
fi nancial reporting  
 
trust and leveraging of positional
fraud 
 
power.
Accounting cycle 
Yes 
This fraud is called “earnings 
fraud 
 
management” or earning 
 
 
engineering, which are in violation 
 
 
of generally accepted accounting 
 
 
principles (GAAP) and all other 
 
 
accounting practices. See aicpa.org.
Disgraced financier Bernard Madoff is in jail after pleading 
guilty in 2009 to the biggest fraud in Wall Street history. For 
four decades, Madoff perpetrated a complex and sinister 
fraud. Prior to his arrest, Madoff was viewed as a charis-
matic man and stellar financier with favorable connections 
to power brokers on Wall Street and in Washington. Since 
his arrest, federal prosecutors have maintained that Bernard 
Madoff ran a scheme that bilked wealthy individuals and 
large nonprofits out of an estimated $64.8 billion.
Social Engineering
Fundamentally, Madoff relied on social engineering and 
the predictability of human nature to generate income for 
himself—and not on financial expertise. Madoff would ask 
people to invest in his funds, which were by invitation only, 
to create the illusion of exclusivity. Madoff used this tactic to 
create the illusion that only the elite could invest because of 
consistent returns and his stellar Wall Street reputation. As 
IT at Work 5 .6
Madoff Defrauds Investors of $64.8 Billion

168  Chapter 5     Cybersecurity and Risk Management
he expected, wealthy investors mistook exclusivity to mean 
a secret formula for a sure thing.
Unusual steady returns were one of the many well-
known red flags indicating fraud that investors and watch-
dogs chose to disregard. In fact, in hindsight, investors admit 
they missed several glaring red flags.
The Red Flags
Among others, the following classic red flags would have 
made this fraud detectable much earlier if they had not been 
consistently ignored:
• 
Madoff was trusted because he was a Wall Street fixture, 
so his work was not given full scrutiny.
• 
Unbelievable returns defied the market. They were 
impossible, yet this fact was ignored.
• 
Madoff used a sense of exclusivity—a hook to play “hard 
to get.” This false sense of exclusivity is a telltale sign of 
a Ponzi scheme.
• 
Reports of consistently good but never spectacular gains, 
so-called steady returns, lulled all kinds of investors into 
a false sense of security over time.
Madoff and SEC Under Investigation
Not only did this scandal trigger an investigation into Madoff; 
it also prompted an investigation of the watchdog agency, 
the SEC. It was investigated by Congress and the agency’s 
inspector general for repeatedly ignoring whistleblowers’ 
warnings about Madoff’s operations. Created by Congress 
in 1934 during the Great Depression, the SEC is charged 
with ensuring that public companies accurately disclose their 
financials and business risks to investors, and that brokers 
who trade securities for clients make their investors’ interests 
a first priority.
Madoff is not the only party at fault. Madoff worked 
with dozens of feeder funds and other middlemen to lure 
money into his Ponzi scheme. The investigation into “how-
could-this-have-happened?” has involved forensic account-
ing as well as computer forensics. The latter experts were 
tasked with uncovering any smoking-gun e-mails and other 
digital messages that revealed “who knew what” and “who 
did what.” Forensics experts dug deeper into the physical 
evidence to determine who else was complicit in the fraud.
Regulatory Reaction
In January 2009 the Senate Banking Committee introduced 
legislation to provide $110 million to hire 500 new FBI 
agents, 50 new assistant U.S. attorneys, and 100 new SEC 
enforcement officials to crack down on fraud.
Sources: Compiled from Antilla (2008), Chew (2009), Gold (2008), and 
Quinn (2009).
Questions
1. How important was trust to Madoff’s scheme?
2. What else did Madoff rely upon to carry out his fraud?
3. What is a red flag?
4. In your opinion, how were so many red flags ignored 
given the risk that investors faced?
5. Could such a large investment fraud happen again—or are 
there internal fraud prevention and detection measures 
in place that would prevent or stop it from occurring? 
Explain your answer.
INTERNAL FRAUD 
PREVENTION AND 
DETECTION
The single most effective fraud prevention tactic is making employees know that 
fraud will be detected by IT monitoring systems and punished, with the fraudster 
possibly turned over to the police or FBI. The fear of being caught and prosecuted 
is a strong deterrent. IT must play a visible and major role in detecting fraud.
Corporate Governance
IT monitoring and control also demonstrate that the company has implemented 
effective corporate governance and fraud prevention measures. Regulators look 
favorably on companies that can demonstrate best practices in corporate gover-
nance and operational risk management. Management and staff would then spend 
less time worrying about regulations and more time adding value to their brands 
and business.
Internal fraud prevention measures are based on the same controls used to pre-
vent external intrusions—perimeter defense technologies, such as firewalls, e-mail 
scanners, and biometric access. They are also based on human resource (HR) pro-
cedures, such as recruitment screening and training.

5.5     Compliance and Internal Control     169  
Intelligent Analysis and Anomaly Detections
Most detection activity can be handled by intelligent analysis engines using 
advanced data warehousing and analytics techniques. These systems take in audit 
trails from key systems and personnel records from the HR and finance depart-
ments. The data are stored in a data warehouse where they are analyzed to detect 
anomalous patterns, such as excessive hours worked, deviations in patterns of 
behavior, copying huge amounts of data, attempts to override controls, unusual 
transactions, and inadequate documentation about a transaction. Information from 
investigations is fed back into the detection system so it learns of any anomalous 
patterns. Since insiders might work in collusion with organized criminals, insider 
profiling is important to find wider patterns of criminal networks.
An enterprisewide approach that combines risk, security, compliance, and IT 
specialists greatly increases the prevention and detection of fraud. Prevention is the 
most cost-effective approach, since detection and prosecution costs are enormous 
in addition to the direct cost of the loss. It starts with corporate governance culture 
and ethics at the top levels of the organization.
Identity Theft
One of the worst and most prevalent crimes is identity theft. Such thefts where indi-
viduals’ Social Security and credit card numbers are stolen and used by thieves are 
not new. Criminals have always obtained information about other people—by steal-
ing wallets or dumpster diving. But widespread electronic sharing and databases 
have made the crime worse. Because financial institutions, data processing firms, 
and retail businesses are reluctant to reveal incidents in which their customers’ 
personal financial information may have been stolen, lost, or compromised, laws 
continue to be passed that force those notifications. 
Questions
1. What are the two categories of crime?
2. Explain fraud and occupational fraud.
3. What defenses help prevent internal fraud?
4. What are two red fl ags of internal fraud?
5. Explain why data on laptops and computers need to be encrypted.
6. Explain how identity theft can occur.
All enterprises are subject to federal and state laws and regulations. Compliance 
with regulations always requires internal controls to ensure that sensitive data are 
protected and accurate.
5.5  Compliance and Internal Control
INTERNAL CONTROL
The internal control environment is the work atmosphere that a company sets for 
its employees. Internal control (IC) is a process designed to achieve:
• Reliability of financial reporting, to protect investors
• Operational efficiency
• Compliance with laws, regulations, and policies
• Safeguarding of assets

170  Chapter 5     Cybersecurity and Risk Management
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) mandates more accurate business reporting and 
disclosure of generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) violations. Section 
302 deters corporate and executive fraud by requiring that the CEO and CFO verify 
that they have reviewed the financial report, and, to the best of their knowledge, the 
report does not contain an untrue statement or omit any material fact. To motivate 
honesty, executive management faces criminal penalties including long jail terms 
for false reports. Section 805 mandates a review of the Sentencing Guidelines to 
ensure that “the guidelines that apply to organizations . . . are sufficient to deter 
and punish organizational criminal conduct.” The Guidelines also focus on the 
establishment of “effective compliance and ethics” programs. As indicated in the 
Guidelines, a precondition to an effective compliance and ethics program is “an 
organizational culture that encourages ethical conduct and a commitment to com-
pliance with the law.”
Among other measures, SOX requires companies to set up comprehensive 
internal controls. There is no question that SOX, and the complex and costly provi-
sions it requires public companies to follow, have had a major impact on corporate 
financial accounting. For starters, companies have had to set up comprehensive 
internal controls over financial reporting to prevent fraud, catching it when it 
occurs. Since the collapse of Arthur Andersen, following the accounting firm’s 
conviction on criminal charges related to the Enron case, outside accounting firms 
have gotten tougher with clients they are auditing, particularly with regard to their 
internal controls.
SOX and the SEC are making it clear that if controls can be ignored, there is no 
control. Therefore, fraud prevention and detection require an effective monitoring 
system. If a company shows its employees that it can find out everything that every 
employee does and use that evidence to prosecute a wrongdoer to the fullest extent 
possible under the law, then the likelihood of any employee adopting an “I can get 
away with it” attitude drops drastically.
Approximately 85 percent of occupational fraud could have been prevented if 
proper IT-based internal controls had been designed, implemented, and followed.
DEFENSE STRATEGY
The objective of IT security management practices is to defend all of the compo-
nents of an information system, specifically data, software applications, hardware, 
and networks, so they remain in compliance. Before they make any decisions con-
cerning defenses, the people responsible for security must understand the require-
ments and operations of the business, which form the basis for a customized defense 
strategy.
The defense strategy and controls that should be used depend on what needs 
to be protected and a cost–benefit analysis. That is, companies should neither 
underinvest nor overinvest. The SEC and FTC impose huge fines for data breaches 
to deter companies from underinvesting in data protection. The following are the 
major objectives of defense strategies:
1. Prevention and deterrence. Properly designed controls may prevent errors from 
occurring, deter criminals from attacking the system, and, better yet, deny access 
to unauthorized people. These are the most desirable controls.
2. Detection. Like a fi re, the earlier an attack is detected, the easier it is to combat, 
and the less damage is done. Detection can be performed in many cases by using 
special diagnostic software, at a minimal cost.
3. Contain the damage. This objective involves minimizing or limiting losses once 
a malfunction has occurred. It is also called damage control. This can be accom-
plished, for example, by including a fault-tolerant system that permits operation 
in a degraded mode until full recovery is made. If a fault-tolerant system does 
not exist, a quick and possibly expensive recovery must take place. Users want 
their systems back in operation as fast as possible.

5.5     Compliance and Internal Control     171  
4. Recovery. A recovery plan explains how to fi x a damaged information system as 
quickly as possible. Replacing rather than repairing components is one route to 
fast recovery.
5. Correction. Correcting the causes of damaged systems can prevent a problem 
from occurring again.
6. Awareness and compliance. All organization members must be educated about 
the hazards and must comply with the security rules and regulations.
A defense strategy is also going to require several controls, as shown in Figure 5.11. 
General controls are established to protect the system regardless of the specific 
application. For example, protecting hardware and controlling access to the data 
center are independent of the specific application. Application controls are safe-
guards that are intended to protect specific applications. In the next two sections, 
we discuss the major types of these two groups of information system controls.
GENERAL CONTROLS
The major categories of general controls are physical controls, access controls, data 
security controls, communication network controls, and administrative controls.
Physical Controls
Physical security refers to the protection of computer facilities and resources. This 
includes protecting physical property such as computers, data centers, software, 
manuals, and networks. It provides protection against most natural hazards as well 
as against some human hazards. Appropriate physical security may include several 
physical controls such as the following:
• Appropriate design of the data center. For example, the data center should 
be noncombustible and waterproof.
• Shielding against electromagnetic fields.
• Good fire prevention, detection, and extinguishing systems, including a 
sprinkler system, water pumps, and adequate drainage facilities.
Figure 5.11 Major defense 
controls.
Defense Control
Web Controls
Biometrics
Data Security
Communication
Administrative
Other
Access
Physical
Output
Processing
Input
Encryption
Cable Testers
Firewalls
Virus Protection
Authentication
Biometrics
General
Application

172  Chapter 5     Cybersecurity and Risk Management
• Emergency power shutoff and backup batteries, which must be maintained 
in operational condition.
• Properly designed and maintained air-conditioning systems.
• Motion detector alarms that detect physical intrusion.
Access Controls
Access control is the management of who is and is not authorized to use a com-
pany’s hardware and software. Access control methods, such as firewalls and access 
control lists, restrict access to a network, database, file, or data. It is the major 
line of defense against unauthorized insiders as well as outsiders. Access control 
involves authorization (having the right to access) and authentication, which is also 
called user identification (proving that the user is who he or she claims to be).
Authentication methods include:
• Something only the user knows, such as a password
• Something only the user has, for example, a smart card or a token
• Something only the user is, such as a signature, voice, fingerprint, or retinal 
(eye) scan; implemented via biometric controls, which can be physical or 
behavioral
Biometric Controls
A biometric control is an automated method of verifying the identity of a person, 
based on physical or behavioral characteristics. Most biometric systems match 
some personal characteristic against a stored profile. The most common biometrics 
are a thumbprint or fingerprint, voice print, retinal scan, and signature. Biometric 
controls have been integrated into e-business hardware and software products. 
Biometric controls do have some limitations: They are not accurate in certain cases, 
and some people see them as an invasion of privacy.
Administrative Controls
While the previously discussed general controls are technical in nature, adminis-
trative controls deal with issuing guidelines and monitoring compliance with the 
guidelines. Examples of controls are shown in Table 5.5.
TABLE 5.5 
Representative Administrative Controls
• Appropriately selecting, training, and supervising employees, especially in 
accounting and information systems
• Fostering company loyalty
• Immediately revoking access privileges of dismissed, resigned, or transferred 
employees
• Requiring periodic modifi cation of access controls, such as passwords
• Developing programming and documentation standards (to make auditing 
easier and to use the standards as guides for employees)
• Insisting on security bonds or malfeasance insurance for key employees
• Instituting separation of duties, namely, dividing sensitive computer duties 
among as many employees as economically feasible in order to decrease the 
chance of intentional or unintentional damage
• Holding periodic random audits of the system

5.5     Compliance and Internal Control     173  
BUSINESS CONTINUITY
Risk management is not complete without a business continuity plan that has been 
tested to verify that it works. Business continuity refers to maintaining business 
functions or restoring them quickly when there is a major disruption. The plan cov-
ers business processes, assets, human resources, business partners, and more. Fires, 
earthquakes, floods, power outages, malicious attacks, and other types of disas-
ters hit data centers. Yet business continuity planning capabilities can be a tough 
sell because they do not contribute to the bottom line—that is, until it is too late. 
Compare them to an insurance policy: If and only if a disaster occurs, the money has 
been well spent. And spending on business continuity preparedness is an ongoing 
process because there is always more that could be done to better prepare.
The purpose of a business continuity plan is to keep the business running after 
a disaster occurs. Each function in the business should have a feasible backup plan. 
For example, if the customer service center or call center was destroyed by a storm 
or lost all power, would anyone know how the reps would continue to answer cus-
tomer calls? The backup plan could define how to provide necessary network access 
to enable business to continue.
AUDITING 
INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS
An audit is an important part of any control system. Auditing can be viewed as an 
additional layer of controls or safeguards. It is considered as a deterrent to criminal 
actions, especially for insiders. Auditors attempt to answer questions such as these:
• Are there sufficient controls in the system? Which areas are not covered by 
controls?
• Which controls are not necessary?
• Are the controls implemented properly?
• Are the controls effective? That is, do they check the output of the system?
• Is there a clear separation of duties of employees?
• Are there procedures to ensure compliance with the controls?
• Are there procedures to ensure reporting and corrective actions in case of 
violations of controls?
Auditing a website is a good preventive measure to manage the legal risk. Legal 
risk is important in any IT system, but in Web systems it is even more important due 
to the content of the site, which may offend people or be in violation of copyright 
laws or other regulations (e.g., privacy protection). Auditing e-commerce is also 
more complex since, in addition to the website, one needs to audit order taking, 
order fulfillment, and all support systems.
COST–BENEFIT 
ANALYSIS
It is usually not economical to prepare protection against every possible threat. 
Therefore, an IT security program must provide a process for assessing threats and 
deciding which ones to prepare for and which ones to ignore or provide reduced 
protection against. Two methods are risk assessment and business impact analysis.
Risk Assessment
Risk assessments are done using an app or spreadsheet. The basic computations are 
shown here:
Expected loss 
 P1 
 P2 
 L
where
P1 
probability of attack (estimate, based on judgment)
P2 
probability of attack being successful (estimate, based on judgment)
L  
loss occurring if attack is successful

174  Chapter 5     Cybersecurity and Risk Management
Example:
P1 
.02, P2 
.10, L 
$1,000,000
Then expected loss from this particular attack is
P1 
P2 
L 
0.02 
 0.1 
 $1,000,000 
 $2,000
The amount of loss also depends on the duration of a system being out of operation.
Business impact analysis
A business impact analysis (BIA) estimates the consequences of disruption of a 
business function and collects data to develop recovery strategies. Potential loss 
scenarios are first identified during the risk assessment. Operations may also be 
interrupted by the failure of a supplier of goods or services or delayed deliveries. 
There are many possible scenarios that should be considered.
The BIA identifies both operational and financial impacts resulting from a dis-
ruption. Several examples of impacts to consider include (Ready.gov, 2014):
• Lost sales and income
• Delayed sales or income
• Increased expenses (e.g., overtime labor, outsourcing, expediting costs, etc.)
• Regulatory fines
• Contractual penalties or loss of contractual bonuses
• Customer dissatisfaction or defection
• Delay of new business plans
These costs and losses should be compared with the costs for possible recovery 
strategies. The BIA report should prioritize the order of events for restoration of 
the business, with processes having the greatest operational and financial impacts 
being restored first.
Questions
 1. Why are internal controls needed?
 2. What federal law requires effective internal controls?
 3. Why do the SEC and FTC impose huge fi nes for data breaches?
 4. What are the two types of controls in a defense strategy?
 5. Explain authentication and two methods of authentication.
 6. What are biometric controls? Give an example.
 7. Why do organizations need a business continuity plan?
 8. Why should websites be audited?
 9. How is expected loss calculated?
10. Explain business impact analysis.
Key Terms
acceptable use policy 
(AUP)
access control
administrative controls
advanced persistent threat 
(APT)
Anonymous
application controls
assets
attack vectors
audit
backdoor
biometric control
BlackPOS
Black smartphone
botnet
bring your own apps 
(BYOA)
bring your own device 
(BYOD)
business continuity 
plan
business impact analysis 
(BIA)

Assuring Your Learning     175  
command and control 
(C&C) channel
consumerization of 
information technology 
(COIT)
contract hacker
Control Objectives for 
Information and 
Related Technology 
(COBIT)
corporate governance
critical infrastructure
data tampering
distributed denial-of-ser-
vice (DDoS) attack
do-not-carry rules
enterprise risk manage-
ment (ERM)
exploit
general controls
hacker
hacktivist
internal control (IC)
internal threats
intrusion detection 
system (IDS)
intrusion prevention sys-
tem (IPS)
iOS 5
IT governance
LulzSec
malware
mobile biometrics
occupational fraud
patches
payload
Payment Card Industry 
Data Security Standard 
(PCI DSS)
phishing
physical controls
programming attacks
remote access trojan 
(RAT)
remote wipe capability
risk
rogue app monitoring
rootkit
service pack
signature
social engineering
spam
spear phishing
spyware
threat
time-to-exploitation
vector
virus
voice biometrics
vulnerability
worm
zero-day exploit
zombie
Assuring Your Learning
 1. Why is cybercrime expanding rapidly? Discuss some 
possible solutions.
 2. In addition to hackers, what kinds of cybercriminals 
do organizations need to defend against?
 3. What are the major motives of cybercriminals?
 4. In what ways do users make themselves vulnerable 
to cybercrimes?
 5. Why do malware creators alter their malware?
 6. Why should you set a unique password for each 
website, service, and device that you use?
 7. How can malware be stopped from stealing or dis-
closing data from an organization’s network?
 8. What impact might huge fi nes have on how much a 
company budgets for IT security defenses?
 9. Why are BYOD, BYOA, and do-not-carry rules 
important to IT security? Why might users resist 
such rules?
 10. Why do users refuse to use strong passwords 
even though they know how dangerous weak 
passwords are?
 11. How can the risk of occupational fraud be 
decreased?
 12. Why should information control and security be of 
prime concern to management?
 13. Explain what fi rewalls protect and what they do not 
protect.
 14. Why are authentication and authorization 
important in e-commerce?
 15. Some insurance companies will not insure a 
business unless the fi rm has a computer disaster 
recovery plan. Explain why.
 16. Explain why risk management should involve 
the following elements: threats, exposure associated 
with each threat, risk of each threat occurring, 
cost of controls, and assessment of their 
effectiveness.
 17. Discuss why the Sarbanes-Oxley Act focuses on 
internal control. How does that focus infl uence 
information security?
DISCUSS: Critical Thinking Questions
1. The Wall Street Journal (WSJ.com) has detailed a 
cyberattack against the U.S. Chamber of Commerce 
in which e-mails were stolen. Review The Wall Street 
Journal interactive graphic “China Hackers Hit U.S. 
Chamber, Attacks Breached Computer System of 
Business-Lobbying Group; Emails Stolen,” dated 
December 21, 2011. Also view the video. The links 
are posted in the book’s website at www.wiley.com/
EXPLORE: Online and Interactive Exercises 

176  Chapter 5     Cybersecurity and Risk Management
college/turban or you can search the WSJ.com 
website using the video title.
a. Explain the importance and role of social 
engineering in this intrusion and cybertheft.
b. What can be done to prevent this type of intrusion 
from occurring again?
c. How serious was the intrusion and when did it 
occur?
d. What or who did the hackers focus on? Why?
e. What information could the hackers have 
gleaned from the intrusion of the Chamber?
f. What did the Chamber do to increase cybersecu-
rity after learning of the intrusion and 
cybertheft?
g. Explain why cars and appliances can be hack 
targets.
h. What other resources are at risk?
i. 
Does this incident indicate about how wide-
spread hacking is? Explain your answer.
2. Access the Anti-Phishing Working Group website 
(antiphishing.org) and download the most recent 
Phishing Activity Trends Report.
a. Describe the recent trends in phishing attacks.
b. Explain the reasons for these trends.
3. Research a botnet attack. Explain how the botnet 
works and what damage it causes. What preventive 
methods are offered by security vendors?
4. Visit cio.com and search for a recent article on 
security, privacy, or compliance. What three lessons 
are learned from the article?
5. Research vendors of biometrics. Select one vendor 
and discuss three of its biometric devices or technol-
ogies. Prepare a list of major capabilities. What are 
the advantages and disadvantages of its biometrics?
1. Many fi rms concentrate on the wrong questions and 
end up throwing a great deal of money and time at 
minimal security risks while ignoring major vulner-
abilities. Why?
2. Assessing how much a company is legally obligated 
to invest in cybersecurity remains a challenge. Since 
there is no such thing as perfect security (i.e., there 
is always more that you can do), resolving these 
questions can signifi cantly affect cost.
a. When are a company’s security measures suffi -
cient to comply with its obligations? For example, 
does installing a fi rewall and using virus detection 
software satisfy a company’s legal obligations?
b. Is it necessary for an organization to encrypt all 
of its electronic records?
6. Assume that the daily probability of a major earth-
quake in Los Angeles is .07 percent. The chance of 
your computer center being damaged during such a 
quake is 5 percent. If the center is damaged, the 
average estimated damage will be $1.6 million.
a. Calculate the expected loss (in dollars).
b. An insurance agent is willing to insure your 
facility for an annual fee of $15,000. Analyze the 
offer, and discuss whether to accept it.
7. Should an employer notify employees that their 
usage of computers is being monitored? Why or 
why not?
8. Twenty-fi ve thousand messages arrive at an organi
zation each year. Currently, there are no fi rewalls. 
On average, 1.2 successful hackings occur each 
year. Each successful hack attack results in a loss 
of about $130,000 to the company. A major fi rewall 
is proposed at a cost of $66,000. The estimated useful 
life is 3 years. The chance that an intruder will break 
through the fi rewall is 0.0002. In such a case, the 
damage will be $100,000 (30%), or $200,000 (50%), 
or no damage. There is an annual maintenance cost 
of $20,000 for the fi rewall.
a. Should management buy the fi rewall?
b. An improved fi rewall that is 99.9988 percent 
effective and that costs $84,000, with a life of 
3 years and annual maintenance cost of $16,000, 
is available. Should this fi rewall be purchased 
instead of the fi rst one?
ANALYZE & DECIDE: Apply IT Concepts to Business Decisions

CASE 5.2     Business Case     177  
CASE 5.2
Business Case: Lax Security at LinkedIn Exposed
On any social network, most users mistakenly believe that 
their privacy is only as good as the privacy of their most 
careless—or temporary—friend. In fact, weak passwords and 
hackers can deprive users of all privacy.
 
Business social networking site LinkedIn was hacked 
in June 2012 (Figure 5.12). Hackers stole 6.5 million pass-
words and e-mail addresses. This data breach was discovered 
by IT security experts when they found millions of LinkedIn 
passwords posted on a Russian underground website 
(Figure 5.13). Experts also determined that a hacker named 
Dwdm was asking underground members for help in cracking 
the stolen passwords. Within only two days, most passwords 
were cracked. Why were LinkedIn’s passwords cracked so 
quickly? The simple answer is that LinkedIn was using an 
outdated encryption method instead of up-to-date industry-
standard encryption. As a result, members’ passwords were 
really only camoufl aged—and crackable.
LinkedIn Criticized for Bad Data Security
What could hackers do to your online accounts if they had 
your passwords for 48 hours and you did not know? That is 
what LinkedIn allowed to happen by waiting two days before 
notifying members that their passwords had been stolen. The 
company took a lot of criticism for not notifying members 
via Twitter or Facebook immediately. According to the chief 
executive of the Public Relations Consultants Association, 
Francis Ingham, LinkedIn ignored the fi rst rule of crisis man-
agement, which is to be fi rst to tell your customers.
 
What surprised customers and IT security experts was 
that a company that collects and profi ts from vast amounts 
of data had taken a negligent approach to protecting it. 
Figure 5.14 explains why it was surprising and alarming that 
LinkedIn’s password protection was weak.
E-mail Addresses Are Universal Usernames
At most e-commerce and social sites, usernames are e-mail 
addresses—making them our universal username for online 
accounts. If the e-mail is a work account, then everyone also 
knows where we work and our login name. Therefore, know-
ing users’ usernames and passwords provides authorized 
access to corporate accounts with almost no risk of being 
detected. Hackers attacked LinkedIn to gain access to over 
161 million members’ credentials as a means to gain access 
to much more valuable business networks and databases.
Figure 5.12 LinkedIn data 
breach overview.
Figure 5.13 LinkedIn did not 
discover its own data breach 
and, when informed of it, 
delayed notifying members.
Hackers breached Linkedln’s
network and stole 6.5 million of its
customers’ passwords, which had
been only lightly encrypted. They
were posted to a Russian hacker
forum for all to see and steal.
Data Breach
Linkedln
Hack attack led to 6.5 million
e-mail addresses and passwords
being compromised.
Over $1 million in costs
associated with forensic work,
investigating, and addressing
the breach.
Seven-figure investments in IT
infrastructure to update and
harden network and data security.
Costs
© Kevin Britland/Alamy 

178  Chapter 5     Cybersecurity and Risk Management
Business Risks and Collateral Damage
The hack caused the following business risks and collateral 
damage.
• 
Takeover of members’ other accounts by hackers, 
fraudsters, and other criminals. Hackers know that 
people reuse passwords; once their LinkedIn accounts 
are linked to Facebook and Twitter, far too much informa-
tion may be revealed. Knowing where people worked 
and their e-mail accounts allowed hackers to quickly use 
the stolen LinkedIn passwords to log in to corporate 
accounts, online bank accounts, and so on to steal more 
data or transfer funds.
• 
Damage to LinkedIn’s biggest revenue source—its 
advertising business. LinkedIn’s fi nancial success is tied 
to its advertising revenues, which in turn are based on the 
number of active members and membership growth.
• 
Fines for violating privacy laws and regulations. Any 
company exposing the confi dential data of customers or 
employees faces steep fi nes. Regulators impose harsh 
penalties for breaking privacy laws and not taking reason-
able care to defend against data breaches. Strict data 
privacy laws in states such as Massachusetts and California 
could keep LinkedIn fi ghting legal battles for years.
• 
Cleanup costs. The cleanup cost LinkedIn nearly $1 million 
and another $2 to $3 million in upgrades. Forensic work on 
the password theft cost another $500,000 to $1 million.
Data Security: A Top Management Concern
Data security is a senior management concern and respon-
sibility. It affects a company’s operations, reputation, and 
customer trust, which ultimately impact revenue, profi ts, and 
competitive edge. Yet defenses that could help to prevent 
breaches are not always implemented.
 
Some experts argue that senior management continues 
to skimp on basic protections because computer security is 
not regulated—that is, until a business suffers a major crisis. 
After the data breach, LinkedIn implemented improved pass-
word storage encryption, hired private security and forensics 
experts, and called in the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
(FBI) to help investigate the security breach.
 
Jeremiah Grossman, chief technology offi cer of White 
Hat Security, estimated that it would have cost LinkedIn “a 
couple hundred thousand dollars” to secure its members’ 
passwords, Web servers, and applications (Perlroth, 2012a).
How This Attack Compares to Others
While 6.5 million leaked passwords represents a serious 
breach, it affected a relatively small percent of the more than 
175 million members LinkedIn had at that time. Overall, the 
LinkedIn breach, while somewhat costly, did not do as much 
harm as those experienced by other hacked companies such 
as Global Payments, Sony, and Certifi cate Authority 
DigiNotar, which was literally hacked out of business.
Sources: Compiled from Perlroth (2012a), Ponemon Institute (2013), 
whitehatsec.com, and prca.org.uk.
Questions
1. LinkedIn does not collect the credit card or other 
fi nancial account information of its members. Why then 
would profi t-motivated hackers be interested in stealing 
LinkedIn’s stored data? What data would they be most 
interested in?
2. Companies are often slow to self-detect data breaches so 
a cyberattack can occur without a company even know-
ing it has a problem. What effect do you think LinkedIn’s 
failure to self-detect its massive data breach had on its 
popularity and credibility?
Figure 5.14 Three reasons why 
LinkedIn’s underinvestment 
in data security did not make 
business sense.
• Linkedln’s business model: collect and profit from data.
• Linkedln was not some cash-poor startup company.
  The company had piles of cash from its successful
  initial public offering (IPO) in May 2011. Once it went
  public, Linkedln, like all public companies, had to
  report hack attacks to the SEC.
• Linkedln’s net income for the first quarter of 2012 was
  $5 million, more than double its $2.1 million net income
  in the first quarter 2011. Linkedln had a lot to protect...
  and lose.
Its most valuable asset is data
It’s a high-tech, public company with a brand 
image to protect
It had a lot of net income to protect

References     179  
3. Most corporate security incidents are uncovered by a 
third party, like a security fi rm, that picks up on evidence 
of malicious activity. Why do you think IT security experts 
and not LinkedIn discovered the data breach?
4. LinkedIn’s lax approach to members’ information security 
and weak passwords was very surprising to members and 
information security professionals. Why?
5. Identify and evaluate the actual and potential business 
risks and damages from LinkedIn’s data breach.
6. Why is data encryption an important information security 
defense?
7. Discuss why information security is a concern of senior 
managers.
8. Explain why someone who used the same password for 
several sites would need to change all those passwords. 
In your opinion, was LinkedIn negligent in protecting its 
main asset? Explain.
CASE 5.3
Video Case: Botnets, Malware Security, and Capturing Cybercriminals
Gunter Ollmann, vice president of research at Damballa, 
Inc., explains the Aurora attacks against major companies. 
Thousands of botnet operators launched targeted botnet 
campaigns with the help of automated tools. In the video, 
you learn why it is diffi cult for law enforcement to track and 
prosecute cybercriminals and the effectiveness of Microsoft’s 
legal action to shut down the C&C (command and control) 
network of the Waladec botnet. Visit searchsecurity.techtarget.
com/video/Botnets-malware-and-capturing-cybercriminals to 
view the video and read the transcript of it.
Questions
1. What are botnets used for?
2. What is needed to get started in the botnet industry? 
Explain why.
3. Given your answers, what should users and organizations 
do and/or not do to reduce the threat of botnets?
Quiz
1. From research into Operation Aurora and analysis of the 
botnets, investigators learned all of the following except:
a. There are about 50 botnet operators.
b. Botnet operators have increased their range by 
running multiple botnets and campaigns.
c. The feature set of modern malware is similar for both 
the amateur and the professional operator.
d. Many of the advanced types of malware are available 
in kit form.
2. What really differs between the professional 
practice and the amateur operator is the way that 
they __________.
a. select their targets.
b. have hardened their malware.
c. infect a network.
d. use proxies.
3. Armoring malware is done to make sure that if researchers 
obtain a sample of the code, it cannot be automatically 
used for deconstructing who the command and control 
chains are. True or false?
4. Many consumers know that a traditional antivirus program 
has value, but that value is depreciating considerably. 
True or false?
Antilla, S. “Red Flags Were There All Along: Suspicious Activi-
ties Largely Unquestioned.” Gazette (Montreal), December 
16, 2008.
Boeing.com. “Overview: Boeing Black Smartphone.” 2014.
Chew, R. “A Madoff Whistle-Blower Tells His Story.” Time, 
February 4, 2009.
D’Innocenzio, A. “Data-breach Cuts Target Profi t.” Timesleader.
com, February 26, 2014.
Egan, S. “New Report Predicts High Growth in Mobile Bio-
metric Security.” SecureIDNews.com. September 15, 2011.
Gallagher, S. “Update: Boeing’s Black—This Android Phone 
Will Self-Destruct.” Ars Technica, February 26, 2014.
Gold, L. “Forensic Accounting: Finding the Smoking E-mail: 
E-discovery Is Now a Critical Part of Forensics—and of Firm 
Policy.” Accounting Today 22, no. 8, May 5, 2008.
Hosenball, M. “Leaked Call on Ukraine Made on Unencrypted 
Cellphones—U.S. Offi cials.” Reuters, February 7, 2014.
Kratsas, G. “Reports: Target Warned Before Data Breach.” 
USA Today, February 18, 2014.
KPMG. Data Loss Barometer. 2012. http://www.kpmg.com/US/
en/IssuesAndInsights/ArticlesPublications/Documents/data-
loss-barometer.pdf
Krebs on Security. “A First Look at the Target Intrusion, 
Malware.” January 14, 2014.
References

180  Chapter 5     Cybersecurity and Risk Management
Mobile Phone Biometric Security Analysis and Forecasts 
2011–2015.
O’Connor, C. “Target CEO Gregg Steinhafel Resigns in Data 
Breach Fallout.” Forbes, May 5, 2014.
Perlroth, N. “Hacked Chamber of Commerce Opposed Cyber-
security Law.” bits.blogs.nytimes.com, December 21, 2012a.
Perlroth, N. “Traveling Light in a Time of Digital Thievery.” 
The New York Times, February 10, 2012b.
Ponemon Institute. “2013 Cost of Data Breach Study: Global 
Analysis.” Ponemon Institute Research Report. May 2013.
PricewaterhouseCoopers (PWC). 2014 Global State of 
Information Security Survey. http://www.pwc.com/gx/en/
consulting-services/information-security-survey/download.
jhtml
Quinn, J. “On the Trail of Madoff’s Missing Billions.” The 
Sunday Telegraph (London), January 18, 2009.
Ready.gov. “Business Impact Analysis.” January 29, 2014.
Sharf, S. “Target Shares Drop After CEO Gregg Steinhafel’s 
Resignation.” Forbes, May 5, 2014.
TrendMicro TrendLabs, “Repeating History.” 2012 http://www.
trendmicro.com/cloud-content/us/pdfs/security-intelligence/
reports/rpt-repeating-history.pdf
Westcott, L. “Boeing’s New Self Destructing Phone Is Ideal for 
Those Who Need to Keep Secrets.” The Wire, March 5, 2014.
Yadron, D., P. Ziobro, & D. Barrett. “Target Warned of 
Vulnerabilities Before Data Breach.” The Wall Street Journal, 
February 14, 2014.

Chapter Snapshot
Every day, over 1.5 billion people around the world 
use what seems to be a simple tool to find information 
online—a search engine. We sometimes take for granted 
that behind a relatively simple user interface, an increas-
ingly complex set of search engine technologies are at 
work, helping us find the information we need to do 
our jobs, conduct research, locate product reviews, or 
find information about the television shows we watch. 
Attracting Buyers with 
Search, Semantic, and 
Recommendation 
Technology
6
Chapter
1. Describe how search engines work and identify ways 
that businesses gain competitive advantage by using 
search technology effectively.
2. Describe how to improve website ranking on search 
results pages by optimizing website design and creating 
useful content.
3. Describe how companies manage paid search advertising 
campaigns to increase awareness and drive sales volume.
4. Describe how semantic Web technology enhances the 
accuracy of search engines results and how businesses 
can optimize their websites to take advantage of this 
emerging technology.
5. Describe how recommendation engines are used 
to enhance user experience and increase sales on 
e-commerce websites.
Learning Outcomes
181
Winning, Engaging, and Retaining 
Consumers with Technology
Part 2
Chapter Snapshot
Case 6.1 Opening Case: Nike Golf Drives Web 
Traffic with Search Engine Optimization
6.1  Using Search Technology for Business 
Success
6.2  Organic Search and Search Engine 
Optimization
6.3 Pay-Per-Click and Paid Search Strategies
6.4  A Search for Meaning—Semantic 
Technology
6.5  Recommendation Engines
Key Terms
Assuring Your Learning
• Discuss: Critical Thinking Questions
• Explore: Online and Interactive Exercises
•  Analyze & Decide: Apply IT Concepts 
to Business Decisions
Case 6.2 Business Case: Recommending Wine 
to Online Customers
Case 6.3 Video Case: Power Searching with 
Google
References

Because most search engine services are free, people 
are not generally aware that “Search” has become a 
multibillion-dollar-a-year business. More importantly, 
the way search engines work and how they rank-order 
the links displayed when we conduct a search have huge 
implications for millions of other businesses. Because 
consumers typically don’t look past the first few pages 
of search results, having your business appear at the top 
of a search results page can make a big difference in 
how much traffic your website gets. In this chapter, you 
will read about how search engines work and how they 
determine page rankings. You will also read about the 
strategies companies use to increase their presence on 
search results pages including search engine optimization 
(SEO) and pay-per-click (PPC) advertising.
Semantic technologies are increasingly being used by 
search engines to understand webpage content. In this 
chapter you will read about the ways that search engines 
are using semantic technology to improve performance, 
increasing relevant pages and decreasing the number of 
irrelevant pages that appear in search results.
Finally, you will read about recommendation engines. 
These tools attempt to anticipate online information you 
might be interested in. Netflix uses recommendation 
engines to suggest movies you might like to watch and 
news organizations use them to recommend stories you 
might want to read on their websites. Amazon credits its 
recommendation technology for increasing sales by sug-
gesting products that customers might want to buy.
Business managers need to understand search and 
recommendation technologies because their influence 
in directing potential consumers to business websites is 
already significant and expected to grow substantially in 
the future.
Search Engine Results Page 
(SERP): the list of links and 
other descriptive information 
about webpages returned by 
a search engine in response 
to a search query.
Keywords: in the context of 
web search or SEO, words 
or phrases that describe 
the content on a webpage. 
Search engines use keywords 
to match webpages with user 
search queries.
CASE 6.1 OPENING CASE
Nike Golf Drives Web Traffic with Search Engine Optimization
According to some estimates, 50 to 75 percent of Web traffic is generated by search 
engines (Pick, 2012, Safran, 2013, Van Zelst, 2013, Willcocks, 2013). This should not 
come as a surprise to most of us, considering how often we use search engines like 
Google, Bing, or Yahoo to find online information. Because businesses compete for 
our attention, they have a vested interest in maintaining a high degree of visibility 
on search engine results pages, or SERPs.
Traffic from search engines comes from two basic sources: organic search results 
and paid search advertisements. Organic search results are heavily influenced by 
website content and design features (e.g., the technology used to create the site, 
webpage coding, etc.). Paid search traffic is the result of ads that appear on SERPs. 
Companies pay search engines to place these ads on SERPs when certain keywords 
are used in a search query. Search engine users frequently ignore these ads—about 
85 percent of website traffic generated by search engines is the result of organic 
search listings (Downhill & Peggie, 2005).
182
COMPANY OVERVIEW
Nike, Inc., based near Beaverton, OR, is one of the world’s most recognized brand 
names in sports apparel and equipment. Revenues in 2013 increased 8 percent from 
the previous year to $25.3 billion. The company is currently experiencing a period of 
growth, particularly with its “direct to consumer” (DTC) sales strategy involving a 
combination of online sales and company stores (Figure 6.1). DTC sales at the com-
pany grew 24 percent to $4.3 billion compared to the previous year. This was fueled, 
in part, by increasing the number of company stores from 557 to 645 worldwide over 
the past year (Nikeinc.com, 2013).
Nike is frequently associated with what it calls a “big athlete, big ad, big prod-
uct” marketing strategy (Nikeinc.com, 2014). This involves signing endorsement 
deals with the most widely recognized athletes in the sporting world, creating 

CASE 6.1     Opening Case     183  
signature products, and supporting them with high-powered advertising campaigns 
featuring the company’s famous tagline, “Just do it.” Perhaps the best example 
of this promotional strategy is Nike’s popular campaign for Air Jordans, a line 
of basketball shoes named for Michael Jordan. Other well-known Nike athletes 
include golf pro Tiger Woods, Russian tennis star Maria Sharapova, Brazilian 
soccer phenomenon Ronaldinho, and professional skateboarder Paul Rodriguez, 
Jr. (Goldman, 2008).
Figure 6.1 Nike is expanding 
its “direct to consumers” 
name-brand stores worldwide 
like this one in Beijing, China. 
(shutterstock.com.)
TABLE 6.1 
Opening Case Overview
Company 
Nike, Inc., nikeinc.com
History 
 Founded in 1964 as Blue Ribbon Sports, the company 
changed its name to Nike in 1971 and sells products 
under a variety of brand names, including Nike Golf, 
Nike Pro, Air Jordan, Nike Vision, Converse, and Nike 
Skateboarding.
Industry 
Athletic apparel, footwear, and equipment
Product lines 
 The global company manufactures, sells, and distributes 
athletic footwear, apparel, and sports equipment to 
retail outlets, colleges and universities, sports clubs, 
professional sports teams, and directly to consumers.
Digital technology 
 Nike is a leader in e-commerce innovation, for instance, 
allowing consumers to design their own individual 
footwear. Nike
 products integrate traditional sports 
equipment with digital technology (e.g., mobile apps, 
wristbands, watches, and software) that allow athletes 
to monitor and track their performance.
Business challenges 
•  Placing greater emphasis on digital marketing 
strategies, including search engine marketing.
 
•  Growing its direct to consumer (DTC) sales 
channels.
 
•  Expanding the Nike Digital Sports division.
Taglines 
“Just do it.”
© testing/Shutterstock.com 

184  Chapter 6     Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation Technology
More recently, Nike has shifted its marketing and promotion strategy, placing 
greater emphasis on digital or online channels, attempting to engage consumers in 
ways not possible via traditional mass media. See Figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2 Nike, Inc. 
overview.
NIKE’S BUSINESS 
CHALLENGES
In order to continue online sales growth, Nike’s e-commerce sites need to maintain 
high levels of visibility on major search engines. This means that when consum-
ers conduct searches for things like “golf shoes,” “sports equipment,” or “athletic 
gear,” Nike would like to appear at the top of SERP listings. Unfortunately, the 
Nike website does not appear in the search results of many queries for which you 
would expect it to.
BUSINESS AND IT 
STRATEGIES
Despite its well-known brand name and established position as a market leader in 
sports apparel, footwear, and athletic equipment, Nike has not historically done 
well in search engine rankings. The company hired SwellPath, a digital marketing 
agency based in Portland, OR, to help it increase the visibility of its golf brand 
on popular search engines for the 2011 golf season. Swellpath set out to improve 
Nike’s organic search rankings and provide an analysis of the company’s improved 
performance in search. The strategy involved identifying changes that needed to be 
made to Nike’s golf site (nikegolf.com) and researching keywords that prospective 
customers were most likely to use when searching for the type of products that Nike 
sells. Changing the design and content of a website to improve its ranking in SERPs 
is called search engine optimization (SEO).
SwellPath discovered that Nike had built its website using Java technology, 
which created attractive and visually compelling webpages, but was practically invis-
ible to the tools (called spiders) that search engines use to crawl webpage content 
looking for keywords that serve as clues to what the website is about. This was a big 
problem since search engines rely on matching words in search queries with words 
in the website content to determine if a page is relevant.
SwellPath also analyzed the keywords that people were likely to use when 
searching for the kind of products Nike sells. It is not practical or effective to 
optimize for all possible keywords, so SwellPath set out to identify the words that 
not only produced traffic to Nike’s site, but also attracted customers most likely to 
Search Engine Optimization 
(SEO): a collection of 
strategies and techniques 
designed to increase the 
number of visitors to a web-
site as a result of the web-
site’s rank on search engine 
results pages.
Manufacturing: 998,888
workers, 744 factories in 43
countries.
Nike.com online sales to 24 
countries worldwide.
Retail stores in approximately
 190 countries.
Global Reach
Innovation
Intensly loyal employees
Corporate Culture
Just do it.
“If you have a body, you’re an
athlete”
Swoosh Logo
Brand
Search Engine Optimization
Social Media Marketing
Digital Athletic Gear
Digital Technology
Nike, Inc.

CASE 6.1     Opening Case     185  
“convert” (purchase products). For instance, the company examined the words “golf 
apparel,” “golf clothing,” “golf clothes,” and “golf sportswear.” Research showed 
that people in the U.S. searched on the words “golf apparel” more frequently, and 
customers who visited the site when searching those words stayed on the Nike site 
longer, visited more pages, and were more likely to purchase an item.
SEO SOLUTION
Completely redesigning Nike’s Java-based website was not a viable option because 
of the cost involved. SwellPath recommended an alternative solution—creating a 
parallel site using HTML, a more basic Web programming language that could be 
read by search engine spiders. Visitors to the site still saw the original Java-based 
site with the attractive pages, but search engines could easily read the content on 
the parallel site. In addition, it turned out that the HTML site displayed better on 
mobile devices, an added benefit.
Once the site’s technology problem was solved, SwellPath optimized the con-
tent for “golf apparel” along with other terms and phrases it had identified in its 
keyword research.
PERFORMANCE 
RESULTS
Between the 2010 and 2011 golf seasons, Web traffic from organic search increased 
169 percent, an impressive gain. However, SwellPath discovered that most of this 
traffic derived from consumers who included the word “Nike” in their search que-
ries. These are referred to as branded search queries. To really judge the impact of 
SEO, SwellPath evaluated changes in Web traffic from nonbranded searches (such 
as “golf shoes” vs. “Nike golf shoes”). It discovered that traffic from nonbranded 
organic searches actually slipped 17 percent. As a result, the SwellPath team redou-
bled its efforts by continued research on keywords and adding site content around 
terms and phrases likely to attract customers. The effort paid off. When its plan 
was fully implemented, nonbranded traffic to the Nike site increased 250 percent 
between the 2011 and 2012 golf seasons.
More recently, the SwellPath team helped Nike Vision, the company’s unit that sells 
sunglasses and athletic eyewear. Prior to the 2012 Olympic Games in London, Nike 
signed professional beach volleyball star Misty May-Treanor (see Figure 6.3). Knowing 
that people would be using search engines to look up information on star athletes dur-
ing the Olympics, SwellPath optimized the Nike Vision website with blog content about 
Misty May-Treanor and her Nike-branded sunglasses. As a result, during the six-day 
period that Misty May-Treanor competed in the London Olympics, organic traffic from 
search engines to Nikevision.com increased 169 percent. If Nike had failed to update 
its site with optimized blog posts and other content about Misty May-Treanor prior to 
Figure 6.3 Misty May-
Treanor’s success at the 
London Olympics helped 
drive traffi c to the Nike Vision 
website as a result of careful 
planning by the company’s 
SEO team. 
DANIEL GARCIA/AFP/Getty Images

186  Chapter 6     Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation Technology
the Olympics, it would have missed out on an opportunity to capture the attention of 
thousands of prospective customers (Arnesen, 2012). This example illustrates how SEO 
is a constantly evolving strategy, requiring companies to anticipate the interests, search 
behavior, and needs of the marketplace and to regularly create optimized content that 
will rank high in organic SERPs.
As Nike expands its product line into digital products (Figure 6.4) that allow 
athletes to monitor and track their performance, the Nike Digital Sports division 
will need to optimize its webpages with content that will rank high in search results. 
What type of content and keywords do you think will help people discover these 
new digital products on search engines?
Figure 6.4 Olympic athlete 
Shawn Johnson (L) and 
Nike Vice President of 
Digital Sport Stefan Olander 
discussing Nike’s new digital 
wristband product at a 2013 
NikeFuel Forum in New York 
City. 
Sources: Compiled from Safran (2013), Van Zelst (2013), Pick (2012), Willcocks (2013), Nikeinc.com 
(2013, 2014), Goldman (2008), Arnesen (2012), SwellPath.com (2012), Downhill & Peggie (2005).
Discussion Questions
1. Why is it important that companies strive to have high rankings on 
search engine results pages?
2. What is meant by the term “organic search results”?
3. What two basic strategies did SwellPath use to optimize the Nike Golf 
website?
4. How did Nike take advantage of Olympic star Misty May-Treanor’s 
popularity to increase its search-related Web traffi c?
5. Why do organic search results produce more website traffi c than PPC or 
paid search advertisements?
Search engines like Google, Bing, Yahoo, and others have traditionally been 
regarded as a consumer technology. But search technology has become an impor-
tant business tool with many different uses and applications. In this section, you will 
read about how search engines work. You will learn about the role search engines 
play in generating revenue and consumer awareness for organizations. You will also 
discover how businesses use enterprise search technology to unlock hidden content 
with their organizations. Finally, you will read about how search and Internet tech-
nology is evolving to provide more accurate and useful results.
6.1  Using Search Technology for Business Success
Mike Lawrie/Getty Images

6.1     Using Search Technology for Business Success     187  
HOW SEARCH ENGINES 
WORK
People use the word search engine to refer to many different kinds of information 
retrieval (IR) services that find content on the World Wide Web. However, these 
services vary in significant ways. Understanding the nature of these differences is 
important if you want to get the best results from your search. Listed below is a brief 
description of different IR services for finding Web content:
• Crawler search engines rely on sophisticated computer programs called 
“spiders,” “crawlers,” or “bots” that surf the Internet, locating webpages, 
links, and other content that are then stored in the search engine’s page 
repository. The most popular commercial search engines, Google and Bing, 
are based on crawler technology.
• Web directories are categorized listings of webpages created and maintained 
by humans. Because websites are only included after being reviewed by a 
person, it is less likely that search results will contain irrelevant websites. 
Examples of popular directories include Open Directory Project (dmoz.org), 
Best of the Web (botw.org), and Looksmart.com.
• Hybrid search engines combine the results of a directory created by humans 
and results from a crawler search engine, with the goal of providing both 
accuracy and broad coverage of the Internet. Yahoo.com, the third most 
popular commercial search tool, uses a hybrid approach to information 
search.
• Meta-search engines compile results from other search engines. For instance, 
Dogpile.com generates listings by combining results from Google and Yandex, 
two crawler-based search engines, and Yahoo, a hybrid search tool.
• Semantic search engines are designed to locate information based on the nature 
and meaning of Web content, not simple keyword matches. The goal of these 
search engines is to dramatically increase the accuracy and usefulness of search 
results. Semantic search engines are described in more detail in Section 6.4
Search engine: an applica-
tion for locating webpages 
or other content (e.g., docu-
ments, media files) on a 
computer network. Popular 
web-based search engines 
include Google, Bing and 
Yahoo.
WEB DIRECTORIES
Before crawler search engines became the dominant method for finding Web 
content, people relied on directories created by human editors to help them find 
information. Web directories are typically organized by categories (for instance, 
see the homepage of the popular Web directory dmoz.org). Webpage content is 
usually reviewed by directory editors prior to its listing in a category to make sure 
it is appropriate. This reduces the number of irrelevant links generated in a search. 
The review process, however, is very slow compared to the automated process used 
by crawlers (described below). As a result, the listings in a Web directory represent 
a relatively small portion of the Web. Directories are particularly useful when con-
ducting searches on a narrow topic, such as identifying suppliers of a specific type 
of product or service. Companies who need to identify vendors or suppliers may 
consult a niche Web directory created for just this purpose. For example, see the 
Web directory at business.com.
HOW CRAWLER 
SEARCH ENGINES 
WORK
The two most popular commercial search engines on the Web, Google and Bing, 
are based on crawler technology. Behind the relatively simple interfaces of these 
two powerful search engines, a great deal of complex technology is at work 
(Figure 6.5). Because modern search engines use proprietary technology in the 
race to stay ahead of competitors, it is not possible to tell exactly how they decide 
what websites will appear in a search engine results page (SERP). While they 
each produce different results, it is possible to describe the basic process shared 
by most crawler search engines. The following description is based on publications 
by Grehan (2002) and Oak (2008).
Spiders: also known as 
crawlers, web bots or simply 
“bots,” spiders are small 
computer programs 
designed to perform auto-
mated, repetitive tasks over 
the Internet. Used by search 
engines for scanning web-
pages and returning informa-
tion to be stored in a page 
repository.

188  Chapter 6     Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation Technology
1. The crawler control module assigns webpage URLs to programs called spiders 
or bots. The spider downloads these webpages into a page repository and scans 
them for links. The links are transferred to the crawler control module and 
used to determine where the spiders will be sent in the future. (Most search 
engines also allow webmasters to submit URLs, requesting that their websites 
be scanned so they will appear in search results. These requests are added to the 
crawler control queue.)
2. The indexer module creates look-up tables by extracting words from the web-
pages and recording the URL where they were found. The indexer module also 
creates an inverted index that helps search engines effi ciently locate relevant 
pages containing keywords used in a search. (See Figure 6.6 for examples of an 
inverted index.)
3. The collection analysis module creates utility indexes that aid in providing 
search results. The utility indexes contain information about things like how 
many pages are in a website, the geographic location of the website, number of 
pictures on a webpage, webpage length, or other site-specifi c information the 
search engine may use to determine the relevance of a page.
4. The retrieval/ranking module determines the order in which pages are listed in 
a SERP. The methods by which search engines determine page rank vary and 
the specifi c algorithms they use are often carefully guarded trade secrets. In 
some cases, a search engine may use hundreds of different criteria to determine 
which pages appear at the top of a SERP. Google, for instance, claims to use over 
200 “clues” to determine how it ranks pages (Google.com, 2014). According to 
Dover and Dafforn (2011), all these factors can be grouped into two categories: 
relevance and popularity (or “authority”).
5. Webpages retrieved by the spiders, along with the indexes and ranking informa-
tion, are stored on large servers (see IT at Work 6.1).
6. The query interface is where users enter words that describe the kind of infor-
mation they are looking for. The search engine then applies various algorithms 
to match the query string with information stored in the indexes to determine 
what pages to display in the SERP.
Figure 6.5 Components 
of crawler search engine 
(Adapted from Grehan, 
2002).
Page Repository
WWW
Text
Utility
Indexer
Module
Structure
Collection
Analisys Module
Surfer–Client Queries
Spiders/
Crawlers
Crawler Control
Indexes
URL
Submissions
1. URL
2. URL
3. URL
.
Query
Formulation
Results
Ranking
..
Page repository: a data 
structure that stores and 
manages information from a 
large number of webpages, 
providing a fast and efficient 
means for accessing and 
analyzing the information 
at a later time.
Crawler control module: a 
software program that con-
trols a number of “spiders” 
responsible for scanning or 
crawling through information 
on the Web.

6.1     Using Search Technology for Business Success     189  
Each search engine utilizes variations and refinements of the above steps in 
an attempt to achieve superior results. The Web search industry is highly competi-
tive and the proprietary advances in search technology used by each company are 
closely guarded secrets. For instance, even the first step in the process, crawling the 
Web for content, can vary greatly depending on the strategic goals of the search 
engine. Some search engines limit the number of pages scanned at each website, 
seeking instead to use limited computing power and resources to cover as many 
websites as possible. Other search engines, however, program their spiders to scan 
deep into each website, seeking more complete coverage of the site’s content. Still 
other search engines direct their spiders to seek out websites that contain certain 
types of content, such as government sites, shopping (e-commerce) sites, and so on. 
Another decision that search engines make with regard to spiders is the amount of 
resources directed at searching new websites versus devoting resources to exploring 
previously indexed pages for updates or changes.
One of the many challenges faced by large commercial search engines is stor-
age. In the simplest sense, the crawler approach to search requires a company to 
store a copy of the Web in large data centers. In addition to the petabytes of storage 
required to maintain this copy of the Web, the search engine must also store the 
results of its indexing process and the list of links for future crawls.
Figure 6.6 Search engines use inverted indexes to effi ciently locate Web 
content based on search query terms.
Document ID
1
To the heart, real love
always endures.
www.lovesickpoems.com
www.enduringlove.com
www.lovecrazy.com
Though passion may
cool, love remains true.
True love kindles the
passion in my heart.
2
3
Content
URL
Search Query:
Page Index
Inverted Index
ID
Term
Document: Position
1
1:3, 3:7
1:4
1:5, 2:5, 3:2
1:6
1:7
2:7, 3:2
2:1
2:2, 3:5
2:3
2:4
2:6
3:3
3:8
heart
real
love
always
endures
true
though
passion
may
cool
remains
kindles
heart
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
True love
Results Ranking (based on position)
True love kindles the passion in my heart.
www.enduringlove.com
Though passion may cool, love remains true.
www.lovecrazy.com
Documents with
both terms: 2 and 3
Petabyte: a unit of measure-
ment for digital data storage. 
A petabyte is equal to one 
million gigabytes.

190  Chapter 6     Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation Technology
Not only does Google maintain a copy of the Internet for its 
search engine services, it is also constantly updating a map of 
the entire planet for users of its popular Google Earth appli-
cation. In addition, the company is making a full-text, search-
able copy of all 129,864,880 known books, equal to 4 billion 
pages or 2 trillion words. And then there are applications 
like Gmail, serving roughly 425 million people and YouTube, 
where 100 hours of video are uploaded every minute! Add 
all this up, and Google is facing perhaps the biggest data 
storage challenge ever. So where does Google store all of 
these data?
Challenges: Energy, Performance, and Security
Information collected by Google is housed on over 1 million 
servers spread across 12 different facilities worldwide. The 
facilities are large, factorylike installations containing row 
upon row of racked and stacked servers. Cooling systems, 
required to keep servers from overheating, are a significant 
component of any large data center (Figure 6.7). Google 
pioneered the software systems that connect the company’s 
servers and make it possible for various applications to access 
data stored on the machines. Unlike other companies that 
purchase servers from outside suppliers, Google builds its 
own. Based on its experience creating the hardware, soft-
ware, and facilities necessary to power the company on a 
global scale, Google is recognized as a leader in data center 
operations.
The company’s data centers, including the servers, are 
built with energy efficiency, reliability, and performance in 
mind. As Google is a leading provider of Internet services, 
its data infrastructure must keep up with growing consumer 
demand for speedy performance and reliability. A typical 
Google search delivers millions of pages of results in less 
than half a second. Consumer expectations for perfor-
mance have grown so high that waiting more than a few 
seconds for an e-mail to load or a search to run can cause 
frustration.
More recently, Google has had to contend with revela-
tions that the U.S. National Security Agency (NSA) breached 
its server network security. This follows cyberattacks in 2010 
and 2011 by hackers suspected of being associated with 
the Chinese government. Protecting company data from 
criminals is a significant challenge in itself, but Google is 
understandably frustrated by the fact that it must now fight 
off attacks from two world superpowers, one of which is its 
own government.
Environmental Impact
Industrywide, data centers used 38,000 megawatts of elec-
tricity in 2012, representing a tremendous increase of over 
63 percent from the previous year. Industrywide, data cen-
ter energy use and the related environmental impact have 
become an issue of growing concern. Google is widely 
recognized as operating some of the most efficient data 
centers in the world, but many critics are disturbed by the 
industry’s overall level of energy consumption. According 
to some estimates, data centers account for about 2 per-
cent of the world’s energy use and the fast rate of growth 
is cause for concern (see Figure 6.8). Google has taken an 
active approach to reducing its environmental footprint by 
increasing the company’s use of renewable energy sources 
and continuously developing new ways to become more 
energy-efficient. (For further information, see google.com/
about/datacenters.)
Google Data Center Statistics
• 
Number of servers worldwide: Over 1 million
• 
Number of data centers: 6 to 12 in North America, 1 in 
South America, 2 in Asia, and 3 in Europe
• 
2013 capital investment in data centers: $7.35 billion
IT at Work 6 .1
Google Data Centers
Figure 6.7 Pipes pass through the chiller plant at the 
Google, Inc. data center in Changhua, Taiwan. Google 
doubled its spending plan for its new data center in 
Taiwan to $600 million amid surging demand from 
Asia for its Gmail and YouTube services. 
Bloomberg/Getty Images

6.1     Using Search Technology for Business Success     191  
Figure 6.8 New, large-scale data centers being 
constructed for companies like Google, Microsoft, and 
Facebook house thousands of servers and are creating 
concern among environmentalists over increases in 
energy consumption.
• 
Average energy efficiency: PUE* 
 1.12
• 
Energy use: Continual use of about 260 megawatts of 
electricity, approximately 0.01 percent of global energy 
consumption
• 
Energy use comparisons: Owns about 3 percent of serv-
ers worldwide, but only uses about 1 percent of data 
center industry energy
• 
Renewable energy: Claims that approximately 35 per-
cent of its energy use comes from renewable sources
*PUE stands for Power Usage Effectiveness. A PUE of 2.0 means that 
for every watt of power devoted to computing, an additional watt is 
spent on cooling, power distribution, and overhead. The Data Center 
Industry average PUE falls between 1.8 and 1.89.
Sources: Anthony (2013), Miller (2013), Glanz (2011, 2012), Venkatraman 
(2012), Schneider (2011), Gallagher (2012), Grifantini (2011), Newman 
(2011), Jacobson (2010).
• 
Estimated investment in data centers since 2006: 
$21 billion
• 
Data processing volume: Over 20 petabytes a day
© asharkyu/Shutterstock
WHY SEARCH IS 
IMPORTANT FOR 
BUSINESS
Search engines have become a part of our everyday life. They are free, easy to 
use, and become more powerful and effective every day. Most of us take them for 
granted and are generally unaware of the complex technologies that power these 
tools. For the average Web user, it may not be vitally important to understand how 
search technology is evolving. But for business managers, understanding the poten-
tial power of search technology is crucial and becoming more important every day. 
It has long been recognized that access to information is a competitive advantage. 
Search technology impacts business in each of the following ways:
• Enterprise search—finding information within your organization
• Recommendation engines—presenting information to users without requir-
ing them to conduct an active search
• Search engine marketing (SEM)—getting found by consumers on the Web
• Web search—finding crucial business information online
Each of these important search technology applications is described below.
Enterprise Search
Enterprise search tools are used by employees to search for and retrieve information 
related to their work in a manner that complies with the organization’s information-shar-
ing and access control policies. Information can come from a variety of sources, including 
publicly available information, enterprise information found in databases and intranets, 
as well as information on individual employee computers (Delgado, Laplanche, & 
Krishnamurthy, 2005, Smartlogic.com, 2012). An organization’s ability to share knowl-
edge among employees is vital to its ability to compete (Bock, Zmud, Kim, & Lee, 2007; 
Brown & Duguid, 2000; Small & Sage, 2006, Hatala & Lutta, 2009). Enterprise search 
tools allow companies to leverage the value of internal information by unlocking content 
that would otherwise remain hidden or “siloed” because of:
• Technology silos—incompatible software or systems (Thomas, 2013)
• Departments operating as individual business units with different priorities 
and goals (Smith, 2012)

192  Chapter 6     Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation Technology
• Concerns about the cost of integrating information (Walker, 2014)
• Organizational structure and culture (Simon, 1998, Hattal & Lutta, 2009)
• Security concerns (Hattal & Lutta, 2009)
• Concerns about diverting or overloading employees’ work-related attention 
(Hattal & Lutta, 2009)
In most organizations today, a large portion of employees are “knowledge 
workers” (e.g., business analysts, marketing managers, purchasing agents, IT 
managers, etc.). Almost half of their time is spent on unproductive work—gathering 
information, unsuccessful searches, converting data to different formats, or recre-
ating information (Google.com, 2008, Feldman & Sherman, 2001).
Enterprise search tools allow businesses, companies, and organizations to 
extract information from databases, intranets, content management systems, files, 
contracts, policy manuals, and documents to make timely decisions, adding value to 
the company and enhancing its competitive advantage.
Structured vs. unstructured data One of the challenges encountered by 
developers of enterprise search tools is that information is not always in the same 
format. Data exist in two formats: structured or unstructured. Structured data can 
be defined as “information with a high degree of organization, such that inclusion in 
a relational database is seamless and readily searchable by simple, straightforward 
search engine algorithms or other search operations” (Brightplanet.com, 2012). 
Unstructured data, sometimes called messy data, refers to information that is not 
organized in a systematic or predefined way. Unstructured data files are also more 
likely to contain inaccuracies or errors. Examples of unstructured data include 
e-mails, articles, books, and documents. It is estimated that unstructured data 
accounts for about 80 percent of all the data present on computers today (Kahn, 
2012). Originally, enterprise search tools worked only with structured data. Many 
newer systems claim to work with unstructured information as well, although there 
is great variability in terms of how well they actually do this.
Security issues in enterprise search Unlike a Web search, enterprise search 
tools must balance the goal of making information widely available throughout the 
organization with the need to restrict access based on an employee’s job function 
or security clearance. Limiting access to certain documents or data is referred to as 
access control. Enterprise search tools introduce the potential for a number of secu-
rity breaches or access of unauthorized information. Most of these can be addressed 
as long as the organization’s IT workers install and maintain the search system’s secu-
rity features, including security integrations with other enterprise programs. An audit 
of requests logs should be conducted regularly to look for patterns or inconsistencies.
Enterprise search vendors Market analysts Frost and Sullivan (Prnewswire.com, 
2013) estimate that the global market for enterprise search tools was over $1.47 bil-
lion in 2012; it is predicted that the market will grow to $4.68 billion by 2019. Clearly, 
organizations around the world recognize the value of this technology. Several differ-
ent companies make and sell enterprise search systems, Autonomy, Google, Coveo 
and Perceptive Software being the top contenders (Andrews and Koehler-Kruener, 
2014). Vendors can be broken down into the following three categories:
• Specialized search vendors (for instance, Attivio, Endeca, Vivisimo): 
Software designed to target specific user information needs
• Integrated search vendors (for instance, Autonomy, IBM, Microsoft): Software 
designed to combine search capabilities with information management tools
• Detached search vendors (for instance, Google, ISYS): Software designed to 
target flexibility and ease of use
With so many options available for enterprise search, it is important that orga-
nizations conduct a careful needs analysis prior to acquisition (Martin, 2012).

6.1     Using Search Technology for Business Success     193  
Recommendation Engines
Recommendation engines represent an interesting twist on IR technology. Unlike Web 
search engines that begin with a user query for information, recommendation engines 
attempt to anticipate information that a user might be interested in. Recommendation 
engines are used by e-commerce sites to recommend products, news organizations to 
recommend news articles and videos, Web advertisers to anticipate the ads people 
might respond to, and so on. They represent a huge potential for businesses and devel-
opers. While the use of recommendation engines is widespread, there is still a lot of 
work to be done to improve the accuracy of these fascinating applications. You can read 
more about recommendation engines in Section 6.5.
Search Engine Marketing
Most traditional advertising methods target customers who are not actively engaged 
in shopping for a product. Instead, they are watching television, listening to the 
radio, reading a magazine, or driving down the road, paying little attention to the 
billboards they pass. To most people, advertising represents an unwelcome interrup-
tion. On the other hand, people using search engines are actively looking for infor-
mation. As a result, they are much more likely to be interested in product and service 
information found in SERPs as long as it is related to the topic they are searching for. 
Efforts to reach this targeted audience are much more likely to produce sales. That’s 
why search engine marketing (SEM) has become an important business strategy. 
Industry experts report that people generally engage in three basic types of searches:
1. Informational search—using search engines to conduct research on a topic. This 
is the most common type of search.
2. Navigational search—using a search engine to locate particular websites or web-
pages.
3. Transactional search—using a search engine to determine where to purchase a 
product or service.
You might think businesses would be primarily interested in transactional 
searches, but all three types are important and play a key role in the buying pro-
cess. Say you are interested in purchasing a new tablet computer. Your first step is 
likely to engage in an informational search, attempting to learn about the product 
category of mobile tablet devices. Businesses should offer content on their websites 
and social media sites for consumers seeking general product information. An infor-
mational search also represents an opportunity to influence consumers early in the 
purchasing process.
After researching a product category, you might try finding websites of particu-
lar companies to learn more about individual tablet computer brands (navigational 
search). Companies need to design their websites so that they can be found easily 
by search engines.
Finally, you might try to determine where to buy your tablet computer by 
searching on terms like “lowest price,” “free shipping,” and so on. This is an exam-
ple of a transactional search.
Search engine marketing (SEM) (Figure 6.9) consists of designing and adver-
tising a webpage, with the goal of increasing its visibility when consumers conduct 
the three types of searches just described. SEM strategies and tactics produce two 
different, but complementary outcomes:
1. Organic search listings are the result of content and website design features in-
tended to improve a site’s ranking on SERPs that result from specifi c keyword que-
ries. No payments are made to the search engine service for organic search listings.
2. Paid search listings are a form of advertising and are purchased from search en-
gine companies. The placement and effectiveness of paid search ads on SERPs 
Search Engine Marketing 
(SEM): a collection of online 
marketing strategies and 
tactics that promote brands 
by increasing their visibility in 
SERPs through optimization 
and advertising.

194  Chapter 6     Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation Technology
are a function of several factors in addition to the fees paid by advertisers. You 
will read more about these factors in Section 6.3 below.
Businesses utilize search engine optimization (SEO) to improve their website’s 
organic listings on SERPs. SEO specialists understand how search engines work 
and guide companies in designing websites and creating content that will produce 
higher organic SERP rankings than competitive websites.
Paid search listings are often referred to as pay-per-click (PPC) advertising. 
This is because advertisers pay search engines based on how many people click 
on the ads. Typically, PPC ads are listed separately from organic search results. 
Managing an effective PPC ad campaign involves making strategic decisions about 
what keyword search queries you want to trigger the display of your ad. You will 
read more about PPC or paid search advertising in Section 6.3.
Social media optimization refers to strategies designed to enhance a company’s 
standing on various social media sites. Increasingly, search engines evaluate a com-
pany’s presence on social media to determine its reputation, which in turn influ-
ences how the company is ranked in SERPs. You will read more about social media 
strategies in Chapter 7.
Growth of search engine marketing As companies begin to realize the power 
of search engine marketing, more money is being spent on this highly effective 
strategy. Forrester Research estimates that search marketing is the largest segment 
of the digital marketing category, and will account for over $33 million by 2016, 
representing an increase of 77.6 percent since 2011 (VanBoskirk, 2011).
Unlike many traditional advertising methods, return on investment (ROI) can 
be calculated for search engine marketing by tracking click-through rates (CTRs), 
changes in site traffic, and purchasing behavior.
Mobile Search (and Mobile Search SEO)
Mobile devices have become ubiquitous (Figure 6.10). With the emergence of 
smartphones and tablets like the Apple iPad, mobile devices account for over a 
quarter of all website traffic (Sterling, 2013). Mobile Web traffic is expected to tri-
ple by 2017 due to an annual growth rate of approximately 61 percent (Cisco, 2014).
With the dramatic increase in smartphones, tablets, and other mobile devices, 
companies need to make sure their websites and content can be found via search 
engines on mobile devices. This means optimizing mobile websites differently from 
a desktop site. The two essential issues that need to be addressed are:
1. Properly confi guring the technical aspects of the mobile site so that it can be 
crawled and indexed by search engines.
Figure 6.9 Search engine marketing integrates three different strategies: search 
engine optimization, pay-per-click advertising, and social media optimization. 
© arka38/Shutterstock
Click-through rate: the per-
centage of people who click 
on a hyperlinked area of a 
SERP or webpage.

6.1     Using Search Technology for Business Success     195  
2. Providing content that is useful to people using mobile devices. Webmasters 
should consider how people use their mobile devices and adjust content accord-
ingly (see Table 6.2).
When designing a mobile site for e-commerce, Web developers should make 
sure that information about store location, product reviews, and promotional offers is 
easily available and optimized so that it is likely to appear in a mobile SERP. Mobile 
shoppers also use barcode scanning apps as a kind of mobile search engine for locat-
ing product reviews and price comparisons while shopping in stores. This practice, 
called showrooming, is becoming increasingly popular with consumers and creating a 
great deal of frustration and worry on the part of brick-and-mortar retailers.
Web Search for Business
Commercial search engines and Web directories are useful tools for knowledge 
workers in business. To use search engines effectively, workers should familiar-
ize themselves with all the features available on the search engine they use. Since 
Google is the most popular search engine, we highlight some of those features 
below. Many of these features are also available on Bing.com.
• Focused search: You can focus your search to information in different 
formats—webpages, videos, images, maps, and the like—by selecting the 
appropriate navigation button on the SERP page.
• Filetype: If you are looking specifically for information contained in a 
certain file format, you can use the “filetype:[file extension]” command 
following your keyword query. For instance, the search “private colleges 
filetype:xls” will produce links to MSExcel files with information related to 
private colleges. Use this command to find Adobe files (pdf), MSWord files 
(doc), PowerPoint files (ppt), and so on.
• Advanced search: To narrow your search, go to the Advanced Search panel. 
From this page, you can set a wide range of parameters for your search, 
including limiting the search to certain domains (e.g., .gov, .org, .edu), lan-
guages, dates, and even reading level. You can also use this to narrow your 
search to a particular website.
• Search tools button: Allows you to narrow your results to listings from spe-
cific locations or time frames.
• Search history: Have you ever found a page using a search engine, but later 
had trouble finding it again? If you are logged into your Google account 
while using the search engine, it’s possible to review your search history. It 
will show you not only your search queries, but also the pages you visited 
following each query.
Figure 6.10 Mobile phone 
users watch One Direction 
perform on Good Morning 
America in New York City’s 
Central Park on November 6, 
2013.
© JStone/Shutterstock.com

196  Chapter 6     Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation Technology
TABLE 6.2 
How In-Store Shoppers are Use Mobile Devices
Shopping Behavior 
Percentage
Use a mobile device to assist with shopping at least  
62%
once a month
Use a mobile device to assist with shopping at least  
17%
weekly
Use their smartphones for more than 15 minutes while in  
50%
a store
Use a search engine to browse product information  
82%
while shopping in a store (Search engines dominate 
store websites, brand websites, store apps, and brand 
apps as a starting point.)
Use their smartphone for preshopping activities such  
90%
as fi nding store locations, fi nding product reviews, 
making price comparisons, fi nding promotional offers, 
and so on
Top mobile shopping categories include: 
  Appliances 
97%
  Groceries 
89%
  Baby care 
87%
  Electronics 
87%
  Household care 
86%
Across all product categories, mobile shoppers report  
33%
using their smartphones instead of asking for information 
from store employees
Use smartphones instead of asking for information from  
55%
store employees when shopping for appliances
Use smartphones instead of asking for information from  
48%
store employees when shopping for electronics
In-store price comparisons are the most common shopping
activity across product categories
  Appliances  
74%
  Electronics  
70%
  Baby care 
62%
  Household care  
58%
Mobile shoppers prefer to view mobile websites vs.  
65% vs. 35%
mobile apps
Source: ThinkWithGoogle.com (2013).

6.1     Using Search Technology for Business Success     197  
These are just a few of the many features you can use to conduct a power 
search. While you are in college, take the time to become proficient with using dif-
ferent search engine features. Not only will it help with your immediate research 
needs, it will help you in your career as well. At the end of this chapter, we include 
information for a free online Power Search course offered by Google. This is a good 
way to enhance your ability to find the information you need.
Finding intellectual property Your business may have an interest in protecting 
certain kinds of intellectual property being used without permission on the Web. This 
might include confidential reports, images, copyrighted blog posts, creative writing 
(e.g., poetry, novels, etc.), and so on. You can use search engines to find where some-
one may have posted your intellectual property on the Web without permission (see 
Osher, 2014). You can search for text-based work by simply using queries containing 
strings of text from the material you’re looking for. Images can be found by using 
Google’s reverse image search engine (images.google.com). Tin Eye is an alternative 
reverse image search engine with a number of interesting features (tineye.com).
Real time search Sometimes you need information about things as they happen. 
For instance, you may be interested in monitoring news stories written about your 
company or you might need to know what people are saying about your brand or a 
political candidate on Twitter. For these situations, you’ll need a real time search tool.
Say your company wants to explore accepting Bitcoin payments. (Bitcoin is a 
digital currency that was launched in 2009.) After engaging in a traditional Web 
search to learn about the currency, you decide you want to learn about public inter-
est in the currency and find news stories about it that have recently been published. 
You might consider using the following tools:
• Google Trends—Trends (google.com/trends) will help you identify current 
and historical interest in the topic by reporting the volume of search activity 
over time. Google Trends allows you to view the information for different 
time periods and geographic regions.
• Google Alerts—Alerts (google.com/alerts) is an automated search tool for 
monitoring new Web content, news stories, videos, and blog posts about 
some topic. Users set up alerts by specifying a search term (e.g., a company 
name, product, or topic), how often they want to receive notices, and an 
e-mail address where the alerts are to be sent. When Google finds content 
that match the parameters of the search, users are notified via e-mail. Bing 
has a similar feature called News Alerts.
• Twitter Search—You can leverage the crowd of over 650 million Twitter 
users to find information as well as gauge sentiment on a wide range of topics 
and issues in real time. Twitter’s search tool (twitter.com/search-home) looks 
similar to other search engines, and includes an advanced search mode.
Social bookmarking search Social bookmarking sites (described in Chapter 7) 
provide a way for users to save links they want to access at a later time. When saving 
page links, users tag them with keywords that describe the page’s content. In effect, 
the bookmarked links form a graph of content on the Web that can be used by oth-
ers. The two largest social bookmarking services are delicious.com and diigo.com. 
Because the webpages are tagged by humans, search results are often different from 
and more relevant than what you get from commercial search engines.
Specialty search engines: vertical search As described previously, large 
commercial search engines use indicators of popularity or reputation to determine 
website quality. This seems to work well for a generalized Web search, but it might 
not be effective when users search on very specific topics such as rare disease, 
which by definition, does not generate a lot of activity on the Web. Crawlers also 
do not often index pages in the lower levels of less popular websites. Vertical search 

198  Chapter 6     Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation Technology
engines are programmed to focus on webpages related to a particular topic and to 
drill down by crawling pages that other search engines are likely to ignore. Vertical 
search engines exist for a variety of industries. Ironically, the best way to find a 
vertical search engine for a particular industry or topic is to search for it on a com-
mercial search engine like Google or Bing.
Questions
1. What is the primary difference between a Web directory and a crawler-
based search engine?
2. What is the purpose of an index in a search engine?
3. Why are companies increasingly interested in enterprise search tools 
capable of handling unstructured data?
4. What is the difference between search engine optimization and PPC 
advertising?
5. Describe three different real time search tools.
The goal of SEO practitioners is to help organizations increase traffic to their web-
sites. They accomplish this by optimizing websites in an effort to increase visibility 
and ranking on SERPs. Using Web analytics programs like Google Analytics, com-
panies can determine how many people visit their site, what specific pages they visit, 
how long they spend on the site, and what search engines are producing the most traf-
fic (see Figure 6.11). More sophisticated SEO practitioners will also analyze keyword 
conversion rates, or the likelihood that using a particular keyword to optimize a page 
will result in conversions (i.e., when a website visitor converts to a buyer).These are 
just a few of the many metrics used to measure the effectiveness of SEO strategies.
6.2  Organic Search and Search Engine Optimization
Figure 6.11 Tools like 
Google Analytics are used 
to monitor changes in 
website traffi c as a result of 
search engine optimization 
practices.
STRATEGIES FOR 
SEARCH ENGINE 
OPTIMIZATION
As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, all search engines use somewhat dif-
ferent proprietary methods for determining where a website will appear in search 
results. As a result, it is not possible to tell what specific factors will be used and 
how much weight they will carry in determining SERP ranking. However, in the 
section below, we describe three categories of ranking factors (see Brown, 2013) 
and attempt to illustrate each with a few examples.
© franckreporter/iStockphoto

6.2     Organic Search and Search Engine Optimization     199  
Ranking Factors
Ranking factors can be grouped into at least three different categories: reputation 
or popularity, relevance, and user satisfaction.
Reputation or Popularity: In simple terms, search engines attempt to provide links 
to good websites—sites that contain high-quality content. But how do they deter-
mine this? It is not possible for the search engine to directly evaluate the quality 
of a website’s content. That would require the system to understand the site’s 
content and have expertise in all possible subject matters. Instead, search engines 
use indirect measures of quality. One way of assessing the quality of a website is 
to use measures of popularity. This is based on the assumption that websites with 
good content will be more popular than sites with poor-quality content. Google’s 
PageRank algorithm is perhaps one of the most well-known attempts to use popu-
larity to determine website quality. It is based on the assumption that people are 
more likely to link to high-quality websites than poor-quality sites. Therefore, the 
algorithm counts backlinks—external links that point back to a site. The effective-
ness of the PageRank strategy is what initially set Google apart from competing 
search engines and led to its dominance in the marketplace. SEO practitioners and 
writers in the field have placed great emphasis on the importance of backlinks over 
the years. A number of creative strategies have been developed for encouraging 
others to link to a website (see Zrekat, 2013, Solihin, 2013, Gaiker, 2012, Ward & 
French, 2013).
Recent changes in Google’s ranking methods have led others to speculate that 
backlinks, while still very important, are not weighted as heavily as they used to be 
(see Schachinger, 2012). Table 6.3 lists a number of other factors that SEO special-
ists believe are used by search engines to gauge reputation.
TABLE 6.3 
Popularity Factors Used by Search Engines
Social media indicators: Webpages being discussed in social media are more likely to be popular. Examples 
include comments on Facebook and Google
, shares, Tweets, Likes, and so on.
Site traffi c: The more traffi c a site gets, the more likely it is to contain quality content.
Listings in quality Web directories: Sites that have been accepted for listing in quality Web directories are more 
likely to contain quality content because they have been reviewed by human editors.
Reputation on review sites: Sites with high ratings on review sites (such as Yelp.com, Zagat.com, and Epinions.com) 
are more likely to have quality content.
PageRank of sites containing backlinks: Backlinks from sites with high PageRank scores themselves are thought 
to be more valuable.
SERP click-through rate (CTR): Google and other search engines monitor how often searchers click through on 
a SERP listing. People tend to click listings that appear to contain quality content.
Onpage factors: Metadata (e.g., page titles, page descriptions) and descriptive URLs infl uence how a listing 
appears on a SERP. This, in turn, can affect the CTR.
Dwell time and bounce rate: Dwell time is the amount of time a user stays on a page before returning to the SERP. 
Longer dwell times suggest users found content that was worth reading. A “bounce” is an extremely short dwell 
time—in other words, a user who clicks on a listing and comes right back is said to “bounce.” Low bounce rates and 
long dwell times correlate with high content quality.

200  Chapter 6     Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation Technology
TABLE 6.4 
Factors That Affect Relevance Scores
Keywords related to the search topic suggest relevant content.
Page titles: Words in the page title that are related to the topic suggest relevant content.
Relevant phrases in text: In addition to keywords, search engines look at the words and phrases on the page to 
determine relevance.
Amount of text on page that appears relevant: The proportion of relevant text to nonrelevant text can infl uence 
relevance.
Backlinks from relevant sites and Web directories: Webpages that are listed in relevant categories of Web directories 
are more likely to be relevant because they were reviewed by human editors.
SERP click-through rate (CTR): Searchers are more likely to click on listings that contain relevant content.
Onpage factor: Metadata (such as page titles, page descriptions) and descriptive URLs should refl ect the page 
content. People use the information in search listings to determine if a link contains relevant information. This 
affects CTR.
Dwell time and bounce rate are impacted by how relevant a website’s content is. Long dwell times and short 
bounce rates suggest relevant content related to the search.
Inbound marketing: an 
approach to marketing that 
emphasizes SEO, content 
marketing and social media 
strategies to attract custom-
ers. Often viewed as an alter-
native to traditional marketing 
strategies based on advertis-
ing and personal selling.
CONTENT AND 
INBOUND MARKETING
The ultimate goal of a search engine is to help users find the information or 
content that they are searching for. Sometimes it seems that SEO practitioners 
lose sight of this and spend too much time chasing down hundreds of factors they 
think are being used by search engine ranking algorithms. At worst, SEO can 
represent an attempt to “game the system” or trick search engines into ranking a 
site higher than its content deserves (see the discussion of black hat SEO in the 
next section).
Perhaps the most important action an organization can take to improve its 
website’s ranking and satisfy website visitors is provide helpful content that is 
current and updated regularly. When SEO practices are combined with valuable 
content, websites become easier to find in search engines but, more importantly, 
contribute to building brand awareness, positive attitudes toward the brand, and 
brand loyalty.
Inbound marketing represents an alternative approach to traditional outbound 
marketing strategies (e.g., mass media advertising) that have been used by compa-
nies historically (see Figure 6.12).
Relevance: In addition to popularity, search engines attempt to determine if the 
content on a webpage is relevant to what the searcher is looking for. As with qual-
ity, the search engine cannot determine relevance directly, so algorithms have 
been developed to look for clues that suggest a site might be relevant. The factors 
listed in Table 6.4 have been identified by SEO specialists as likely clues used by 
search engines to determine relevance scores. Note that some of these are the same 
or similar to factors used to evaluate popularity, but are interpreted to evaluate 
relevance.
User Satisfaction: Like all successful businesses, search engines want their custom-
ers to be satisfied. As a result, SERP ranking is influenced by factors that impact 
user satisfaction. Table 6.5 lists factors that are likely to influence a search engine’s 
user satisfaction rating.

6.2     Organic Search and Search Engine Optimization     201  
Inbound marketers attract customers to their websites with content that is 
informative, useful, or entertaining. Inbound marketing campaigns are based on 
strategies that integrate content generation, SEO, and social media tactics. In 
Chapter 7, you will read more about how inbound marketers integrate content, 
SEO, and social media strategies into powerful marketing campaigns that deliver 
sales and profits to companies that use this new approach to marketing.
TABLE 6.5 
Factors Affecting User Satisfaction
Dwell time: Users who stay on a site longer are probably more satisfi ed.
Site speed: Slow page loading time on websites reduces satisfaction.
Reading level: Reading levels that are too high or too low frustrate users.
Hacked sites, malware, spam reduce user satisfaction signifi cantly.
Website satisfaction surveys: Google created user satisfaction surveys that 
webmasters can embed in their websites. Positive responses to these surveys can 
improve ranking.
Barriers to content: Making people register, provide names, or fi ll out forms to 
get to content has a negative impact on user satisfaction.
Other factors: Too many ads, page-not-found errors, duplicate content/pages, 
content copied from other websites, and spam in comment sections all detract 
from user satisfaction.
BLACK HAT VS. WHITE 
HAT SEO: ETHICAL 
ISSUES IN SEARCH 
ENGINE OPTIMIZATION
Search engines regularly update their algorithms to improve results. Two well-
known Google updates called Panda (released in 2011) and Penguin (released in 
2012) were designed to improve the ranking of websites with quality content and 
downgrade poor-quality sites. Both updates are designed to defeat what are com-
monly referred to as black hat SEO tactics. People who employ black hat SEO 
Figure 6.12 Inbound marketers use valuable content, SEO, and social media 
to attract customers.
Communication
is interactive
or two-way
Marketers
promote
company by
educating or
entertaining
Typical
strategies:
content, social
media & SEO
Customers
seek
out the
business
Inbound Marketing
Communication
is one-way
Businesses
broadcast
messages that
interrupt
customers
Typical
strategies:
TV, radio,
print, outdoor, 
cold calls
Businesses
seek out
customers
Outbound Marketing

202  Chapter 6     Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation Technology
tactics try to trick the search engine into thinking a website has high-quality content, 
when in fact it does not. Some examples of obvious black hat techniques are listed 
below. With stronger detection systems now in place, websites that use these tactics 
(or even appear to use them) will be severely downgraded in Google’s ranking 
system.
Link spamming—generating backlinks for the primary purpose of SEO, not 
adding value to the user. Black hat SEOs use tricks to create backlinks. Some 
examples include adding a link to a page in the comments section of an unre-
lated blog post, or building sites called link farms solely for the purpose of link-
ing back to the promoted page.
Keyword tricks—Black hat SEOs will embed several high-value keywords 
on pages with unrelated content to drive up traffic statistics. For instance, an 
e-commerce site might embed words like “amazon” (a word that frequently 
shows up in search queries) in an attempt to get listed on SERPs of people 
looking for amazon.com.
Ghost text—This tactic involves adding text on a page that will affect page 
ranking. The text may not have anything to do with the real content of the 
page, or it may simply repeat certain words to increase the content density. 
The text is then hidden, usually by making it the same color as the back-
ground.
Shadow pages—Also called ghost pages or cloaked pages, this black hat tactic 
involves creating pages that are optimized to attract lots of people. The pages, 
however, contain a redirect command so that users are sent to another page to 
increase traffic on that page.
These particular tactics are no longer effective as a result of updates Google has 
made to its ranking system. Most likely, other major search engines have adopted 
similar measures. However, there will always be people who attempt to take short-
cuts to achieve higher SERP rankings. Businesses need to be very careful when hir-
ing SEO consultants or agencies to make sure they do not use inappropriate SEO 
techniques because when they are discovered, Google and other search engines will 
usually punish the business by dramatically lowering the website’s rank so that it 
does not show up on SERPs at all.
Questions
1. Search engines use many different “clues” about the quality of a 
website’s content to determine how a page should be ranked in search 
results. These clues fall into three primary categories: Reputation or 
Popularity, Relevance, and User Satisfaction. Explain the rationale for 
using each of these three categories as an indicator of a website’s con-
tent quality.
2. Backlinks were a key factor in Google’s original PageRank algorithm. 
Explain what a backlink is and why Google has reduced its emphasis on 
backlinks and instead uses many other additional factors in its ranking 
algorithm.
3. Explain why so-called black hat SEO tactics are ultimately short-sighted 
and can lead to signifi cant consequences for businesses that use them.
4. How do organizations evaluate the effectiveness of their search engine 
optimization (SEO) strategies and tactics?
5. Explain why providing high quality, regularly updated content is the 
most important aspect of any SEO strategy.

6.3     Pay-Per-Click and Paid Search Strategies     203  
In addition to organic listings, most search engines display paid or sponsored list-
ings on their SERPs. These advertisements provide revenue for the search engine 
and allow it to offer Web search services to the general public for free. They also 
provide a way for smaller organizations or businesses with new websites to gain 
visibility on SERPs while waiting for their SEO strategies to produce results. Most 
major search engines differentiate organic search results from paid ad listings on 
SERPs with labels, shading, and placing the ads in a different place on the page. 
Some critics have complained that paid advertisements receive preferential page 
placement and are not clearly distinguished from organic listings. However, at 
the time of this publication, it is easy to distinguish ads from organic results on 
Google and Bing SERPs. Defenders of the search engine companies argue that 
since the paid ads make it possible for everyone to use search services for free, the 
preferential page placement is justified.
6.3  Pay-Per-Click and Paid Search Strategies
CREATING A PPC 
ADVERTISING 
CAMPAIGN
There are four steps to creating a PPC advertising campaign on search engines.
1. Set an overall budget for the campaign.
2. Create ads—most search engine ads are text only.
3. Select keywords associated with the campaign.
4. Set up billing account information.
Search advertising allows businesses to target customers who are likely to pur-
chase their products. They do this by selecting keywords that correspond to search 
queries that potentially identify someone as a customer. For instance, a company 
that sells women’s purses may want to appear on a SERP when someone conducts 
a search using any of the following terms or phrases:
• Purse
• Handbag
• Women’s purses
• Ladies’ purses
• Designer purses
• Designer handbags
Google and other search engines provide advertisers with tools for evaluating 
the impact of different keywords or phrases. These tools typically display informa-
tion about how often people use the word in a search and also recommend alternative 
words the advertiser may want to consider including in the campaign. Advertisers 
“bid” on having their ads appear when someone searches on one of their keywords. 
Higher bids result in a greater probability that the ad will be selected to appear 
when someone searches on a particular keyword, but also deplete the advertiser’s 
budget more quickly. If a bid is too low, the ad might not appear very often or not 
at all. The keyword tools usually provide information about typical bid prices for 
each keyword or phrase. Smart advertisers will typically start with a modest bid and 
increase it over time to achieve the ad placement rate they desire.
The likelihood of ad placement can also influenced by a quality score deter-
mined by factors related to the user’s experience. Ads that are considered to be 
more relevant (and therefore more likely to be clicked on) will cost less and more 
likely run in a top position. According to Google, quality scores are determined by 
several factors:
• Expected keyword CTR
• The past CTR of your URL

204  Chapter 6     Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation Technology
• Past effectiveness (overall CTR of ads and keywords in the account)
• Landing page quality (relevance, transparency, ease of navigation, etc.)
• Relevance of keywords to ads
• Relevance of keywords to customer search query
• Geographic performance—account success in geographic regions being 
targeted. 
• How well ads perform on different devices (quality scores are calculated for 
mobile, desktop/laptop, and tablets). 
Relevant ads are good for all parties—the search engine makes more money 
from clicked ads, the advertiser experiences more customers visiting its site, and the 
customer is more likely to find what he or she is looking for.
In addition to selecting keywords and setting bid prices, advertisers also set 
parameters for the geographic location they want their ad to appear in and the 
time of day. These factors allow for additional customer targeting designed to help 
advertisers reach the consumers most likely to purchase their products.
In their review of paid search advertising, Jansen and Mullen (2008) point out 
that the effectiveness of PPC ads is heavily influenced by factors on the webpages 
that ads are linked to. For instance, sometimes companies create product-oriented 
ads, but then link to the main page of their website instead of a page with informa-
tion about the product in the ad. Other factors include landing page design, effec-
tiveness of the call to action, and the quality of the shopping cart application. It does 
not make sense to spend a lot of money on a PPC campaign if the website is not 
attractive to consumers once they reach it.
You can learn more about advertising on the major commercial search engines 
by visiting the following websites:
• Google: adwords.google.com
• Bing: advertise.bingads.microsoft.com
• Yahoo: advertising.yahoo.com
METRICS FOR PAID 
SEARCH ADVERTISING
In addition to more effective targeting, one of the key benefits of online adver-
tising is the ability to evaluate its contribution to sales revenue more effectively. 
PPC advertisers use the following metrics to gauge the effectiveness of their 
campaigns:
Click-through rates (CTRs)—By themselves, CTRs do not measure the finan-
cial performance of an ad campaign. But they are useful for evaluating many of 
the decisions that go into a campaign, such as keyword selection and ad copy.
Keyword conversion—High CTRs are not always good if they do not lead to 
sales. Since the cost of the campaign is based on how many people click an ad, 
you want to select keywords that lead to sales (conversions), not just site visits. 
PPC advertisers monitor which keywords lead to sales and focus on those in 
future campaigns.
Cost of customer acquisition (CoCA)—This metric represents the amount of 
money spent to attract a paying customer. To calculate CoCA for a PPC cam-
paign, you divide the total budget of the campaign by the number of customers 
who purchased something from your site. For instance, if you spent $1,000 on 
a campaign that yielded 40 customers, your CoCA would be $1,000/40 
 $25 
per customer.
Return on advertising spend (ROAS)—The campaign’s overall financial effec-
tiveness is evaluated with ROAS (revenue/cost). For example, if $1,000 was spent 
on a campaign that led to $6,000 in sales, ROAS would be $6,000/$1,000 
 $6. In 
other words, for every dollar spent on PPC ads, $6 was earned.

6.4     A Search for Meaning—Semantic Technology     205  
Questions
1. What would most people say is the fundamental difference between 
organic listings and PPC listings on a search engine?
2. What are the four primary steps to creating a PPC advertising campaign 
on search engines?
3. In addition to the “bid price” for a particular keyword, what other 
factor(s) infl uence the likelihood that an advertisement will appear on a 
search results page? Why don’t search engines just rely on the advertis-
ers bid when deciding what ads will appear on the search results page?
4. How do webpage factors infl uence the effectiveness of PPC advertise-
ments?
5. Describe four metrics that can be used to evaluate the effectiveness of 
a PPC advertising campaign.
If there is one thing history has taught us, it is that the future is hard to predict. It 
might seem silly to predict what the future Internet will look like when it’s clear so 
many people are having trouble understanding all the implications of the Internet 
that now exists. However, forward-thinking businesses and individuals are begin-
ning to plan for the next evolution, which is sometimes called Web 3.0.
The current Web is disjointed, requiring us to visit different websites to get con-
tent, engage in commerce, and interact with our social networks (community). The 
future Web will use context, personalization, and vertical search to make content, 
commerce, and community more relevant and easier to access (Mitra, 2007). With 
the addition of mobile technology, this Web will be always accessible.
• Context defines the intent of the user; for example, trying to purchase music, 
to find a job, to share memories with friends and family.
• Personalization refers to the user’s personal characteristics that impact how 
relevant the content, commerce, and community are to an individual.
• Vertical search, as you have read, focuses on finding information in a par-
ticular content area, such as travel, finance, legal, and medical.
Many technologies are being developed that will create a new, richer experi-
ence for Web users of the future. Semantic technology is one of those growth areas.
6.4  A Search for Meaning—Semantic Technology
WHAT IS THE 
SEMANTIC WEB?
Semantic refers to the meaning of words or language. The semantic Web is one in 
which computers can interpret the meaning of content (data) by using metadata:
“Semantics (in an IT setting) is meaningful computing: the application of 
natural language processing (NLP) to support information retrieval, ana-
lytics, and data-integration that compass both numerical and “unstruc-
tured” information.” (Grimes, 2010)
Tim Berners-Lee, creator of the technology that made the World Wide Web 
possible is the director of the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). This group 
develops programming standards designed to make it possible for data, informa-
tion, and knowledge to be shared even more widely across the Internet. The result 
of these standards is a metadata language, or ways of describing digital information 
so that it can be used by a wide variety of applications. Much of the world’s digital 
information is stored in files structured so that they can only be read by the pro-
grams that created them. With metadata, the content of these files can be labeled 
Metadata: data that describe 
and provide information 
about other data.

206  Chapter 6     Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation Technology
with tags describing the nature of the information, where it came from, or how it is 
arranged, essentially making the Web one large database that can be read and used 
by a wide variety of applications.
It is helpful to think about the semantic Web against the background of earlier 
Internet functionality (see Table 6.6). The early Internet allowed programmers and 
users to access information and communicate with one another without worrying 
about the details associated with the machines they used to connect to the network and 
store the information. The semantic Web continues this evolution, by making it pos-
sible to access information about real things (people, places, contracts, books, chemi-
cals, etc.) without worrying about the details associated with the nature or structure 
of the data files, pages, and databases where these things are described or contained 
(Hendler and Berners-Lee, 2010). This will increase the amount of information avail-
able on the Web and enhance our ability to search for and find useful information.
TABLE 6.6 
Evolution of the Web
Web 1.0 (The Initial Web)  
Pages or documents are “hyperlinked,” making
A Web of Pages 
it easier than ever before to access connected 
 
information.
Web 2.0 (The Social Web)  
Applications are created that allow people to
A Web of Applications 
easily create, share, and organize information.
Web 3.0 (The Semantic Web)  
Information within documents or pages is
A Web of Data 
tagged with metadata, allowing users to access 
 
specifi c information across platforms, regardless 
 
of the original structure of the fi le, page, or 
 
document that contains it. It turns the Web into 
 
one giant database.
THE LANGUAGE(S) 
OF WEB 3.0
The early Web was built using hypertext markup language (HTML). Web 2.0 was 
made possible, in part, by the development of languages like XML and JavaScript. 
The semantic Web utilizes additional languages that have been developed by the 
W3C. These include resource description framework (RDF), Web ontology lan-
guage (OWL), and SPARQL protocol and RDF query language (SPARQL). RDF 
is a language used to represent information about resources on the Internet. It will 
describe these resources using metadata uniform resource identifiers (URIs) like 
“title,” “author,” “copyright and license information.” It is one of the features that 
allow data to be used by multiple applications.
As the acronym SPARQL implies, it is used to write programs that can retrieve 
and manipulate data stored in RDF format. OWL is the W3C language used to 
categorize and accurately identify the nature of things found on the Internet. These 
three languages, used together, will enhance the element of context on the Web, 
producing more fruitful and accurate information searches. The W3C continues its 
work, with input by programmers and the broader Internet community to improve 
the power and functionality of these languages.
SEMANTIC WEB AND 
SEMANTIC SEARCH
As you have read, the semantic Web is (or will be) described by metadata, making it 
easier for a broad range of applications to identify and utilize data. One of the barriers 
to creating the semantic Web, however, is the tagging process. Who will tag all of the 
data that currently exist on the Web? How can we be sure that such data will be tagged 
correctly? Will people purposely tag data incorrectly to gain some kind of advantage in 
the same way that black hat SEO tactics are used to mislead search engines?

6.4     A Search for Meaning—Semantic Technology     207  
Semantic search engines could be programmed to take advantage of metadata 
tags, but their usefulness would be very limited if they could only identify Web 
content that had been tagged with metadata:
“Semantic search is the process of typing something into a search engine 
and getting more results than just those that feature the exact keyword 
you typed into the search box. Semantic search will take into account 
the context and meaning of your search terms. It’s about understanding 
the assumptions that the searcher is making when typing in that search 
query.” (DiSilvestro, 2013)
Instead of relying solely on metadata tags, current semantic search engines 
use alternative approaches to understanding the meaning of content on the Web. 
Semantic search engines use natural language processing, contextual cues, syn-
onyms, word variations, concept matching, specialized queries, and other strategies 
to generate search results that are superior to those created by simple keyword-
matching algorithms. Understanding the context or intent of users is particularly 
important. If a search engine understood the proper context of a search query con-
taining the word “Disneyworld,” it would know if the search engine should return 
information that would be of interest to people
• planning a vacation, or
• looking for a job at the theme park, or
• interested in the history of Disneyworld.
Simple keyword matching is likely to produce a wide assortment of informa-
tion, much of which will not be of interest to users with a specific goal in mind.
Semantic Search Features and Benefits
So what can semantic search engines do that is superior to search engines that work 
solely on keyword matching? Grimes (2010) provides a list of practical benefits that 
could result from semantic search technology:
Related searches/queries. The engine suggests alternative search queries that 
may produce information related to the original query. Search engines may also 
ask you, “Did you mean: [search term]?” if it detects a misspelling.
Reference results. The search engine suggests reference material related to the 
query, such as a dictionary definition, Wikipedia pages, maps, reviews, or stock 
quotes.
Semantically annotated results. Returned pages contain highlighting of search 
terms, but also related words or phrases that may not have appeared in the 
original query. These can be used in future searches simply by clicking on them.
Full-text similarity search. Users can submit a block of text or even a full docu-
ment to find similar content.
Search on semantic/syntactic annotations. This approach would allow a user 
to indicate the “syntactic role the term plays—for instance, the part-of-speech 
(noun, verb, etc.)—or its semantic meaning—whether it’s a company name, 
location, or event.” For instance, a keyword search on the word “center” would 
produce too many results. Instead, a search query could be written using a syn-
tax such as the following:
<organization> center </organization>
This would only return documents where the word “center” was part of an 
organization’s name (e.g., Johnson Research Center or Millard Youth Center). 
Google currently allows you to do something similar to specify the kind of files 
you are looking for (e.g., filetype:pdf).

208  Chapter 6     Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation Technology
Concept search. Search engines could return results with related concepts. 
For instance, if the original query was “Tarantino films,” documents would be 
returned that contain the word “movies” even if not the word “films.”
Ontology-based search. Ontologies define the relationships between data. An 
ontology is based on the concept of “triples”: subject, predicate, and object. 
This would allow the search engine to answer questions such as “What veg-
etables are green?” The search engine would return results about “broccoli,” 
“spinach,” “peas,” “asparagus,” “Brussels sprouts,” and so on.
Semantic Web search. This approach would take advantage of content tagged 
with metadata as previously described in this section. Search results are likely 
to be more accurate than keyword matching.
Faceted search. Faceted search provides a means of refining results based on pre-
defined categories called facets. For instance, a search on “colleges” might result 
in options to “refine this search by. . .” location, size, degrees offered, private or 
public, and so on. Faceted search tools available today tend to focus on a specific 
domain, such as Wikipedia or Semidico, a search tool for biomedical literature.
Clustered search. This is similar to a faceted search, but without the predefined 
categories. Visit Carrot2.org to better understand this concept. After conducting 
a search, click on the “foamtree” option to see how you can refine your search. 
The refining options are extracted from the content in pages of the initial search.
Natural language search. Natural language search tools attempt to extract words 
from questions such as “How many countries are there in Europe?” and cre-
ate a semantic representation of the query. Initially, this is what people hoped 
search engines would evolve toward, but Grimes wonders if we have become 
so accustomed to typing just one or two words into our queries that writing out 
a whole question may seem like too much work.
You may recognize some of these search enhancements when using popular 
commercial search engines like Google or Bing. That is because they have begun 
to build semantic technologies into their systems. You are encouraged to explore 
other search engines that are developing semantic search features: DuckDuckGo.com, 
Hakia.com, and Swoogle (swoogle.umbc.edu).
SEMANTIC WEB FOR 
BUSINESS
What opportunities and challenges does the semantic Web hold for businesses? 
Perhaps the most immediate challenge faced by businesses is the need to optimize their 
websites for semantic search. Because search engines are responsible for directing so 
much traffic to business websites, it will be important that companies take advantage 
of semantic technologies to ensure they continue to remain visible to prospective 
customers who use search engines. While the details of semantic SEO are beyond the 
scope of this book, we can illustrate one important benefit of semantic website opti-
mization. Websites optimized for semantic technology with metadata produce richer, 
more attractive listings on SERPs. Google calls these rich snippets (see Figure 6.13).
Note how detailed the organic search listing in Figure 6.13 is compared to a 
basic listing. These enhanced search listings are more visually attractive and pro-
duce greater CTRs.
Businesses need to stay up-to-date with advances in semantic search so that they 
can continuously optimize their sites to increase traffic from major search engines.
Questions
1. List fi ve different practical ways that semantic technology is enhancing 
the search experience of users.
2. How do metadata tags facilitate more accurate search results?
3. Briefl y describe the three evolutionary stages of the Internet?
4. Defi ne the words “context,” “personalization,” and “vertical search” and 
explain how they make for more powerful and accurate search results.
5. What are the three languages developed by the W3C and associated 
with the semantic Web?

6.5     Recommendation Engines     209  
Figure 6.13 The Google 
search listing for this New 
York–based grocery chain 
is more attractive because 
it uses metadata from the 
business’s website. (Google 
and the Google logo are 
registered trademarks of 
Google, Inc., used with 
permission.)
A lot of times, people don’t know what they want until you show it to them. 
 
—Steve Jobs (quoted in Business Week, May 12, 1998)
Think about the challenge faced by large e-commerce websites like Amazon or 
Netflix. Brick-and-mortar retailers can capture people’s attention in the store with 
eye-catching point-of-purchase displays or suggestive selling by store employees. 
However, these are not options for retail websites. They need an effective way of 
recommending their vast array of products to customers. Most e-commerce sites 
provide website search tools based on the technologies previously discussed in this 
chapter. Relying on customers to find products through an active search, however, 
assumes customers know what they want and how to describe it when forming 
their search query. For these reasons, many e-commerce sites rely on recommenda-
tion engines (sometimes called recommender systems). Recommendation engines 
proactively identify products that have a high probability of being something the 
consumer might want to buy. Amazon has long been recognized as having one of 
the best recommendation engines. Each time customers log into the site, they are 
presented with an assortment of products based on their purchase history, brows-
ing history, product reviews, ratings, and many other factors. In effect, Amazon 
customizes their e-commerce site for each individual, leading to increased sales. 
According to Amazon employees, click-through and conversion rates “vastly 
exceed those of untargeted content such as banner advertisements and top-seller 
lists” (Linden, Smith & York, 2003).
6.5  Recommendation Engines
RECOMMENDATION 
FILTERS
There are three widely used approaches to creating useful recommendations: 
content-based filtering, collaborative filtering, and hybrid strategies (Burke, 2007).
Content-Based Filtering
Content-based filtering recommends products based on the product features of items 
the customer has interacted with in the past (Figure 6.14). Interactions can include 
viewing an item, “liking” an item, purchasing an item, saving an item to a wish list, 

210  Chapter 6     Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation Technology
and so on. In the simplest sense, content-based filtering uses item similarity to make 
recommendations. For instance, the Netflix recommendation engine attempts to rec-
ommend movies that are similar to movies you already watched (see IT at Work 6.2). 
Music-streaming site Pandora creates its recommendations or playlists based on the 
Music Genome Project©, a system that uses approximately 400 different attributes 
to describe songs (Glaser et al., 2006). These detailed systems for describing movies 
and songs enhance Netflix’s and Pandora’s positions in highly competitive industries 
because of their ability to offer superior recommendations to their customers.
3. Recommendation: “Based on your rating of fruity
    cocktail umbrella drink you may also like...”
1. Customer likes fruity cocktail
   umbrella drink
2. Computer searches products for fruity
    cocktail umbrella drink
Figure 6.14 Content-
based fi ltering produces 
recommendations based on 
similarity of product features.
Alexis Madrigal (2014) reverse-engineered Netflix’s list of 
movie genres and was surprised to learn the company uses 
approximately 76,897 different ways to describe movies, 
creating the potential for some unusually specific movie 
recommendations. Christian Brown (2012) compiled a list of 
possible humorous and sometimes disturbing movie catego-
ries, a few of which are listed below:
10. Cerebral Con-Game Thrillers
 9. Visually Striking Father-Son Movies
 8. Violent Nightmare-Vacation Movies
 7. Understated Independent Workplace Movies
 6. Feel-Good Opposites-Attract Movies
 5. Witty Dysfunctional-Family TV Animated Comedies
 4. Period Pieces About Royalty Based on Real Life
 3. Campy Mad-Scientist Movies
 2. Mind-Bending Foreign Movies
 1. More like Arrested Development
The fact that Netflix went to the trouble of creating 
so many detailed and descriptive labels suggests that a 
content-based filtering strategy is at use in the company’s 
recommendation system.
IT at Work 6 .2
Violent Nightmare-Vacation Movies and Other Fun Movie Genres at Netflix
Collaborative Filtering
Collaborative filtering makes recommendations based on a user’s similarity to 
other people. For instance, when a customer gives a product a high rating, he or 

6.5     Recommendation Engines     211  
she may receive recommendations based on the purchases of other people who 
also gave the same product a high rating. Sometimes websites will explain the 
reason for the recommendations with the message, “Other people who liked this 
product also bought. . .” Many collaborative filtering systems use purchase his-
tory to identify similarities among customers. In principle, however, any customer 
characteristic that improves the quality of recommendations could be used (see 
Figure 6.15).
In an effort to develop increasingly better recommendation engines, developers 
are exploring a number of creative ways to predict what consumers might like based 
on patterns of consumer behavior, interests, ratings, reviews, social media contacts 
and conversations, media use, financial information, and so on.
In addition to content filtering and collaborative filtering, two other 
approaches to recommendation engines are mentioned in the literature: knowl-
edge-based systems and demographic systems (Burke, 2007). Knowledge-based 
systems use information about a user’s needs to recommend products. This kind 
of system is useful for developing recommendations for products that consumers 
do not shop for very often. For instance, an insurance company may ask a cus-
tomer a series of questions about his or her needs, and then use that information 
to recommend policy options. Demographic systems base recommendations on 
demographic factors corresponding to a potential customer (i.e., age, gender, 
race, income, etc.). While similarity to other customers might play a role in 
developing these recommendations, such systems are different from collaborative 
filtering systems that typically rely on information about a person’s behavior (i.e., 
purchase, product ratings, etc.).
Systems are being developed that leverage big data streams from multiple 
sources to refine and enhance the performance of current systems.
Limitations of Recommendation Engines
While recommendation engines have proven valuable and are widely used, there 
are still challenges that must be overcome. Four commonly cited limitations are 
described below:
Cold start or new user—Making recommendations for a user who has not 
provided any information to the system is a challenge for most systems since 
they require a starting point or information about the user (Burke, 2007, 
Adomavicius & Alexander, 2005). Tiroshi and colleagues (2011) have suggested 
3. Recommendations: “Other customers who like pink beverage also like...”
1. Customer likes pink beverage
2. Other customers like pink beverage
Figure 6.15 Collaborative 
fi ltering bases 
recommendations on 
similarity to other customers.

212  Chapter 6     Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation Technology
consumers’ existing social media profiles from sites like Facebook and Twitter 
could be used in situations where a website did not have sufficient information 
of its own to make recommendations.
Sparsity—Collaborative systems depend on having information about a criti-
cal mass of users to compare to the target user in order to create reliable or 
stable recommendations. This is not always available in situations where 
products have only been rated by a few people or when it is not possible to 
identify a group of people who are similar to a user with unusual preferences 
(Burke, 2007).
Limited feature content—For content filter systems to work, there must be 
sufficient information available about product features and the information 
must exist in a structured format so it can be read by computers. Often feature 
information must be entered manually, which can be prohibitive in situations 
where there are many products (Adomavicius & Alexander, 2005).
Overspecialization—If systems can only recommend items that are highly 
similar to a user profile, then the recommendations may not be useful. For 
instance, if the recommendation system is too narrowly configured on a web-
site that sells clothing, the user may only see recommendations for the same 
clothing item he or she liked, but in different sizes or colors (Adomavicius & 
Alexander, 2005).
Hybrid Recommendation Engines
Hybrid recommendation engines develop recommendations based on some combi-
nation of the methodologies described above (content-based filtering, collaboration 
filtering, knowledge-based and demographic systems). Hybrid systems are used to 
increase the quality of recommendations and address shortcomings of systems that 
only use a single methodology. Burke (2007) identified various ways that hybrid 
recommendation engines combine results from different recommender systems. To 
illustrate the potential complexity and variation in hybrid systems, four approaches 
are listed below:
• Weighted hybrid: Results from different recommenders are assigned a 
weight and combined numerically to determine a final set of recommenda-
tions. Relative weights are determined by system tests to identify the levels 
that produce the best recommendations.
• Mixed hybrid: Results from different recommenders are presented along-
side of each other.
• Cascade hybrid: Recommenders are assigned a rank or priority. If a tie 
occurs (with two products assigned the same recommendation value), 
results from the lower-ranked systems are used to break ties from the 
higher-ranked systems.
• Compound hybrid: This approach combines results from two recommender 
systems from the same technique category (e.g., two collaborative filters), 
but uses different algorithms or calculation procedures.
Recommendation engines are now used by many companies with deep content 
(e.g., large product inventory) that might otherwise go undiscovered if the compa-
nies depended on customers to engage in an active search.
To simplify our description of recommendation engines, most of the examples 
above have been based on the e-commerce sites recommending products to custom-
ers. However, this technology is used by many different kinds of business organiza-
tions, as illustrated in Table 6.7.

6.5     Recommendation Engines     213  
TABLE 6.7 
Examples of Recommendation Engine Applications
Company 
How It Uses Recommendation Engines. . .
Amazon 
Recommends products using multiple fi ltering 
 
methods.
Netfl ix 
Approximately 75 percent of Netfl ix movies are 
 
selected as a result of its recommendation system.
Pandora
 
This streaming-music site creates playlists based on 
 
similarity to initial songs or artists selected by the 
 
user.
CNN, Time, Fast  
These news and entertainment companies all use a
Company, Rolling  
recommendation engine (or “content discovery
Stone, NBCNews.com,  
system”) created by Outbrain.com to suggest
Reuters, Us Weekly 
additional articles related to the one site visitors 
 
initially viewed.
YouTube
 
YouTube uses a variation of Amazon’s 
 
recommendation engine to suggest additional 
 
videos people might like to watch (Linden, 2011).
Goodreads 
This social website for readers recommends books 
 
based on user ratings of books they have read.
Samsung 
Uses recommendation engines built into its “smart 
 
TVs” to suggest television programming to viewers.
Facebook and LinkedIn
 
These social networking services use 
 
recommendation engines to suggest people 
 
that users may want to connect with.
Apple 
Helps users fi nd mobile apps they might enjoy.
Microsoft Xbox 360 
Suggests new games based on what users have 
 
previously shown an interest in.
Tripadvisor 
Recommends travel destinations and services based 
 
on destinations people have viewed or rated.
Stitch Fix
 
This fashion start-up uses a recommender system in 
 
conjunction with human stylists to select and ship 
 
clothing products to customers, before customers 
 
viewed or ordered them!
Fashioning Change
 
This online clothing retailer lets customers select 
 
what their recommendations are based on: style 
 
preferences, personality, causes, and “likes.”

214  Chapter 6     Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation Technology
Questions
1. How is a recommendation engine different from a search engine?
2. Besides e-commerce websites that sell products, what are some other 
ways that recommendation engines are being used on the Web today?
3. What are some examples of user information required by recommendation 
engines that use collaborative fi ltering?
4. Before implementing a content-based recommendation engine, what 
kind of information would website operators need to collect about their 
products?
5. What are the four distinct methodologies used by recommender systems 
to create recommendations?
6. What is a recommendation engine called that combines different 
methodologies to create recommendations? What are three ways these 
systems combine methodologies?
Key Terms
access control
backlinks
black hat SEO
bounce rates
click-through rate (CTRs)
collaborative fi ltering
collection analysis module
content-based fi ltering
crawler control module
crawler search engines
dwell time
enterprise search
ghost pages
hybrid recommendation 
engines
hybrid search engines
inbound marketing
indexer module
informational search
keyword conversion rates
keywords
link farms
link spamming
metadata
meta-search engines
navigational search
organic search listings
page repository
PageRank
paid search listings
pay-per-click (PPC)
petabyte
quality score
query interface
recommendation engines
resource description 
framework (RDF)
retrieval/ranking module
rich snippets
search engine
search engine marketing 
(SEM)
search engine optimization 
(SEO)
search engine results page 
(SERP)
semantic search engines
semantic web
shadow pages
showrooming
social media optimization
SPARQL protocol and 
RDF query language 
(SPARQL)
spiders
structured data
transactional search
uniform resource 
identifi ers (URIs)
unstructured data
vertical search engines
Web directories
Web ontology language 
(OWL)
Assuring Your Learning
 1. Why is it important that businesses maintain a high 
level of visibility on search engine results pages?
 2. Why are organic search listings more valuable than 
paid search listings for most companies over the 
long term? Even though organic search listings are 
more valuable, what are some reasons that compa-
nies should consider using PPC advertising as part 
of their search marketing strategies?
 3. Why is relevant and frequently updated content a 
signifi cant factor for companies concerned about 
their visibility on popular search engines? Does 
the quality of content impact organic results, paid 
results, or both? Explain.
 4. Explain the differences between Web directories, 
crawler search engines, and hybrid search engines.
 5. Why do search engines consider their page-
ranking algorithms to be trade secrets? What 
would be the consequences of providing detailed 
information about how a search engine ranks 
SERP listings?
 6. Why do consumer search engines like Google and 
Bing require vast amounts of data storage? What 
actions do they take to address this need?
 7. Explain why enterprise search technology is be-
coming increasingly important to organizations. 
Describe how enterprise search applications are 
DISCUSS: Critical Thinking Questions

Assuring Your Learning     215  
different from consumer search engines in terms 
of their functionality, purpose, and the special 
challenges they must overcome.
 8. Explain why people are much more likely to view 
and pay attention to product and service informa-
tion in SERPs compared to traditional mass media 
advertising? What strategies are businesses adopt-
ing to take advantage of this trend?
 9. Why is it easier to measure the return-on-investment 
of resources spent on search engine marketing com-
pared to mass media advertising?
 10. How are consumers using mobile devices to search 
for information about goods and services? How can 
businesses respond to this trend to gain a competi-
tive advantage?
 11. Identify at least fi ve ways that Google has changed 
its page-ranking algorithms in recent years to en-
courage website developers to do more than simply 
list keywords in an attempt to improve their ranking 
on search results.
 12. The ultimate goal of Google, Bing, and other con-
sumer search engines is to provide users with search 
listings that contain useful information on the topic 
of their search. What recommendations would you 
make to a website owner with regard to website 
content that will improve its rank on search result 
listings over time?
 13. Why are “black hat” SEO techniques (see 
Section 6.2) considered unethical? Who is harmed 
by the use of such techniques? What are the conse-
quences of using these questionable SEO tactics?
 14. Explain how search engines determine if websites 
contain relevant information or content.
 15. Identify and describe the four steps to creating a 
pay-per-click (PPC) ad campaign.
 16. How does an advertiser’s bid and quality score 
determine the frequency of PPC ad placement on 
SERPs? What are the factors that Google uses to 
determine an advertiser’s quality score? Why does 
Google use the quality score instead of relying 
solely on the advertiser’s bid?
 17. Describe three metrics used by PPC advertisers to 
evaluate the effectiveness of their search ad campaign.
 18. Describe the difference between the semantic Web 
and semantic search.
 19. Describe fi ve ways that semantic search engines will 
enhance functionality for users. How will businesses 
benefi t from the development of semantic search 
functions?
 20. Recommender systems use different approaches to 
generating recommendations. Explain the differ-
ence between content-based fi ltering and collab-
orative fi ltering. Describe the kind of information 
required for each approach to work.
 21. What are the alternatives to content-based fi ltering 
and collaborative fi ltering recommender systems? 
When is it most useful to use these alternatives?
 22. Hybrid recommendation engines utilize two or 
more fi ltering strategies to create recommendations. 
Describe the four different approaches to creating a 
hybrid system.
1. Select a search query term or phrase based on a class 
assignment, a product you plan to purchase, or some 
area of personal interest. Use the query at each of 
the following search engines:
a. Google.com
b. Bing.com
c. Yahoo.com
d. Hakia.com
 For each site, make the following observations:
a. How relevant or useful are the websites listed on 
the fi rst two pages of search results?
b. What differences do you observe in terms of how 
the search engines list websites on the search 
results page?
c. Do you see any indication that the search engine 
is using semantic technology to generate results 
(see “Semantic Search Features and Benefi ts” 
in Section 6.4)?
2. Visit the Nike website for its Fuelband product here: 
nike.com/us/en_us/c/nikeplus-fuelband.
a. Make a list of nonbranded keywords that you 
would recommend Nike use to optimize pages so 
that they would show up in organic search listings.
b. Make a list of recommendations for content (i.e., 
articles, blog posts, information, etc.) that Nike 
should add to its website for this product to in-
crease the chances that it will show up in organic 
search results. What keywords should be empha-
sized in the content you recommend?
3. Use an existing account, or sign up for an account, at 
one of the websites listed in Table 6.7.  Make a list of 
the ways that the website recommends its content, 
goods, or services to you. Based on your observations, 
are you able to determine what kind of recommenda-
tion system is in use by the website?
4. Pretend you are going to purchase an expensive item 
like a large fl at-screen television or a major appliance 
EXPLORE: Online and Interactive Exercises

216  Chapter 6     Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation Technology
from a national retailer like Best Buy or Sears. Using 
your mobile phone, attempt to fi nd store locations, 
product information, and customer reviews. Next, 
install one of the popular shopping and price com-
parison apps listed below on your phone:
• Red Laser
• Amazon Price Check, or Flow (also by Amazon)
• Google Shopper
• Barcode Scanner
• Or, fi nd a similar price-checking app at your 
mobile app store.
Now, go shopping (visit the store). While shopping, 
use your mobile app to fi nd product reviews and 
make price comparisons of the products you fi nd. 
Briefl y describe your mobile shopping experience. 
How did the mobile technology help or hinder your 
shopping experience? What challenges does mobile 
technology pose for traditional retailers?
5. Pretend you are an SEO consultant for a local busi-
ness or not-for-profi t organization. Visit the organiza-
tion’s website to familiarize yourself with the brand, 
mission, products, services, and so on. Next, make a 
list of keywords or phrases that you think should be 
used to optimize the site for search engines. Rank-
order the list based on how frequently you think the 
words are used in searches. Finally, go to google.com/
trends/explore and enter your keywords or phrases, 
creating a graph that illustrates how often they have 
been used in search queries. Based on what you 
learn, what keywords or phrases would you recom-
mend the organization use to optimize its site?
1. Perform a search engine query using the terms “data 
center” 
 “environmental impact”. Describe the 
environmental concerns that large-scale data centers 
are creating around the globe and steps that com-
panies are taking to address these concerns. Read 
about Google’s efforts at google.com/green. In your 
opinion, is Google making a satisfactory effort to 
minimize its negative impact on the environment? 
Explain your answer.
2. Review the information in Section 6.1 about the 
three types of searches (informational, navigational, 
and transactional) that people conduct on search 
engines. Put yourself in the role of an SEO consul-
tant for your college or university. Create a set of 
content and/or keyword strategies that you would 
recommend to your institution’s leaders to increase 
the chances of appearing on SERPs resulting from 
prospective students conducting each kind of search.
3. Review Table 6.3, Popularity Factors Used by Search 
Engines. Select three factors that search engines use 
to evaluate a website’s reputation. Next, generate a 
list of strategies or ways that a website owner could 
use the factors to improve its ranking on a search 
engine. For instance, if one of your factors is “site 
traffi c,” you might recommend that the website owner 
post links to the website on the company Facebook 
page to increase traffi c. Or, you might recommend 
the website run a contest that requires people to visit 
the site to enter. This would increase traffi c during the 
contest. Come up with as many creative ideas as you 
can for each popularity factor.
4. Traditional brick-and-mortar stores are increasingly 
frustrated by competition with online retailers. Online 
websites often have a cost advantage because they 
do not have to maintain physical storefronts or pay 
salespeople, and can use more effi cient logistical and 
operational strategies. This sometimes allows them to 
offer better prices to consumers. With the emergence 
of recommendation engines, they appear to be gaining 
another advantage—the ability to suggest products 
to customers based on their past shopping history 
and personal characteristics. Pretend you are a senior 
manager for a national retail chain. How could your 
company make use of recommendation systems to 
suggest products to customers shopping in your store? 
Outline a creative approach to this problem that iden-
tifi es the information you would need to collect, the 
in-store technology required, and the manner in which 
you would inform customers about the personalized 
recommendations generated by your system.
5. Select a consumer product or service for which there 
are at least three popular brand names. For example, 
you might choose the category “cell phone carriers” 
which includes Verizon, AT&T, Sprint and T-Mobile. 
On the Google.com/trends page, type the brand 
names, separated by commas, into the search fi eld 
at the top of the screen (e.g. Verizon, AT&T, Sprint, 
T-Mobile). The resulting chart will display the search 
query volume by brand, an indicator of how much 
interest each brand has received over time. Using the 
Google Trends data, answer the following questions.
Tip: Before answering the questions below, use 
Google’s search engine to fi nd articles on “how to 
interpret Google trends”. This will help you better 
understand the Google trends report and make it 
easier to answer the questions below.
a. Using the date setting at the top of the Google 
Trends page, explore different periods of time. 
ANALYZE & DECIDE: Apply IT Concepts to Business Decisions

CASE 6.2     Business Case     217  
Briefl y summarize how interest in each brand has 
changed over the last four years.
b. In the Regional Interest section, you can see how 
interest in each brand varies by country or city. 
In which countries and cities is each brand most 
popular?
c. In the Related Searches section, you will see a list 
of topics and query terms of interest to people 
who used one of the brand names in a search. 
How does the list of related topics change from 
one brand name to another? Do the topic and 
query term lists give you any insight into what 
kind of information people may be interested in 
relative to each brand?
d. Using a search engine, see if you can fi nd mar-
ket share data for the product or industry you 
researched on Google Trends. If you fi nd this 
information, does there seem to be any relation-
ship between search volume and market share 
for the brand names you explored?
CASE 6.2
Business Case: Recommending Wine to Online Customers
Wine.com, headquartered in San Francisco, CA, is the world’s 
largest online wine retailer, selling over 2 million bottles a 
year. The company maintains an inventory of over 13,000 
different wines and ships its product throughout the United 
States. The company also operates wineshopper.com, a 
members-only site for customers interested in special sales 
and discounts on wine products.
 
While online retailers in other product categories have 
enjoyed considerable success over the years, online wine sell-
ers have to work harder because of several political and regu-
latory factors. Chief among these challenges is complying 
with a number of federal laws controlling the sale of alcohol 
as well as state-level regulations that vary across the country. 
Wine.com had to create seven different distribution centers 
around the country to comply with varying state regulations, 
raising its cost of doing business. Wine is also a potentially 
perishable product, which means the company must take fac-
tors like weather into consideration when shipping during the 
hot summer months.
 
A quick look at the Wine.com website will give you some 
insight into how hard the company works to maintain its top 
spot in online wine sales. The website features an extensive 
community section where customers provide product reviews 
and create wish lists of wines they would like to try. A blog 
on the site keeps customers informed about the latest wine 
news and the company engages its customers through social 
media using Facebook and Twitter.
 
When consumers purchase wine at a local retailer, they 
often rely on the expertise and recommendations of a knowl-
edgeable salesperson. This benefi t can be diffi cult to repli-
cate on a website. Historically, Wine.com placed information 
for alternative wine selections on product pages, but these 
recommendations were not customized to individual users. 
These “static” recommendations were sometimes based on 
wines the company wanted to promote, or the price category 
and type of wine the customer was viewing at the time. For 
instance, a product page for a particular type of Chardonnay 
might display recommendations for three alternative brands 
of Chardonnay in the same price category. All customers 
viewing that page would see the same three recommenda-
tions.
 
In an effort to provide more attractive and relevant rec-
ommendations, Wine.com contracted with RichRelevance, a 
San Francisco–based company, to create a system capable of 
providing personalized recommendations. The new sys-
tem uses customer purchases, product search history, and 
information about the wine purchases of similar customers to 
create pages containing unique, personalized recommenda-
tions. Customers are encouraged to create profi le pages on 
the site to aid in identifying shoppers who are similar to one 
another. As well, customers can write product reviews that 
provide additional information about consumer preferences 
to the recommendation system. According to Wine.com 
Director of Business Development Cam Fortin, “By analyzing 
the data pulled from each purchase and then personalizing 
the product recommendations, we can enable customers to 
discover great new wines that fi t with their tastes and life-
style” (Wine.com, 2012).
 
The new system allows wine.com to deliver several differ-
ent types of recommendations:
• 
Customers With Similar Interests Also Viewed. . .
• 
Customer Lists Including This Wine. . .
• 
Customers Who Bought This Item Also Bought. . .
• 
Customers Who Viewed This Item Also Viewed. . .
• 
Top Sellers Of This Varietal/Region/Price Range
• 
Other products (similar to the one being viewed)
 
Recommendations appear on search results pages, 
homepages, product detail pages, and on the site’s Gift Center 
page. In addition to this automated recommender system, 
wine.com sales representatives sometimes appear in chat 
windows offering to assist customers with making a product 
selection.

218  Chapter 6     Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation Technology
 
When Wine.com launched its personalized recommenda-
tion engine in 2009, the company did not have to wait long to 
see impressive results (marketingsherpa.com, 2009):
• 
Unit sales and revenue on gift baskets increased.
• 
Sales from recommendations increased to 10 percent of 
the company’s total volume.
• 
Orders that included products from recommendations 
had a value that was 15 percent higher than the site’s 
overall average.
• 
Conversions, or sales resulting from recommendations, 
were 52 percent higher than the site’s overall average.
 
Since the initial launch of its recommendation system, 
Wine.com has continued to work with RichRelvance to 
improve and expand system capabilities as well as imple-
menting other customer-centric features on its site. Today, 
Wine.com represents a good example of how online retailers 
can utilize a wide variety of technological features to over-
come challenges and provide a personalized and positive 
shopping experience that inspires customer loyalty and 
growth for the company.
Sources: Compiled from Bensinger (2012), wine.com (2012), 
marketingsherpa.com (2009), dmnews.com (2009).
Questions
1. Based on the information in this case, would you catego-
rize the Wine.com recommendation system as content 
fi ltering, collaborative fi ltering, or hybrid?
2. Why does Wine.com have to work harder to succeed 
than other online retailers?
3. Visit the Wine.com website. Identify website features the 
company has created to enhance the consumer’s shop-
ping experience.
4. Why do you think the recommendations provided by the 
new recommendation system are likely to have a greater 
infl uence on consumer behavior than the company’s 
earlier attempt to make recommendations?
5. What impact has the new recommendation system had 
on Wine.com’s business performance?
CASE 6.3
Video Case: Power Searching with Google
This video case is a bit different from what you have seen in 
other chapters. Google has created two easy-to-follow video 
courses designed to teach you how to use search engines 
more effectively: Power Searching and Advanced Power 
Searching. Each course contains a series of videos that you 
can view at your own pace. Following each video, you are 
shown a set of activities and small quizzes that you can use 
to test your knowledge. Start with the Power Searching 
course. Once you have mastered the basic skills discussed 
in that course, move on to the Advanced Power Searching 
course.
 
Visit Google’s Search Education Page for Power Search-
ing. Go to powersearchingwithgoogle.com. On this page, 
you will see links for the two self-guided courses: Power 
Searching and Advanced Power Searching. Select the Power 
Searching link, and begin viewing the course videos. After 
each video, do the related activities and test your knowledge 
with any online quizzes or tests that are provided. After you 
have completed the Power Searching course, go back and 
take the Advanced Power Searching course.
 
While it may take several days to complete both courses, 
we encourage you to do so. The time you invest in learning 
these power search techniques will pay off next time you 
need to use a search engine for a class or work-related 
research project.
Question
1. Describe two or three search techniques you learned from 
these tutorial videos that you think will be particularly 
helpful.
Adomavicius, G. & T. Alexander. “Toward the Next Generation 
of Recommender Systems: A Survey of the State-of-the-Art 
and Possible Extensions.” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge 
and Data Engineering 17, no. 6, 2005, 734–749.
Andrews, W. & H. Koehler-Kruener. “Magic Quadrant for 
Enterprise Search.” gartner.com, July 16, 2014.
Anthony, S. “Microsoft Now Has One Million Servers—
Less than Google, But More than Amazon, Says Ballmer.” 
extremetech.com, July 19, 2013.
Arnesen, M. “Olympic-sized Traffi c Spikes for Misty May-
Treanor Sunglasses or, the Online Effect of Offl ine Wins.” 
SwellPath.com, August 1, 2012.
Bensinger, G. “Wine: The Web’s Final Frontier.” Wall Street 
Journal, October 26, 2012.
Bock, G. W., R. W. Zmud, Y. G. Kim, & J. N. Lee. “Behavioral 
Intention Formation in Knowledge Sharing: Examining the 
Roles of Extrinsic Motivators, Social-Psychological Forces, 
and Organizational Climate.” Management Information 
Systems Quarterly 29, no. 1, March 30, 2007, 87–111.
Brightplanet.com. “Structured vs. Unstructured Data.” June 28, 
2012.
Brown, C. “43 Increasingly Precise Netfl ix Custom Genre 
Recommendations.” TheAwl.com, March 16, 2012.
References

References     219  
Brown, M. “5 Questions About Semantic SEO.” The Moz Blog 
(moz.com), June 25, 2013.
Brown, J. S. & P. Duguid. The Social Life of Information. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2000.
Burke, R. “Hybrid Recommender Systems.” In Brusilovsky, P., 
A. Kobsa, & W. Nejdl (eds.), The Adaptive Web, pp. 377–408. 
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag Berlin, 2007.
Cisco. “Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile Data 
Traffi c Forecast Update 2013–2018.” February 5, 2014.
Delgado, J., L. Renaud, & V. Krishnamurthy. “The New Face of 
Enterprise Search: Bridging Structured and Unstructured In-
formation.” Information Management Journal 39, no. 6, 2005, 
40–46. Business Source Premier. Web. February 28, 2014.
DiSilvestro, A. “The Difference Between Semantic Search and 
Semantic Web.” Search Engine Journal, July 10, 2013.
dmnews.com. “DMNews Chats with Amy Kennedy, VP of Mar-
keting at Wine.com.” Direct Marketing News, October 26, 2009.
Dover, D. & E. Dafforn. Search Engine Optimization (SEO) 
Secrets. Indianapolis, IN: John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
Downhill, D. & J. Peggie. “SEO: The Secret Weapon in the 
E-Commerce Wars.” Sempo.org, 2005.
Feldman, S. & C. Sherman. “The High Cost of Not Finding 
Information.” White paper, IDC, June 2001.
Gaikar, V. “Effective Backlink Strategies for SEO.” 
tricksmachine.com, October 20, 2012.
Gallagher, S. “The Great Disk Drive in the Sky: How Web Giants 
Store Big—and We Mean Big—Data.” Arstechnica.com, 
January 26, 2012.
Glanz, J. “The Cloud Factories: Power, Pollution and the 
Internet.” The New York Times, September 22, 2012.
Glanz, J. “Google Details, and Defends, Its Use of Electricity.” 
The New York Times, September 8, 2011.
Glaser, W., T. Westergren, J. Stearns, & J. Kraft. “Music Genome 
Project US Patent: No. 7,003,515.” Filed May 16, 2002; issued 
February 21, 2006.
Goldman, L. “Nike’s Superstar Endorsers.” Forbes.com, Janu-
ary 24, 2008.
Google.com. “Algorithms.” Google.com, accessed March 24, 2014.
Google.com. “Custom Search: Overview.” September 26, 2013.
Google.com. “Enterprise Findability Without the Complexity.” 
2008.
Grehan, M. “How Search Engines Work.” Excerpted from 
Search Engine Marketing: The Essential Best Practice Guide, 
New York: Incisive Media, 2002.
Grifantini, K. “What It Takes to Power Google.” MIT Technol-
ogy Review, September 9, 2011.
Grimes, S. “Breakthrough Analysis: Two 
 Nine Types of 
Semantic Search.” InformationWeek.com, January 1, 2010.
Hatala, J. & J. G. Lutta. “Managing Information Sharing Within 
an Organizational Setting: A Social Network Perspective.” 
Performance Improvement Quarterly 21, no. 4, 2009, 5–33. 
ERIC. Web. February 28, 2014.
Hendler, J. & T. Berners-Lee. “From the Semantic Web to 
Social Machines: A Research Challenge for AI on the World 
Wide Web.” Artifi cial Intelligence 174, 2010.
Jacobson, J. “Google: 129 Million Different Books Have Been 
Published.” PCWorld.com, August 6, 2010.
Jansen, B. J. & T. Mullen. “Sponsored Search: An Overview of 
the Concept, History, and Technology.” International Journal 
of Electronic Business 6, no. 2, 2008, 114–131.
Kahn, K. “Structuring the Unstructured: Why Big Data Is 
Suddenly Interested in Enterprise Search.” cmswire.com, 
December 6, 2012.
Linden, G. “YouTube Uses Amazon’s Recommendation Algo-
rithm.” glinden.blogspot.com, February 1, 2011.
Linden, G., B. Smith, & J. York. “Amazon.com Recommenda-
tions: Item-to-Item Collaborative Filtering.” IEEE Internet 
Computing, 7, no. 1, January–February 2003, 76–80.
Madrigal, A. “How Netfl ix Reverse Engineered Hollywood.” 
The Atlantic, January 2, 2014.
marketingsherpa.com. “Revamped Recommendations Lift 
Order Value 15%: 5 Steps to More Relevant Suggestions.” 
November 18, 2009.
Martin, J. “How to Choose an Enterprise Search Solution.” 
computerworkduk.com, February 8, 2012.
Miller, R. “Google Has Spent $21 Billion on Data Centers.” 
Datacenterknowledge.com, September 17, 2013.
Mitra, S. “Web 3.0 
 (4C 
 P 
 VS).” Sramanamitra.com, 
February 14, 2007.
Newman, J. “6 Things You’d Never Guess About Google’s 
Energy Use.” Techland.time.com September 9, 2011.
Nikeinc.com. “History and Heritage.” 2014.
Nikeinc.com. “Nike, Inc. Reports Fiscal 2013 Fourth Quarter 
and Full Year Results.” Press release, June 27, 2013.
Oak, M. “How Does a Search Engine Work?” buzzle.com, June 
5, 2008.
oracle.com. “Oracle Secure Enterprise Search 11g R1.” July 2011.
Osher, M. “Finding Copyright Infringements of Your Artwork 
on the Internet.” MarianOsher.com, February 9, 2014.
Pick, T. “How Much of Your Traffi c ‘Should’ Come from 
Search?” SocialMediaToday.com, July 3, 2012.
Prnewswire.com. “Growth of Big Data in Businesses Intensifi es 
Global Demand for Enterprise Search Solutions, Finds Frost & 
Sullivan.” January 24, 2013.
Reinhardt, A. “Steve Jobs on Apple’s Resurgence: Not a One 
Man Show”, Business Week, May 12, 1998.
Safran, N. “310 Million Visits: Nearly Half of All Web Site 
Traffi c Comes From Natural Search [Data].” Conductor.com, 
June 25, 2013.
Schachinger, K. “10 Website Quality Indicators That Can Sink 
Your SEO Battleship.” SearchEngineWatch.com, November 
29, 2012.
Schneider, D. “Under the Hood at Google and Facebook.” 
spectrum.ieee.org, May 31, 2011.
Simon, N. “Barriers to an Information Sharing Culture.” Com-
petitive Intelligence Magazine 1, no. 3, October–December 
1998.
Small, C. T. & A. P. Sage. “Knowledge Management and 
Knowledge Sharing: A Review.” Information Knowledge 
Systems Management 5, no. 3, 2006, 153–169.

220  Chapter 6     Attracting Buyers with Search, Semantic, and Recommendation Technology
Smartlogic.com. “Enterprise Search.” 2012.
Smith, N. “To Build Your Business, Smash Your Silos.” 
Fastcompany.com, June 5, 2012.
Solihin, N. “Search Engine Optimization: A Survey of Current 
Best Practices.” Garden Valley State University Technical 
Library, Paper 151, 2013.
Sterling, G. “Mobile Now 28 Percent of Total Web Traffi c—
Report.” Marketingland.com, November 6, 2013.
SwellPath.com. “SEO Case Study: How SwellPath Grew Nike 
Golf’s Organic Traffi c by 250%
.” 2012.
ThinkwithGoogle.com. “Mobile In-Store Research: How In-store 
Shoppers Are Using Mobile Devices.” Google Shopper 
Marketing Council and M/A/R/C Research. April 2013.
Thomas, V. “Six Reasons to Break Out of Your Organization’s 
Silos.” mangoapps.com, September 24, 2013.
Tiroshi, A., T. Kufl ik, J. Kay, & B. Kummerfeld. “Recommender 
Systems and the Social Web.” In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Workshop on Augmenting User Models with Real 
World Experiences to Enhance Personalization and Adapta-
tion (AUM), Girona, Spain, July 15, 2011. Ardissono, L., and 
Kufl ik, T. (Eds.), Springer-Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012.
Van Boskirk, S. “U.S. Interactive Marketing Forecast, 
2011–2016.” Forester Research. August 24, 2011.
Van Zelst, P. “What Is the Average Percentage of Traffi c 
from Search Engines That a Website Receives?” Moz.com, 
October 18, 2013.
Venkatraman, A. “Global Census Shows Data Centre Power 
Demand Grew 63% in 2012.” Computerweekly.com, October 
8, 2012.
Walker, M. “Data Silos Obstruct Quest for Competitive 
Advantage.” datasciencecentral.com, February 11, 2014.
Ward, E. & G. French. “Ultimate Guide to Link Building.” 
Irvine, California: Entrepreneur Press, 2013.
Willcocks, R. “E-commerce Marketing: Where Your Website 
Traffi c Will Come From & How.” ScreenPages.com, 2013.
wine.com. “Wine.com Launches Advanced Personalized 
Recommendations to Enhance Shopping Experience.” 
pr.wine.com, May 16, 2012.
Zreikat, L. “Effective Link Building Strategies.” laithzreikat.com, 
April 5, 2013.

Chapter Snapshot
Everyone is talking about social media. Chances are you 
and your friends connect on social networking services or 
other forms of social media frequently. Every day, people 
discover new ways to share things with their network of 
friends through messaging, photographs, videos, and blogs. 
The digital-savvy connected generation or millenials—
teens and those in their early twenties—“get” social media, 
but might not be able to accurately define it or how compa-
nies use social technology to influence brand attitudes and 
consumer behavior. After you venture past the big brand 
names—Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and LinkedIn—
awareness of social media tools drops off quickly. Most 
social media use among Millennials is for recreational or 
entertainment purposes. There is little understanding of 
Social Networking, 
Engagement, and 
Social Metrics
7
Chapter
1. Understand the key technologies that made Web 2.0 pos-
sible, and appreciate the opportunities and challenges 
that social media represents for business organizations.
2. Describe the features and capabilities of large social 
networking services.
3. Explain how blogs and microblogs facilitate communication 
on a global scale.
4. Describe how mashups, RSS technology, and monitoring 
tools are valuable to business organizations and indi-
vidual users.
5. Describe how organizations and groups make use of 
new Web 2.0 collaboration tools and services.
Learning Outcomes
221
Chapter Snapshot
Case 7.1 Opening Case: The Connected 
Generation Influences Banking Strategy
7.1 Web 2.0—The Social Web
7.2  Social Networking Services and 
Communities
7.3  Engaging Consumers with Blogs and 
Microblogs
7.4  Mashups, Social Metrics, and Monitoring 
Tools
7.5 Knowledge Sharing in the Social Workplace
Key Terms
Assuring Your Learning
• Discuss: Critical Thinking Questions
• Explore: Online and Interactive Exercises
•  Analyze & Decide: Apply IT Concepts 
to Business Decisions
Case 7.2 Business Case:  Social Customer Service
Case 7.3 Video Case: Viral Marketing: Will It 
Blend?
References

how social media can be used for marketing, recruiting, 
research, collaboration on projects, or personal branding.
Facebook has caught the attention of business orga-
nizations because the number of people who use the 
site is huge (and continues to grow!). Businesses are 
also exploring promotional opportunities on sites like 
Twitter, Pinterest, Tumblr, and YouTube. Companies 
get 24/7 advertising, live interaction with customers and 
prospects, and targeted ads. Organizations are work-
ing feverishly to prompt consumers to engage—to like, 
tweet, comment, and share their brand experiences with 
others. And they are spending a lot of time doing just 
that. According to media consulting firm BIA/Kelsey, 
companies will spend $8 billion promoting goods and 
services through social media by 2015.
In this chapter, you will learn what makes social 
media social. You will also learn about social media 
applications that have both personal and professional 
uses, and you will learn how business organizations make 
use of social media to gain competitive advantages in the 
marketplace.
222
CASE 7.1 OPENING CASE
The Connected Generation Influences Banking Strategy
THREE KEY 
OBSERVATIONS
1. Banks, even the biggest ones, need to think in terms of the consumer because 
social media has given them a powerful voice. 
2. The two most effective mechanisms for banks dealing with connected cus-
tomers is to provide great service and to listen to them when they are not 
happy. The process can be brutal because it demands that banks be transpar-
ent. Bad surprises and “hidden fees” will be exposed in negative tweets and 
posts.
3. Unless you honestly engage customers and get rid of outdated processes that 
harm customer service, you risk negatively impacting your brand image or rev-
enues.
BACKGROUND ON THE 
BANKING INDUSTRY
During the 2010s, the banking industry worldwide was in serious trouble. In the 
United States, mortgage foreclosures, a soft economy, high unemployment, and 
distrust of large corporations stirred by Occupy Wall Street protests against “big 
money” were just some of the problems facing retail banks.
BIG BANKS FACING 
CUSTOMER DISTRUST 
AND PROTEST
In late 2011 big retail banks were losing huge numbers of customers to credit unions 
(CU) and small community banks. According to an October 2011 survey by Intuit 
Financial Services, more than 36 percent of long-time banking customers said they 
had already moved or planned to move their accounts to a CU or other financial 
institution largely because of the high checking account and debit card fees their 
banks had imposed.
The seriousness of the situation led to an event called Bank Transfer Day, a 
Facebook-organized protest against “ridiculous fees and poor customer service” 
originally aimed at Bank of America (BoA), but expanded to include large banks in 
general. It is an example of a groundswell-organized group that came into existence 
via the shared opinions of a large number of people on social media. 
People were urged to close accounts at multinational banks and encouraged 
to “move your money” to a neighborhood bank or CU by November 5, 2011. 
Even though BoA reversed its initial fees after mass outrage, the response was 

CASE 7.1     Opening Case     223  
ADAPTING TO 
CUSTOMERS AND 
THE POWER OF 
SOCIAL MEDIA
Consumers today have a voice that can reward organizations that listen to them, 
and punish those that do not. Social media can provide that powerful voice. “Social 
media is rewriting the rules and increasing the speed with which banks have to 
respond,” says Mark Schwanhausser, a senior analyst for Javelin Strategy and 
Research (Quittner, 2011). Troubled banks (those that had angered customers) 
needed a turnaround strategy to restore customers’ trust and satisfaction, while 
also holding down costs and complying with many regulations. Citigroup is a large, 
global banking and financial services enterprise (see Figure 7.1). The strategies 
employed by its Citibank division are a good example of how some banks have 
chosen to respond to new consumer needs.
ACTION STEP: 
CITIBANK RESPONDS 
TO THE CONNECTED 
GENERATION WITH A 
SOCIAL STRATEGY
Citibank’s turnaround strategies involve using social outreach to better solve cus-
tomer issues in real time, engage them for marketing purposes, and monitor online 
comments to know what to fix. Citi is reaching out to tech-savvy customers, dubbed 
the Connected Generation, or Gen C, using YouTube, Facebook, and other social 
platforms. Gen C typically offers the most long-term value to big banks, which 
make investments in social networks worthwhile. Citi’s ultimate goal is to attract 
Gen C customers who remain loyal by building their trust through increased inter-
activity and involvement. 
Citi worked extensively with three companies to support its social media strat-
egy: CoTweet Inc. (now part of salesforce.com), Hearsay Social, and Socialware, 
Inc. On August 16, 2011, Citibank used the front page of the Wall Street Journal to 
promote its Facebook page. On the Facebook site for Citibank US (facebook.com/
citibank), visitors were prompted to hit “Like” to learn how to get special access to 
Beyonce tickets. The payoff was this: By midnight, Citi had acquired an additional 
2,000 fans or likes.
Sources: Compiled from Fiorenza (2011), Quittner (2011), Skinner (2011), White (2011).
too late. In less than two months, over 650,000 customers had opened accounts 
at nonprofit CUs in the U.S., taking away an estimated $4.5 billion from big 
banks.
Figure 7.1 Citigroup, Inc. 
overview.
Global corporation involved in
retail, corporate, and
investment banking and credit
card services.
Brand
Communicates with customers
and investors via social media
channels while maintaining
compliance with industry
regulations.
Business Results
Citigroup is a U.S. corporation
serving markets around the
world.
Global Reach
Citigroup, Inc.
Customer engagement, investor
relations and communications,
customer service, employee
collaboration.
Social Media Use

224  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
TABLE 7.1 
Opening Case Overview
Company 
Citigroup, Inc.
Location  
 Headquartered in Manhattan, New York City, Citigroup is a publicly held U.S. fi rm 
with customers and markets around the world. 
Industries 
 Citigroup is a banking and fi nancial services fi rm that offers a wide range of products 
and services including retail, corporate, and investment banking; credit cards; global 
wealth management; fi nancial analysis; and private equity services.
Business challenges 
 Federal regulations place severe limits and substantial disclosure requirements 
on communications with customers. Banks have traditionally responded to these 
regulations by carefully screening all promotional messages (i.e., ads, direct mail, 
brochures, etc.) for regulatory compliance before distribution to the marketplace. 
The emergence of social media as a communications channel represents signifi cant 
challenges because of the real time, individual, and public nature of “conversations” 
on social media. Banks do not have the ability to manage social media communica-
tions to ensure that their employees will comply with all regulations in each and 
every interaction that takes place.
Technology solution 
 Citigroup has created a presence on major social media sites—Facebook, Twitter, 
YouTube—and added a blog to its website (new.citi.com).
 
 Hired Frank Eliason, who pioneered social customer service at Comcast, to oversee 
its social media strategy.
 
 Employees who interact with customers via social media are trained to express 
concern for customers’ issues, but move conversations to more secure channels 
(i.e., direct message or phone) to protect customer privacy.
 
 Citigroup uses Facebook and YouTube to provide timely and accurate information to 
investors.
 
 The company created a private social network for homeowners called homeowner-
support.com. This online community for homeowners offers homeowner support 
forums, information about mortgage options, a homeowner support blog, and links 
for talking to mortgage counselors.
Questions
1.  Technology can greatly infl uence businesses. How has social media 
changed retail banking?
2.  Imagine having to live the next 24 hours without your smartphone, 
tablet, or any other mobile computing or communication device—and 
without any access to social media, texting, or tweets. What would be 
your biggest challenges? List two changes you would have to make to 
survive. 
3.  Think over what you expect from companies, such as airlines, banks, 
voice and data service providers, and online retailers. Select two com-
panies. How have your “customer service” expectations for each of 
these companies changed in the past three years? 
4.  Have you used social media to let others know of great or bad service 
or product problems? Explain what you did or did not do, and why. 

7.1     Web 2.0—The Social Web     225  
In your lifetime, there have been dramatic changes in the way people use the 
Internet. In the early 1990s, many people did not have regular access to the Internet, 
and those who did typically “dialed up” their network from a home or office tele-
phone. Dial-up access meant long waits as content from webpages “downloaded” 
onto the screen. Some users joked that the letters “www” in a Web address stood 
for “world wide wait.” E-mail was the primary mechanism for social interaction. 
Online communities were often like public bulletin boards where all members of 
the community could read the messages that others posted. Websites were static, 
essentially online billboards for the businesses that created them. Online purchas-
ing (e-commerce) was rare and risky because there were few safeguards in place to 
protect your credit card information. But all that has changed. 
7.1  Web 2.0—The Social Web
THE CONSTANTLY 
CHANGING WEB
Today, most of us access the Internet using wired or wireless broadband technol-
ogy, consuming bandwidth that was unheard of a few years ago. We expect to be 
able to stream audio and video files, and watch feature-length films over wireless 
connections and mobile devices. We surf webpages that constantly change their 
appearance in response to how we interact with them. While e-mail is still a com-
mon form of communication in business, young people tend to view it with disdain 
in favor of tweets, texts, or social networking sites like Facebook. We keep track of 
our world, interests, and hobbies by reading blogs and online newspapers, and use a 
variety of tools and services for sharing them with others. In addition to consuming 
content, we add comments or reviews and signal our appreciation for the content 
by clicking a “Like” or “
1” button.
Increasingly, Internet users are becoming content creators—they write their 
own blogs, post videos on YouTube, and share pictures using sites like Flickr or 
Photobucket. E-commerce continues to grow and evolve, in some cases changing 
entire industries. E-books are now more popular than print books on sites like 
Amazon. More people purchase music from sites like iTunes or use streaming-music 
sites like Pandora or Spotify than purchase music on CDs. Sites like Travelocity 
and Orbitz have almost completely replaced traditional travel agencies and agents. 
Many people are more likely to use sites like eBay and Craigslist to get rid of 
unwanted household items instead of holding garage sales or placing classified 
ads in a local paper. One of the biggest changes in online retail is the use of social 
features by e-commerce sites. Most online retailers make use of customer reviews, 
customer ratings, and information sharing on social networks.
While there are many exciting examples of companies that have embraced the 
potential of Web 2.0 technologies (Figure 7.2) and the emerging social culture that 
characterizes our modern online experience, many businesses, agencies, and indi-
viduals have been slow to understand both the challenges and opportunities created 
Figure 7.2 Web 2.0 is also 
referred to as the social Web.
© s.s./Alamy
Web 2.0: a term used to 
describe a phase of World 
Wide Web evolution 
characterized by dynamic 
webpages, social media, 
mashup applications, 
broadband connectivity and 
user-generated content.

226  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
by the social Web. Smart managers are constantly evaluating how changes in social 
media and related technologies affect their business and industry. Businesses and 
business professionals must devote time and resources to consistently monitoring 
technological innovation and related changes in consumer behavior in order to 
remain relevant, taking advantage of potential opportunities to create competitive 
advantages when they arise.
INVENTION OF THE 
WORLD WIDE WEB
The World Wide Web (WWW) was invented by Tim Berners-Lee and launched 
in 1991. Its use outside of scientific and academic circles was uncommon until the 
mid-1990s. Web access from homes was mostly via telephone lines, slow 56-kbps 
(kilobits per second) dial-up modems, and paid subscription network services such 
as CompuServe and America Online (AOL). Websites were primitive static designs 
that served as online billboards or postcards. You can view archived websites using 
the WayBackMachine at www.archive.org. During that time, e-mail was viewed as 
a sophisticated communications tool that most people accessed at work or college 
campuses, but not from home. 
As the above description suggests, communication was primarily uni-directional. 
There were no easy-to-use conduits for widespread social interaction. The average 
user was the target or recipient of communications, not a creator. 
WWW AS A PLATFORM 
FOR SERVICES AND 
SOCIAL INTERACTION
Now the Web is a platform for all kinds of activity—shopping, entertainment, news, 
education, research, and business processes like logistics and electronic funds trans-
fer (EFT). Homes maintain broadband wireless networks to connect multiple users 
simultaneously to the Internet from computers, tablets, video game systems, and 
video-streaming devices like the Roku box. In addition to the activities listed above, 
new Web technologies gave rise to websites with features and services that make it 
easy for people to interact with one another. As a result, these services collectively 
are referred to as social media. While the applications that are labeled as Web 2.0 
may simply be an extension of earlier advances, it is the change in user behavior 
that matters most to business organizations around the world. The new technolo-
gies dramatically increase the ability of people to interact with businesses and each 
other, sharing and finding information, and forming relationships. This perspective 
explains why Web 2.0 is often called the social Web.
Broadband: refers to wide 
bandwidth technologies that 
create fast, high volume 
connections to the Internet 
and World Wide Web.
TABLE 7.2 
Web 1.0 vs. Web 2.0
Web 1.0—The Early Web 
Web 2.0—The Social Web
Static pages, HTML 
Dynamic pages, XML, and Java
Author-controlled content 
User-controlled content
Computers 
 Computers, cell phones, televisions, PDAs, 
game systems, car dashboards
Users view content 
Users create content
Individual users 
User communities
Marketing goal: infl uence  
Marketing goal: relationships
Data: single source 
Data: multiple sources, e.g., mashups
World Wide Web: a net-
work of documents on the 
Internet, called webpages, 
constructed with HTML 
markup language that 
supports links to other 
documents and media (e.g. 
graphics, video, audio, etc.).
Social media: a collection 
of Web applications, based 
on Web 2.0 technology and 
culture, that allows people to 
connect and collaborate 
with others by creating and 
sharing digital content.

7.1     Web 2.0—The Social Web     227  
EMERGENCE OF 
SOCIAL APPLICATIONS, 
NETWORKS, AND 
SERVICES
Starting in 2000, a series of developments in the technology and business environ-
ment occurred that set the stage (infrastructure) for Web 2.0. 
1. Broad bandwidth (broadband). Internet access became faster and more widely 
available due to large-scale adoption of broadband technology. Website load 
times shrank from a minute to instantaneous. Huge bandwidth is required to 
support byte-intensive music downloads and streaming video and movie ser-
vices. Figure 7.3 shows the increase in the number of broadband connections in 
people’s homes. Speed increased the overall attractiveness and accessibility of 
the Internet—laying the foundation for interactivity and the social Web.
2. Sustainable business models. After the dot.com bust in the late 1990s when many 
badly conceived Internet businesses failed, a new breed of business emerged. 
These businesses had realistic revenue models. Companies like Amazon, Google, 
eBay, and others began to demonstrate that it was possible to create e-commerce 
and consumer service sites that could generate revenue and become not only 
self-sustaining, but also profi table.
3. New Web programming technologies. New Web programming languages and 
technologies were developed that made it possible for programmers to create 
dynamic and feature-rich websites. In some cases, these new features and website 
capabilities created new business opportunities, which in turn led to increased 
demand for Web access. Increased Web usage then led to larger potential mar-
kets for businesses with successful revenue models. The businesses frequently 
reinvested earnings into expanding their technological capabilities in an effort 
to attract even more customers. This cycle of enhanced technological features 
leading to greater value for the consumer/Web user and then to more people using 
the Web continues today. Some of these new Web technologies are described in 
more detail in Tech Note 7.1.
4. Application programming interface (API). APIs facilitate the transfer of data 
from one website app to another. APIs can be either proprietary or open source. 
Use of a proprietary API requires the developer to pay a fee to gain access to 
data. 
Fortunately, many popular APIs are open source, which means that anyone 
can use them for free, although there may be other terms and conditions placed on 
their use. Not surprisingly, the most popular API on the Web is the Google Maps 
API, which is used by over 30 percent of the mashups on the Web today. Visit 
programmableWeb.com/apis for a listing of popular APIs. The Google Maps API 
allows developers to create apps where information like store locations can be dis-
played on a map that comes from Google. 
Figure 7.3 The increased number of broadband at-home connections was a 
critical driver of online interactivity. (Horrigan, 2009.) 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
U.S. Internet Connection Trends
Broadband at home
Dial-up at home

228  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
TECH NOTE 7.1 AJAX Technologies and APIs
AJAX technologies, or asynchronous JavaScript and XML, is a term referring to a 
group of technologies and programming languages that make it possible for web-
pages to respond to users’ actions without requiring the entire page to reload. AJAX 
makes it possible for Web developers to create small apps that run on a page instead 
of a server. This capability makes programs run much faster, eliminating a key source 
of frustration with the early Web. Another important programming development 
is the application programming interface (API), which acts as a software gateway 
programmers can use to pass data back and forth between two or more applica-
tions, platforms, or websites (see IT at Work 7.1). With AJAX and APIs, website pro-
grammers can import data from other sources to create new functions and features 
that we have come to associate with social media applications (see the discussion of 
mashups later in this chapter).
 
AJAX technologies include JavaScript, extendable markup language 
(XML), document object model (DOM), hypertext markup language (HTML), 
XMLHttpRequest, and cascading style sheets (CSS), all of which are defi ned in 
Table 7.3. 
TABLE 7.3 
AJAX Technologies for Web 2.0
HTML: The predominant language for webpages; it is used, along with CSS, to 
describe how things will appear on a webpage.
CSS: A language used to enhance the appearance of webpages written in a 
markup language.
DOM: A programming API for documents. Programmers use it to manipulate 
(e.g., build, add, modify, delete, etc.) HTML documents.
XML: A set of rules and guidelines for describing data that can be used by 
other programming languages. It makes it possible for data to be shared across 
the Web.
JavaScript: An object-oriented language used to create apps and functionality 
on websites. Examples of JavaScript apps include pop-up windows, validation of 
webform inputs, and images that change when a cursor passes over them. 
XMLHttpRequest: A JavaScript object that serves as an API used by programs 
to retrieve data or resources from a URL without requiring a page load. It plays an 
important role in providing programmers with the ability to create dynamic and 
interactive webpages and applications.
Sources: W3C (2010); techterms.com (2014); Hegaret, Wood, & Robie (2000); 
van Kesteren et al. (2014).

7.1     Web 2.0—The Social Web     229  
APIs also make it possible for businesses to create apps 
for interacting with users. Taking advantage of Facebook’s 
Social Graph API, American Express recently created the 
Link, Like, Love app that allows users to link their American 
Express card to their Facebook profile. This makes it possible 
for American Express to deliver customized deals and offers 
to users that are based on things they do on Facebook (Kim, 
2011). For instance, card members who discuss vacation and 
travel plans with friends on Facebook may receive special 
offers for hotel and airline tickets. 
Sources: Kim (2011), American Express (2011).
IT at Work 7 .1
American Express – Feeling the Love
WHY MANAGERS 
SHOULD UNDERSTAND 
WEB TECHNOLOGY
You might ask yourself why business managers who are not directly involved in 
managing an organization’s website should be concerned about the underlying tech-
nology of Web 2.0 and social media. The answer is that these technologies deter-
mine website features and capabilities. In other words, they determine what is pos-
sible on the Web. Understanding how Web technology is evolving helps managers 
identify strategic opportunities and threats as well as the ways in which a company 
might develop sustainable competitive advantages in the marketplace. Therefore, 
it is important to monitor the ongoing development of APIs, Web development 
languages, and other technologies that affect the functioning of the Web. 
APIs: For instance, APIs associated with Facebook determine the nature of apps 
that can be written to interact with core Facebook features. Major changes to the 
Facebook APIs are often rolled out to much fanfare because they define opportuni-
ties for developing new ways for users to create and share content on Facebook and 
across the Web, as described in IT at Work 7.1. 
At Facebook’s annual developer conferences in 2010 and 2011, founder Mark 
Zuckerberg made announcements about changes in Facebook APIs that would 
extend the social networking giant’s presence across the Web through the use of 
social plug-ins, which are listed in Table 7.4. See the discussion of Open Graph in 
Section 7.2.
Plug-Ins: Plug-ins are buttons or features on non-Facebook sites that interact with 
Facebook in some way. For instance, CNN.com might include a Recommend but-
ton on all its news articles. When a Facebook user presses the button, a link to the 
story is automatically created on the user’s Facebook page. You don’t have to be 
a Web programmer to follow and understand public announcements about API 
updates from Facebook, Google Maps, YouTube, Twitter, and other popular social 
media platforms. Using the monitoring tools discussed later in this chapter, you can 
stay informed about these changes and begin to assess how they will impact you as 
an individual, website developer, or business manager.
COMMUNICATING 
ON THE WEB
Collectively, social media apps have shifted the locus of control for mass commu-
nications from large organizations to one shared with individual users. Now people 
as well as organizations control both the message and the medium. Instead of an 
organization broadcasting a single message to a mass audience, a massive number of 
conversations take place among any number of people and organizations.
No one has complete control over the message or the medium, yet everyone 
can play a part. The challenge for businesses today is to change mindsets and 

230  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
develop strategies that take advantage of social media. Instead of a focus on 
developing sophisticated ways of getting their message heard, companies must 
now develop sophisticated strategies for listening and responding to what their 
consumers are saying. 
Because of the relatively low cost and ease of use, social media is a power-
ful force for democratization; the network structure enables communication and 
collaboration on a massive scale. Figure 7.4 shows the emergence of mass social 
TABLE 7.4 
Facebook Social Plug-Ins Used Across the Web
Like button 
 Shares pages from a website back to a user’s Facebook profi le 
with a single click.
Send button 
 Allows users to send content from a website to their Facebook 
friends.
Comments
 
 This plug-in allows users to comment on a webpage’s content 
using their Facebook profi le and shows the activity to the user’s 
friends in a newsfeed.
Embedded 
Places content from any public Facebook post on to your website 
posts  
or blog.
Facepile 
 This feature displays the profi le photos of the people who have 
connected with your Facebook page or app.
Login button 
 Shows profi le pictures of the user’s friends who have already 
signed up for your site in addition to a login button.
Source: Facebook (2014).
Figure 7.4 The emergence 
and rise of mass social 
media.
Network
Effects
Consumer
Control
Videos
Podcasts
Tweets
Forums
Wikis
Enterprise 2.0 Platforms
Institutional
Control
Traditional Media
Social
Consumption
Social Media
Blogosphere
Blog
Blog
Blog
Blog
Blog
Blog
Print
Via comments,
Inst. Msg., Feedback,
Ratings, Reviews
Radio
Movies
Media
Outlets
Shift
Observe
Publish
Contribute
Television

7.1     Web 2.0—The Social Web     231  
SOCIAL MEDIA 
APPLICATIONS 
AND SERVICES
Early descriptions of Web 2.0 would often identify the apps listed in Table 7.5 as 
typical of social media. You will read more about each of these applications later 
in the chapter.
Few apps fit neatly into these categories anymore because of feature conver-
gence. For instance, Facebook started as a social networking service, but now has 
features that span almost all of the categories in Table 7.5. It is a sharing site used 
by many to distribute photos. It is increasingly common for people to tag or label 
photos with the names of people in the picture, making it easy to find and display 
photos of individuals that have been saved in multiple locations on Facebook. 
Users can maintain blogs on their Facebook page and Facebook hosts thousands 
of apps that pull data from sources outside of the social network, making it a huge 
mashup app. 
Likewise, YouTube (see Figure 7.5) started as a sharing site, making it easy for 
people to share video clips with others. However, YouTube now contains many fea-
tures that make it difficult to distinguish from a social networking service. The same 
is true of Flickr, a photo-sharing site that has really become a community platform 
for people interested in photography.
While some original social media apps are still present on the Web today, thou-
sands of newer apps have sprung up that continue to blur the lines of the original 
social media app categories.
media. The figure compares traditional and social media and illustrates the new 
tools of social media, for example, blogs and video blogs (vlogs), as being in the 
consumer’s control. With traditional media, content is tightly controlled and brand 
messages are “pushed” out to users, often in the form of an ad interruption. With 
social media, users are frequently attracted or “pulled” to content that is interesting 
to them and they have greater freedom to decide if, when, and how they want to 
interact with such content.
Notice that traditional media content goes from the technology to the people, 
whereas in social media, people create and control the content.
TABLE 7.5 
Web 2.0 Applications
Apps 
Descriptions
Social networking 
Online communities
services (SNSs)
Blogs 
Online journals
Mashups/ 
Web apps that pull data from various sources and display 
widgets/RSS  
on another page to create new functionality
Social 
An app for tagging or labeling online content for later 
bookmarking/tags  
retrieval
Wikis 
 A collaborative app that allows multiple people to create 
and edit online content
Sharing sites 
 Websites that make it easy for users to upload and share 
digital content like photos, videos, or music
Social networking service 
(SNS): an online platform or 
website that allows subscrib-
ers to interact and form com-
munities or networks based 
on real-life relationships, 
shared interests, activities 
and so on.

232  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
SOCIAL MEDIA IS MORE 
THAN FACEBOOK, 
YOUTUBE, AND 
TWITTER
Many people think that social media is limited to a few iconic companies or brand 
names: Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and LinkedIn. While those companies have 
certainly capitalized on the new technology, in fact, social media is a term describing 
a range of technologies that are used across the cloud (Internet) and are, in some 
way, part of most websites you use today.
While you may be familiar with using social media for recreational purposes 
or communicating with friends and family, businesses use social technologies for a 
wide variety of other benefits:
• Collaboration
• Communication and Engagement with Customers (Marketing)
• Image and Reputation Management (Public Relations)
• Communication and Engagement with Employees and Partners 
(Management)
• Talent Acquisition and Recruiting (Human Resources)
• Research and Knowledge Management
• Productivity and Information Utilities
• Fund Raising
The following section lists some of the key elements of social media that distin-
guish it from other types of media.
Elements of Social Media: What Makes it Different?
In order to understand what makes the modern Web so much different from its ear-
lier incarnation, it is helpful to understand the differentiating features and benefits 
made possible by XML, Java Script, APIs, and related technologies.
User-generated content (UGC). In contrast to traditional media–TV, radio, 
and magazines—social media make it possible for users to create and share 
their own content. Using various social technologies, people share photographs, 
music, and video with the world. They express themselves using the written 
word in stories, articles, and opinion pieces that they publish on their own web-
sites or other platforms. They rate products and write reviews.
Content control. Most of this content creation and sharing is done without 
editorial review—users thus decide for themselves what they want to create 
and share. Social technologies have shifted control of online content to a broad 
base of users. It is users who determine what content “goes viral” or becomes 
highly popular through sharing, not advertising agencies or companies with 
large advertising budgets.
Figure 7.5 YouTube, a 
video-sharing site, is the 
third most popular site on 
the Internet.
© M4OS/Alamy

7.1     Web 2.0—The Social Web     233  
Conversation. With the advent of social media a paradigm shift occurred in 
marketing communications, from a broadcast (one-way) communications 
model to a conversation (two-way) communications model. Dialogue takes 
place in the form of one-to-one, one-to-many, and many-to-one formats. Social 
media websites contain features that allow people to talk back in a variety of 
ways.
Community (common values, culture). Many social media technologies ulti-
mately result in the creation of communities. Like their offline counterparts, 
these online communities are made up of people who share a bond of common 
interests, values, norms, and even sanctions. Some communities are highly 
structured, whereas others may be more fluid and informal. As businesses learn 
to communicate on Web 2.0, some will attempt to create communities made up 
of consumers who have a strong interest in a particular brand. Social network-
ing services lend themselves to this type of strategy, but brand communities can 
be developed around blogs, wikis, sharing sites, and other types of social media 
applications.
Categorization by users (tagging). Newer Web technologies have begun to 
allow users to decide for themselves how to categorize and label information 
they find online. This has created the potential for powerful forms of collabora-
tion and information sharing as well as alternative forms of information search 
(see the discussion of social bookmarking later in the chapter).
Real people (profiles, usernames, and the human voice vs. the corporate “we”). 
Social media technologies allow people to express their individuality through 
the creation of online identities. In traditional media, communication and 
expression come from celebrities or corporate spokespersons. Web 2.0 provides 
people with the tools to create personal brands that characterize their personal, 
professional, or creative identity.
Connections (followers, friends, members, etc.). There are many ways to 
establish additional levels of connection and reflect some level of a relation-
ship. You can become someone’s friend on Facebook. Follow someone on 
Twitter. Subscribe to a person’s blog. Perhaps just as important, these con-
nections can be severed when one party wants to end the relationship (see 
Table 7.6).
TABLE 7.6 
Things That Will Get You Un-Friended on Facebook
Posting unimportant and annoying stuff—Enough with the stupid quizzes 
already!
Too many religious and political posts—If we really want to know, we’ll ask, 
thank you.
Posting inappropriate stuff—Porn, sexist humor, racist stuff, etc. Remember: 
Your friends’ moms or kids are all part of the extended network. 
You’re just too boring—You aren’t Beyonce. People don’t care that you just made 
a PB&J for lunch.
Too many posts—Watch how often your friends post to Facebook and avoid 
being the person who shares twice as much as most other people.
Source: Based on Sibona & Walczak (2011). 

234  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
Constant updating (real time, dynamic). Unlike the static Web of the 1990s, 
social technologies reflect our constantly evolving relationships, opinions, 
political views, religious beliefs, and values. The social Web is a constant stream 
of communications that never turns off and can sometimes be overwhelming.
Content separated from form. Data from one source can be used or exported 
to other platforms. This allows users to organize and display content in ways 
they find most helpful. For instance, with an RSS aggregator, users pull content 
from a number of sources into a single location, making it easier to follow news 
stories and blog posts from multiple sites. Someone writing about local restau-
rants can pull content from food critics, customer comments, and map location 
information from a variety of sources and aggregate this information into a 
single site, making it easier for users to get a complete picture of a restaurant 
without having to surf around to different sites.
Equipment independence. Increasingly, people access the Web and social 
media from a variety of computers and mobile devices, including laptops, 
tablets, smartphones, video game systems, DVD players, and televisions. In 
the near future, you might access the Web from such home appliances as your 
refrigerator or even a kitchen countertop. (Check out the amazing new technol-
ogy featured on videos by Corning Glass. Go to YouTube and search for “A 
Day Made of Glass” using the YouTube search engine.)
WEB 2.0 ATTITUDE
As you have read, the availability of Web 2.0 applications is changing not only 
how people behave, but also the way they think about things. This new way of 
thinking is captured in a provocative list of 95 statements called the Cluetrain 
Manifesto (Levine et al., 2000). Perhaps the fundamental principle of the Manifesto 
is described by its first thesis: Markets are conversations. Other excerpts from the 
Manifesto are listed in Table 7.7. Over time, successful companies will learn to 
engage customers in conversations as an alternative to the unidirectional or broad-
cast method of communication. While the Cluetrain Manifesto seemed idealistic, 
impractical, and revolutionary when it was first written in 2000, we are starting 
to see more examples of individuals and companies finding ways of turning those 
principles into action.
While most companies still struggle with the concept of conversation, Forrester 
researchers Charlene Li and Josh Bernoff describe a number of companies who 
recognize the power of what they call the groundswell, “a spontaneous move-
ment of people using online tools to connect, take charge of their own experience 
and get what they need—information, support, ideas, products, and bargaining 
TABLE 7.7 
Excerpts from the Cluetrain Manifesto
Select Cluetrain Theses
•  “Markets are conversations.”
•  These conversations enable powerful forms of social organization and 
knowledge exchange.
•  People have fi gured out they obtain better information and support from one 
another than from vendors. So much for corporate rhetoric about adding 
value to commoditized products.
•  Companies should realize their markets are often laughing. At them.
Source: Levine et al. (2000).

7.2     Social Networking Services and Communities     235  
power—from each other” (2008). Li and Bernoff identify five key strategic priori-
ties that companies should focus on to leverage the groundswell:
1. Listening—Monitoring what your customers say on social media. By listening to 
what customers say to your company and what they say to each other, organiza-
tions can gain valuable insights.
2. Talking—While listening is perhaps the most important priority, businesses still 
need to develop their message and communicate to their target audience(s).
3. Energizing—Using a variety of tactics, companies can create and maintain rela-
tionships with brand advocates who will support and promote the brand to their 
friends and followers on the Web. Energizing brand advocates is analogous to 
generating word-of-mouth communications in traditional marketing.
4. Supporting—Using social media to deliver effective and convenient customer 
service is one way to support your customers. Some businesses create communi-
ties where customers can help each other with product-related issues and ques-
tions.
5. Embracing—Many companies are utilizing social media to solicit new product 
ideas and suggestions for improving customer satisfaction from current custom-
ers. Managers are often surprised to learn that customers have great ideas for 
how the company can do better. 
These groundswell strategies identify the most significant activities that companies 
should focus on with regard to using social media.
In the rest of this chapter, we describe a variety of social media apps that are 
growing in popularity. We highlight some of the most attractive features, and encour-
age you to explore them firsthand. Most are free, so they are easy to try. You are also 
encouraged to stay on top of new trends and applications by following online sources 
like Mashable, Social Media Today, and Social Media Examiner. The only way to 
truly understand the social media environment is to immerse yourself in it, experienc-
ing it directly. We think it is both fascinating and fun, and hope you will too.
Questions
1. How has Web 2.0 changed the behavior of Internet users?
2. What are the basic tools or applications that characterize Web 2.0?
3. Why is Web 2.0 referred to as the social Web?
4. What are some of the benefi ts or advantages that Web developers gain 
from using AJAX technologies?
5. What are some of the most important messages for business organiza-
tions in the Cluetrain Manifesto?
6. What is feature convergence? Give some examples of this trend with 
regard to social media apps.
Online or virtual communities parallel typical physical communities, such as neigh-
borhoods, clubs, and associations, except that they are not bound by political or 
geographic boundaries. These communities offer several ways for members to inter-
act, collaborate, and trade. Virtual or online communities have been around for a 
long time and pre-date the World Wide Web. The Usenet provided the initial plat-
form for online communities by making it possible for users to exchange messages 
on various topics in public newsgroups, which are similar in many ways to online 
bulletin board systems. While the Usenet is technically not part of the Internet, 
7.2  Social Networking Services and Communities

236  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
much of its content can be accessed from Internet sites like Google Groups or 
subscription-based news server services like Giganews and Astraweb. (For 
additional information about online communities during the early phases of the 
Internet, see Leiner et al., 2009.)
Online communities can take a number of forms. For instance, some people 
view the blogosphere (all the blogs on the Web) as a community. YouTube is a 
community of people who post, view, and comment on videos. Epinions is a com-
munity of people who share their experiences and opinions about products and 
companies. Flickr, Photobucket, Webshots, and similar sites are photo-sharing 
communities. Wikipedia is a community of people who create, edit, and maintain an 
online knowledge base. Twitter is a community, or perhaps several communities, of 
people who frequently share short, 140-character messages with one another about 
a variety of topics. Obviously, social networking sites like Facebook and LinkedIn 
are communities and have seen tremendous growth in recent years. The mass adop-
tion of social networking websites points to an evolution in human social interaction 
(Weaver & Morrison, 2008).
Social network analysis (SNA) is the mapping and measuring of relationships 
and flows between people, groups, organizations, computers, or other information- 
or knowledge-processing entities. The nodes in the network are the people and 
the groups, whereas the links show relationships or flows between the nodes. SNA 
provides both a visual and a mathematical analysis of relationships. In its corporate 
communications, Facebook has begun using the term social graph to refer to the 
global social network reflecting how we are all connected to one another through 
relationships (Figure 7.6). Facebook users can access a social graph application that 
visually represents the connections among all the people in their network. Berners-
Lee (2007) extended this concept even further when he coined the term giant global 
graph. This concept is intended to illustrate the connections between people and/
or documents and pages online. Connecting all points on the Giant Global Graph 
is the ultimate goal for creators of the semantic Web, which you read about in 
Chapter 6.
Online communities have received increasing attention from the business com-
munity. Online communities can be used as a platform for:
• Selling goods and services
• Promoting products to prospective customers; for example, advertising
• Prospecting for customers
• Building relationships with customers and prospective customers
• Identifying customer perceptions by “listening” to conversations
Figure 7.6 A social graph 
uses nodes and ties to 
illustrate relationships 
between individuals and 
groups of people.
© Tom De Spiegelaere/Alamy
Semantic Web: An extension 
of the World Wide Web that 
utilizes a variety of conven-
tions and technologies that 
allow machines to under-
stand the meaning of Web 
content.

7.2     Social Networking Services and Communities     237  
• Soliciting ideas for new products and services from customers
• Providing support services to customers by answering questions, providing 
information, and so on
• Encouraging customers to share their positive perceptions with others; for 
example, via word of mouth
• Gathering information about competitors and marketplace perceptions of 
competitors
• Identifying and interacting with prospective suppliers, partners, and collabo-
rators (See the discussion of Enterprise 2.0 in the next section.)
LEVERAGING THE 
POWER OF THE CROWD
In recent years, several companies have created online communities for the purpose 
of identifying market opportunities through crowdsourcing. Crowdsourcing is a model 
of problem solving and idea generation that marshals the collective talents of a large 
group of people. Using Web 2.0 tools, companies solicit, refine, and evaluate ideas for 
new products and services based on input from their customers. Business organizations 
that have implemented this approach include Fiat, Sara Lee, BMW, Kraft, Procter & 
Gamble, and Starbucks. See Openinnovators.net for a list of other examples. 
CROWDFUNDING
More recently, businesses and entrepreneurs have turned to the crowdsourcing 
model to raise money for business start-ups or projects. A number of crowdfunding 
sites have become popular in recent years, including Kickstarter, GoFundMe, and 
Indiegogo (see crowdfunding.com). The crowdfunding sites are each governed by 
different rules that establish the kinds of projects or organizations that can use them 
to raise money as well as the types of crowdfunding allowed on the site (Table 7.8). 
TABLE 7.8 
Types of Crowdfunding
Donations
 
 Often used by charities and political campaigns, contributors 
do not receive anything tangible in exchange for their donation, 
just the knowledge that they are supporting a cause they like or 
believe in. (In some cases, contributors may be eligible for a tax 
write-off.)
Rewards
 
 Contributors receive some kind of “perk” or thank-you gift. 
Often it is something related to the project. For instance, people 
who contribute to a fi lmmaker’s project may receive a copy of 
the fi nished work on DVD. 
Credit 
 Contributors essentially make microloans to fund projects and 
expect to be repaid with interest.
Equity
 
 With this approach, contributors make “micro-investments” and 
receive a proportional ownership stake in the company. It is 
likely that regulatory agencies that oversee equities markets in 
the U.S. and other countries will establish rules governing or 
even restricting this type of crowdfunding.
Royalties
 
 Contributors receive a percentage of the sales revenue generated 
by a project. For instance, people who contribute to a musician’s 
recording project might receive royalties from the sale of the 
artist’s music. 
Sources: Outlaw (2013), Wikipedia (2014).

238  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
The crowdfunding sites typically collect a percentage of the money raised. The fee 
can vary significantly depending on the site and the crowdfunding model used, so it 
is important to read the terms of service carefully before selecting a particular site 
to raise money on.
Figure 7.7 Average time 
spent per month on social 
networking services, 
2008–2011. (Nielsen, 2010, 
comScore, 2011.)
07:12:00
06:00:00
03:36:00
04:48:00
02:24:00
01:12:00
00:00:00
2008
Hours
2009
Time Spent on Social Networking Sites HH:MM:SS
2010
2011
02:13:24
03:32:49
06:00:25
06:54:00
Figure 7.8 LinkedIn is used 
as a primary recruiting tool 
by a majority of companies.
SOCIAL NETWORKING 
SERVICES
Social networking services (SNSs) represent a special type of virtual community 
and are now the dominant form of online community. With social networking, indi-
vidual users maintain an identity through their profile and can be selective about 
which members of the larger community they choose to interact with. Over time, 
users build their network by adding contacts or friends. On some social network 
platforms, organizations create an identity by establishing discussion forums, group 
pages, or some other presence. Social networking has increased substantially in 
recent years. Research company comScore reported that people in the U.S. spent 
an average of 6 hours and 54 minutes a month on social networking sites in 2011, 
up from only 2 hours and 13 minutes in 2008. Figure 7.7 illustrates the growth rate 
of time spent on social networking sites.
© Alex Segre/Alamy
The number of social networking services has grown tremendously in recent 
years. It is expected that the social networking sector will segment and consolidate 
in the future just like other industries. Among the general-purpose SNS platforms, 
Facebook is the clear leader with over 1.2 billion active users (Statista, 2014). 
Facebook is the second most visited site on the Internet after Google, according 
to alexa.com (2014), and it has publicly stated its intention to become number one 
(Vogelstein, 2009, Harvey, 2010). If Facebook were a country, it would be the sec-
ond or third largest in the world. In the first quarter of 2014, Facebook’s active user 
population appears to have grown slightly larger than the population of India, the 
Terms of Service (TOS) 
Agreement: a formal listing 
of the policies, liability limits, 
fees and user rights and respon-
sibilities associated with using a 
particular service. Users are typi-
cally required to acknowledge 
they have read, understand and 
agree to the TOS before they 
are allowed to use the service.

7.2     Social Networking Services and Communities     239  
second largest country in the world behind China. For an up-to-date list of popular 
social networking sites around the world, see en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_social_
networking_sites.
While SNS sites share some common features, they are not all alike. As the cat-
egory matures, sites are differentiating themselves in a variety of ways. For instance, 
the SNS services in Wikipedia’s list differ in terms of:
• Target age group
• Geographic location of users
• Language
• Area of interest; for example, music, photography, gaming, travel
• Social vs. professional networking (see IT at Work 7.2)
• Interface; for example, profile page, microblog, virtual world, emphasis on 
graphic vs. text content
Susan Heathfield, a human resources (HR) expert at About.com, 
maintains that it is no longer sufficient to post job openings on 
monster.com, Careerbuilder.com, and Craigslist.com. Job 
postings on these large sites often generate hundreds of 
applications from unqualified candidates. This can be over-
whelming for recruiters and very inefficient. Instead, many 
have turned to professional networking sites like LinkedIn. In 
a blog post, Heathfield identified a number of specific ways 
that businesses can use LinkedIn to increase the effective-
ness of their recruiting:
• 
Identify potential candidates among your existing net-
work of professionals.
• 
Ask your network to identify or recommend candidates 
for a position.
• 
Evaluate potential employees based on references and 
referrals from your existing network. 
• 
Actively search for candidates among LinkedIn users 
using keywords or qualifications from their profiles.
• 
Ask current employees to search among their LinkedIn 
networks for potential candidates.
• 
For a fee, you can post job openings on LinkedIn.
• 
Request introductions to potential candidates through 
your existing network of professionals.
• 
Use Inmail (the internal LinkedIn e-mail system) to contact 
potentially qualified individuals.
It is clear that recruiters have come to embrace LinkedIn as 
an effective and cost-efficient way of generating qualified 
candidates. As LinkedIn’s global presence grows, this will 
provide an important benefit to companies who need to fill 
positions internationally.
Source: Heathfield (2012).
Questions
1. Why have monster.com, Careerbuilder.com, and Craigslist.
com lost their effectiveness? 
2. Why have HR departments turned to professional net-
working sites like LinkedIn? 
3. Why is it so essential for career-minded workers to build 
a professional social network? What can this network do 
for you?
IT at Work 7 .2
Recruiters Use Professional Networking Sites
FACEBOOK 
DOMINATES SOCIAL 
NETWORKING
Facebook is the largest social networking service the world. (The next largest 
social network is China’s Qzone with 848 million users.) Facebook was launched 
in 2004 by a former Harvard student, Mark Zuckerberg. Photos, groups, events, 
marketplace, posted items, and notes are the basic applications already installed in 

240  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
Facebook. Apart from these basic applications, users can develop their own apps or 
add any of the millions of Facebook apps that have been developed by other users. 
Increasingly, people are accessing Facebook (and other social media sites) using 
mobile devices instead of computers (Figure 7.9).
Facebook was responsible for originating a unique feature called Newsfeed. 
This app featured a constantly updated stream of status updates from a user’s 
friends. In late 2011 Facebook introduced another major revision to its site called 
Timeline. The Timeline app is designed to show the chronological progression of 
key events in a person’s life as illustrated by his or her Facebook status updates, 
photos, the songs that person is listening to, bad haircuts, as well as changes in 
occupations, locations, relationships, and the like. Facebook says it wants to make 
it easier for people to tell their life stories by curating all the content they have 
shared on the social networking service. Many users, however, were surprised by 
the radical interface change and are uncomfortable with how easy it became for 
others to access old, long forgotten posts and status updates. According to many 
news reports, the new app has encouraged many to tighten their privacy settings 
even further to limit the content that is shared with others.
When Zuckerberg created Facebook, he had very strong social ambitions 
aimed at helping people connect to others on the Web. Facebook was initially an 
online social space for college and high school students. It started by connecting 
students to all others at the same school. In 2006 Facebook expanded to anyone 
13 years or older with a valid e-mail address. The lack of privacy controls (e.g., 
tools that restrict who sees your profile) was among the biggest reasons why many 
businesspeople resisted joining Facebook. 
In 2008 Facebook introduced new controls that allow users to set different lev-
els of access to information about themselves for each of their groups; for example, 
family, friends from school, friends from work, and so on. For instance, close friends 
might see your mobile phone number, music favorites, e-mail address, and so forth, 
while other friends might see only the basics of your résumé (Abram & Pearlman, 
2008). Facebook is regularly criticized for its approach to user privacy, highlighting 
an ongoing tension between the corporate goals of Facebook, which depends on a 
high level of access to user data, and the desire of individual users to control access 
to their personal information. See IT at Work 7.3 for additional information about 
social media privacy issues.
Facebook has expanded to the rest of the world with the help of its foreign-
language members: Engineers first collected thousands of English words and 
phrases throughout the site and invited members to translate those bits of text into 
another language. Members then rated translations until a consensus was reached. 
The Spanish version was done by about 1,500 volunteers in less than a month. 
Figure 7.9 People are 
increasingly using mobile 
devices like tablets and 
smartphones to access 
Facebook and other social 
media sites.
© incamerastock/Alamy

7.2     Social Networking Services and Communities     241  
The German version was done by 2,000 volunteers in less than two weeks. In 
early March 2008 Facebook invited French members to help out. They completed 
the translations in a few days. Facebook exists in over 70 different languages and 
approximately 81 percent of their members reside outside of the U.S. In May 
2012 Facebook went public with its Initial Public Offering (IPO), selling company 
shares on the NASDAQ stock exchange. It raised over $16 billion, making it the 
third largest ever IPO in U.S. history. While founder Mark Zuckerberg sold some 
30 million shares during the offering (for $1.15 billion), he continues to own approx-
imately 22 percent of the company. His net worth of over $27.7 billion places him 
among the 30 most wealthy people on the planet.
The Open Graph Initiative
A primary reason that Facebook expands is the network effect: More users mean 
more value. In April 2010 Zuckerberg announced Facebook’s new initiative called 
Open Graph. The goal was to connect all the different relationships that exist on 
the Internet by linking websites to Facebook. Programmers at external websites 
were encouraged to include a Facebook “Like” button on their websites. That 
way, when a Facebook member visits the website, they can click “Like” and their 
relationship with that website will be reflected back on their Facebook page for 
friends to see.
Facebook also encourages other websites to allow people to use their Facebook 
username and password to sign in or create accounts. For instance, if you are a 
Facebook member and you visit Pandora.com (a music service) or Yelp.com (a 
local directory service), you can sign into the sites using your Facebook username 
and password. Facebook will then share your profile information with those 
sites. This new initiative is exciting for its potential to enhance the social richness 
and ease of use of the Internet. On the other hand, this is just one more example of 
how Facebook creates concerns about how it shares users’ information with others.
Network effect: From the 
field of economics, the net-
work effect explains how the 
perceived value of a product 
or service is affected by the 
number of people using the 
product or service.
GOOGLE TAKES ON 
FACEBOOK WITH G
Launched in June 2011, Google
, or G
 as some like to call it, is the latest entrant 
to the SNS market and some believe it is capable of becoming a formidable com-
petitor to Facebook (see Figure 7.10). By March 2012 Google
 had over 100 mil-
lion users. 
Like Facebook, Google
 offers building and sharing features, including 
Google Hangouts, a popular and easy to use video conferencing feature.
It is clear that Mark Zuckerberg is not taking Google
 lightly. Facebook con-
tinues to launch new features and apps it hopes will help maintain its dominant 
status. Search “Google
 vs. Facebook” for current news and information.
Figure 7.10 With the launch 
of Google
, the search 
engine giant hopes to create 
a social network that is fully 
integrated with all of its other 
services.
© Zoonat/D Vasileva/Age Fotostock

242  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
Figure 7.11 Second Life 
residents participate in a 
virtual world beauty contest 
sponsored by cosmetics 
manufacturer L’Oreal.
© STR/Reuters/Corbis
AND NOW FOR 
SOMETHING DIFFERENT: 
SECOND LIFE
Second Life is a social network service unlike most others. What makes it unique is 
that it uses a 3D virtual world interface in which users, called Residents, are repre-
sented by avatars, or cyberbodies that they create (Figure 7.11). 
Developed by Linden Research in 2003, Second Life lets residents commu-
nicate with others in the virtual world through chat or voice communications. 
Residents can create and trade things they make in Second Life, including virtual 
clothes, art, vehicles, houses, and other architectural structures. They can also earn 
money by providing services such as instruction in a foreign language or serving as a 
DJ in a virtual club. This has led to the evolution of a Second Life economy with its 
own currency, the Linden dollar (L$). While most of the economic activity remains 
in the Second Life world, there are news reports of a few entrepreneurs who have 
made considerable sums of real money. Residents who make a lot of Linden dollars 
can exchange them at a rate of about 250 L$ for every U.S. dollar.
Between 2006 and 2008, there was a big spike in interest on the part of busi-
nesses that saw great potential in using Second Life. For example, IBM used it as 
a location for meetings, training, and recruitment. American Apparel was the first 
major retailer to set up shop in Second Life. Starwood Hotels used Second Life as 
a relatively low-cost market research experiment in which avatars visit Starwood’s 
virtual Aloft hotel. The endeavor created publicity for the company and feed-
back on the design of the hotel was solicited from visiting avatars. This informa-
tion was used in the creation of the first real-world Aloft hotel, which opened in 
2008 (Carr, 2007). Starwood subsequently donated its Second Life property to a 
not-for-profit educational organization. Fashion and clothing manufacturers like 
Reebok, American Apparel, Adidas, and others used Second Life as a place to 
feature new clothing designs, setting up virtual stores where Second Life citizens 
could purchase digital clothing for their avatars. The hope was that awareness of 
fashion products on Second Life would spur interest and eventual purchase of 
real-world products. But efforts by these and other businesses, like 1-800-flowers, 
to get Second Life citizens to purchase real-world products through the virtual 
community have proven disappointing. Many businesses that were quick to 
become part of the early excitement around Second Life have left the virtual world 
community.
Will Second Life eventually replace Facebook and other 2D SNS platforms? 
Probably not, in spite of its impressive interface. While Second Life is visually com-
pelling, it requires users to master a much larger range of controls and technology to 
Avatar: an icon, figure or 
visual representation of a 
person in computer games, 
simulations, virtual worlds or 
online discussion forms.

7.2     Social Networking Services and Communities     243  
become fully functional. Its aesthetic similarity to video games may cause some to 
underestimate its potential for more serious applications. Also, avatars interact in 
real time, so users need to be online at the same time as their friends and acquain-
tances in order to interact. That said, there are some niche applications that show 
promise. Using speakers and microphones, groups of people can conduct meetings 
in Second Life. Teachers can interact with their students in Second Life. How would 
you like it if your professor held offices hours on a virtual beach? Linden Labs 
has revamped the special browser that residents use to participate in the virtual 
world and is actively promoting its use for interesting business applications, but it is 
unlikely to achieve the same level of attention as Facebook in its present form. We 
believe, however, that Second Life will continue to provide benefit as a fascinating 
niche player in the overall SNS marketplace.
PRIVATE SOCIAL 
NETWORKS
The ultimate niche community is the private social networking service (SNS). 
Private SNSs use social technology to create a community restricted to members 
selected by the SNS’ owner. Private SNSs allow a greater degree of control over 
the network. Companies can easily monitor activity on their own SNS platforms 
and track conversations taking place about their brands and products. However, 
managing a private SNS requires considerably more time, attention, and resources 
than maintaining a presence on a general SNS. Organizations need to understand 
up-front that they are making a substantial commitment with this strategy.
Most colleges and universities have Facebook pages. In addition, many institu-
tions have set up private SNSs to engage students even before they have started 
school there. Students typically gain access to these private SNSs when they are 
admitted to the institution. On the system, they can interact with admissions coun-
selors, current students, and other admitted students. Interactions that occur on 
these networks set the stage for relationships and engagement that are simply not 
possible with e-mail and phone calls. 
In 2008 Mercedes-Benz created two private SNSs designed to increase engage-
ment with current and potential customers. The Mercedes Advisor network is for 
current Mercedes-Benz owners. GenerationBenz.com is a private network for 
prospective Mercedes owners. Membership in the network is limited to those who 
fit Mercedes’ profile for younger luxury car buyers. Both of these communities 
provide the company with an opportunity to engage their target audiences directly. 
Members participate in market surveys and polls, provide feedback on prospective 
ad campaigns and product features, and participate in discussion groups with com-
pany managers. This provides valuable feedback to Mercedes as well as creating 
strong advocates for the company’s luxury car brand. 
While engaging customers on a private SNS can be time-consuming and poten-
tially require significant staffing resources, the technological challenges associated 
with setting up a private SNS are relatively small. A number of companies offer 
a combination of free and subscription-based pricing for individuals or organiza-
tions wishing to create a private social network. Basic SNS sites can be set up 
fairly quickly for free. Search on “private social network services” for the latest 
information.
FUTURE OF SOCIAL 
NETWORKING SYSTEMS
Social networking services are perhaps the most feature-rich applications of 
Web 2.0. It is expected that growth and innovation in this sector will continue as 
individual users and business organizations discover its power for building networks 
and relationships. We expect that Facebook will continue to dominate the field, but 
that smaller SNSs will stake out strong positions in niche markets using traditional 
market segmentation strategies—focusing on the needs of specific geographic, cul-
tural, age, or special interest segments. 

244  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
Questions
1. What are the major differences between social networking services and older 
online communities?
2. What is the basic difference between the social graph and Berners-Lee’s concept 
of the Giant Global Graph?
3. Explain Facebook’s Open Graph initiative and how it plans to expand its influ-
ence across the World Wide Web.
4. What are some potential ways that business organizations can take advantage of 
Second Life’s unique virtual world interface?
5. Why would a business want to create a private SNS? What are some of the chal-
lenges associated with doing this?
Privacy rights are too easily abused. Governments and indus-
try associations are trying to control these abuses through 
legislation and professional standards, but they frequently 
fail to provide adequate protection. One of the most effec-
tive deterrents is fear of backlash from abuses that become 
public and cause outrage. So it is important to identify pri-
vacy issues that pertain to social media and specifically social 
networking services. Examples of privacy violations include:
• 
Posting pictures of people on social networking sites 
without their permission
• 
Tricking people into disclosing credit or bank account 
information or investing in “work at home” scams
• 
Sharing information about members with advertisers 
without the users’ knowledge or consent
• 
Disclosing an employer’s proprietary information or trade 
secrets on social networking sites
• 
Posting information on social networking sites that could 
compromise people’s safety or make them targets for 
blackmail 
Taking Control of Your Privacy
The most important thing that users can do to protect them-
selves is to understand that they are responsible for protect-
ing their own information. The basic solution is common 
sense. Unfortunately, most social networking sites create 
the illusion of privacy and control. This sometimes can lull 
even the most vigilant users into making mistakes. Sites like 
Facebook make us feel like our information is only going to 
be seen by those we have allowed to become part of our 
network. Wrong. Listed below are commonsense guidelines:
• 
Do not post private data. Nothing, absolutely nothing 
you put on a social networking site is private. You should 
avoid posting personal information including full birth 
date, home address, phone number, and the like. This 
information can be used for identity theft.
• 
Be smart about who you allow to become part of your 
network. It is not uncommon for teenagers to “friend” 
hundreds of individuals on their Facebook accounts. With 
this many contacts, there is no way to protect profile or 
other information.
• 
Do not rely on current privacy policies or terms of service 
(TOS) agreements. Social networking sites change their 
privacy policies regularly. Many have accused Facebook 
of doing this specifically to wear down user vigilance 
with regard to maintaining desired privacy settings. 
Regularly review your social network service privacy poli-
cies explained in the TOS. Set your privacy settings at the 
level offering maximum protection—operating as if you 
have no privacy whatsoever.
• 
Minimize your use of applications, games, and third-party 
programs on social networking sites until you have care-
fully investigated them. They can expose you to mali-
cious programs or viruses. Do not automatically click on 
links that look as if they were sent to you by members of 
your network. 
Questions
1. Which of these guidelines is the easiest to follow? Which 
is the toughest? Explain why.
2. Why is it recommended that you not post private data on 
a social network, even those with privacy settings?
IT at Work 7 .3
Addressing Social Media Privacy Concerns

7.3     Engaging Consumers with Blogs and Microblogs     245  
One of the problems with traditional media, like newspapers and magazines, is that 
editors and publishers decide what you should read. Often their decisions are based 
on what the masses will buy at the newsstands. Space is limited and barriers to get-
ting published are high. News services frequently fail to devote sufficient space to 
complex issues or viewpoints that might challenge the financial or business interests 
of the publication’s owners or advertisers. But with social media, anyone can write 
a column or article and publish it online for the world to read (see IT at Work 7.4, 
“How to Create a Blog”). 
Of course, this creates another potential problem: clutter. Blogging is so easy 
that even people who do not have much to say can publish their thoughts, opinions, 
and ideas. Readers need to be prepared to look at online content with a skeptical 
eye and find ways to judge the credibility of the material they find on social media. 
In their simplest form, blogs are websites where people regularly post content. 
Some personal blogs are simply online diaries or journals where people share their 
thoughts, reflections, or an account of their life. Other blogs are more sophisticated 
and professional in format, resembling online newspapers or magazines. Because 
blogging technology has become so commonplace, you may not always realize you 
are reading a blog when accessing online content. Many organizations have integrated 
one of the blogging platforms discussed later with their website. Blogging tools make 
it easy for organizations to provide website visitors with frequently updated content 
on pages with titles such as “What’s New,” “Company News,” or “Product Updates.” 
As a result, you may be a frequent blog reader without realizing it!
Blogs contain content in a variety of digital formats including text, photographs, 
video, and music. People who create and maintain blogs are referred to as bloggers.
Internet users increasingly use blogs as a source for information about topics of 
interest. Technorati.com, an advertising network of blog publishers, listed approxi-
mately 1.3 million blogs as of February 22, 2014. The site also reports that it receives 
138 million unique visitors each month, which suggests there is a sizable audience 
for blogging sites. 
7.3  Engaging Consumers with Blogs and Microblogs 
WHAT IS THE PURPOSE 
OF A BLOG?
Many professionals now blog as a way to establish their reputation and promote 
their business interests, or because they enjoy writing and sharing their viewpoints 
with others. Corporate bloggers use the medium to tell stories about their brands 
and connect with customers.
On the surface, blogging appears to be a broadcast (one-to-many) communica-
tion tool. However, it can also be an effective tool for interactive dialogue. Many 
blogs utilize comment features, allowing readers to respond to blog posts, interact-
ing with the blogger and other readers. Successful bloggers tend to comment on and 
link to other blogs in their posts, in effect maintaining a dialogue or conversation 
with other bloggers.  These connections between blogs create what some refer to as 
the blogosphere, or a network of blogs. IT at Work 7.5 lists a number of ways that 
organizations use blogs for marketing.
BLOGGING AND PUBLIC 
RELATIONS
Some bloggers have become highly successful and have developed a large audience 
for their material. Many people approach blogging like a business and consider 
themselves “publishers,” with the goal of generating enough readers or subscribers 
that they can make money from advertisers and ad agencies who will pay to display 
their ads on an individual blogger’s site (see technorati.com). Earlier in this chapter, 
you read about a set of groundswell social media strategies described by Charlene 
Li and Josh Bernhoff. One of those strategies, Energizing, is accomplished when 
a business identifies a blogger whose audience matches its target market and per-
suades that person to write about the company’s product. This is similar to a public 
relations manager sending a press release to a journalist, hoping he or she will write 
a news story about the company in the local paper. When a highly credible and 

246  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
influential blogger writes a positive story about your company, it can have a very 
positive impact on your brand’s image. Bloggers can also have a negative impact if they 
write unfavorable posts about the company or its products. As a result, public rela-
tions professionals are learning how to identify and form positive relationships with 
influential bloggers with the goal of generating favorable coverage of the company 
and its products. Frequently, this will involve doing things like providing the blogger 
with information in advance of it being released to the public, providing access to 
company executives for interviews, sending the blogger samples of the company’s 
product so that he or she can write about it from firsthand experience, and so on. For 
some companies, particularly those in the technology industry, building relationships 
with influential bloggers has become an important public relations strategy.
READING AND 
SUBSCRIBING 
TO BLOGS
The best way to gain an understanding of the blogging phenomenon is to simply 
start reading blogs. You can use search engines like Google or Yahoo to find blogs 
on all kinds of topics. Most blogs make it easy to subscribe using an RSS reader (see 
Section 7.4 later on in this chapter). Reading blogs is a great way to stay current on 
rapidly evolving topics related to technology and business.
Setting up a blog is relatively easy. Making the effort to regu-
larly write and post content that others will find interesting is 
more challenging. The following steps outline the process of 
setting up a blog.
1. Create a plan. Successful blogging requires a certain 
degree of organization and discipline. You can address 
this part of the project by developing a plan at the out-
set. The plan should answer questions like these:
 
a.  What are you going to blog about? What will be the 
focus or topic of your blog? 
 
b.  Identify your target audience. For whom are you 
writing?
 
c.  How often do you intend to update your blog? Some 
bloggers post new material daily, some weekly, and 
some just a few times a month. How often you blog 
is, of course, up to you, but readers are more likely to 
follow blogs that are updated regularly. Avoid spo-
radic updates or only blogging when you feel like it. 
Successful bloggers frequently set up a publication 
schedule outlining topics and posting dates to keep 
themselves on track.
 
d.  Who else is blogging about the same topic? Identify 
bloggers you can interact with through your posts and 
comments on their blogs. 
2. Determine if you will self-host your blog by purchasing 
a hosting plan and domain name (URL), or if your blog 
will use a free blogging service. Free services allow you 
to get up and running quickly and do not require any 
long-term commitments. This provides an easy, low-risk 
way to get started. While this might be the most conve-
nient approach, you do not actually own your blog or the 
content you post there because it is on a domain owned 
by someone else. Your domain name in these situations 
is usually in the form of “myblogname.blogspot.com,” 
which can appear less professional to some readers. 
Purchasing a hosting plan and domain name, however, 
is the better long-term strategy since it creates a unique 
identity for your blog.
3. Select a blogging platform (see the section below). This 
is the software that will provide the look and feel of your 
site and give you myriad features you can employ to 
build a successful blog. Standard features in most blog 
platforms include a comment section, RSS buttons so 
readers can subscribe to your blog, and share buttons so 
readers can post links to your blog on other social media 
sites (e.g., Twitter, Facebook, Digg, etc.).
4. Set up your blog. Once you’ve set up your hosting and 
platform arrangements, you will need to create the aes-
thetic design for your site. Most platforms make this easy 
with a multitude of template options that you can further 
customize to give your blog a unique look.
5. Get started. Now comes the challenging part, writing 
your posts and regularly updating your blog to attract 
readers. You can read blogs about blogging to get great 
tips and advice.
IT at Work 7 .4
How to Create a Blog

7.3     Engaging Consumers with Blogs and Microblogs     247  
BLOGGING 
PLATFORMS
Selecting a blogging platform is an important decision when setting up a blog. 
Installing a platform when you are creating a blog is relatively easy. Converting 
to a new blogging platform after using another one for a while is not. According 
to a study by Technorati (2011), the two most popular platforms are WordPress 
(51 percent) followed by Google’s Blogger platform (21 percent). Other blog plat-
forms include TypePad, Moveable Type, LiveJournal, and Tumblr. The Tumblr 
platform is significantly different from traditional platforms in that it emphasizes 
easy posting of photos and light copy. As such, it is considered to be a microblog-
ging platform and is discussed later in this chapter. 
When choosing between WordPress and Blogger, WordPress is a feature-rich 
platform and offers greater control over site appearance (Figure 7.12). Blogger is 
simpler and easier to use, making it a more desirable choice for beginning bloggers 
who want to get up and running without becoming bogged down in technological 
issues. Blogger’s affiliation with Google might also be attractive because of the 
potential for integration with other Google services. For instance, Blogger comes 
with a built-in analytics program that appears to share many similarities with 
Google Analytics, a stand-alone Web traffic–monitoring tool.
For now, begin by reading blogs about social media, information technology, 
and other topics that are of personal interest. Note how these blogs vary in terms 
of style, length, and appearance. Identify the features they offer readers for com-
menting on and sharing content. After you get a feel for how people blog, try setting 
up your own blog using Google’s free platform and hosting service at www.google.
com/blogger. 
Figure 7.12 WordPress is 
one of the leading platforms 
for online blogs.
© NetPhotos/Alamy
Blogging Platform: a software 
application used to create, 
edit, and add features to a 
blog. WordPress and Blogger 
are two of the most popular 
blogging platforms.
MICROBLOGS
You may be a microblogger and not even know it! Microblogging is a way of shar-
ing content with people by the regular, often frequent posting of short messages. 
Although people don’t usually call it microblogging, perhaps the most common 
form of this social media activity occurs when you update your status message on 
Facebook. More often, however, the term is used to describe popular microblogging 
services like Twitter and Tumblr. 
Most microblog content consists of text-based messages, although there appears 
to be an increase in people who are microblogging photos and video on Twitter and 
Tumblr. Tumblr has increased in popularity recently among younger Internet users 
because of its multimedia capabilities and ease of use.
Microblog: a blog that 
consists of frequent, but very 
brief posts containing text, 
pictures or videos. Twitter is 
perhaps the most well-known 
example of a microblog.

248  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
Figure 7.13 Twitter is a 
microblogging SNS that 
limits users to messages 
of 140 characters or less.
© 2020WEB/Alamy
Tweet: a brief 140-character 
message or post broadcast 
on Twitter, a microblogging 
service.
Blogs and microblogs provide individuals and organizations 
with a means to accomplish a variety of communications 
objectives. Marketers use blogs and microblogs to:
• 
Develop relationships with independent bloggers, 
encouraging them to write positive stories about the 
brand, product, and company.
• 
Engage members of the blogging community, via corpo-
rate blogs, by providing helpful and interesting information.
• 
Tell the company’s “story,” position a product, create 
brand identity, and differentiate from the competition.
• 
Engage customers and readers by soliciting comments 
and feedback about information provided in blog posts.
• 
Drive traffic to the company website by using Twitter to 
announce recent updates to the company blog.
• 
Inform current or prospective customers about positive 
blog posts featuring your product or company that were 
written by independent, third-party bloggers.
• 
Encourage repeat visits to the company website through 
regular updates or new posts to the blog.
• 
Have a celebrity or influential expert send a tweet with 
a promotional message about your brand using Twitter’s 
new advertising program.
IT at Work 7 .5
How Marketers Use Blogs and Microblogs
TWITTER
Twitter has grown in popularity over the last few years, becoming one of the 
world’s largest communication platforms. According to Twitter, approximately 
5 million messages, or tweets, are sent each day by over 255 million active users 
(see Figure 7.13).
Twitter has played a significant role in both global and domestic events (Lee, 
2013). In countries where the media is largely dominated by government control, 
Twitter has proven to be a valuable tool for activists engaged in organizing protests, 
debating political viewpoints, and broadcasting real time information about sig-
nificant events that might otherwise be ignored by the mainstream media. Twitter 
has been credited by many with playing a key role in the Arab Spring revolutions 
that took place across the Middle East during the early 2010s. In the United States 
presidential election of 2012, Twitter was used heavily by both candidates. The win-
ner, Barak Obama, is largely regarded as having out-performed his opponent, Mitt 
Romney, on Twitter and other social media platforms. Because of Twitter’s reach, 
most federal and state political leaders now use Twitter as a regular channel for 
communicating with their followers. For the same reason, most advocacy groups 
engage in what some call hashtag activism, using the service to maintain awareness 
levels about their cause as well as influence people’s beliefs and attitudes on key 
issues. Twitter has even begun to influence investment decisions made on Wall 
Street. Financial research analysts have created algorithms that use the volume and 
sentiment of Twitter traffic to predict the future stock value of a company. 
Twitter is attractive to individuals, groups, and organizations because it pro-
vides a direct link to the public, bypassing traditional mass media which often acts 
as an information gatekeeper. Ironically, Twitter frequently influences what we see 
on traditional media. Journalists regularly use Twitter to broadcast breaking news 
stories. Hashtag journalists increasingly monitor Twitter to identify newsworthy 
events being tweeted (reported) by eyewitnesses and to gauge the public’s interest 
in an event or issue by monitoring trending topics. Using Twitter to monitor public 
sentiment as well as influence public opinion has become an important skill for 
public relations professionals working for business and not-for-profit organizations. 
Organizations can no longer afford to ignore the conversations that take place on 

7.3     Engaging Consumers with Blogs and Microblogs     249  
Twitter about their brands, products, and executives. Furthermore, public relations 
professionals must understand how to actively participate in these conversations or 
risk appearing aloof and out-of-touch. 
Twitter is often used by consumers to complain about frustrations they are 
having with a company or its products. In response, some companies have adopted 
Twitter as a customer service channel, along with email and telephone call centers. 
When customer service representatives find people complaining about their brand 
or product, they can use the service to empathize with the customer’s frustration and 
offer solutions for resolving the problem. Because conversations on Twitter are pub-
lic, other customers can watch or “listen in” on interactions between an unhappy cus-
tomer and a customer service representative and judge how effective the company is 
at solving problems. This can be a benefit or liability for organizations depending on 
how adept they are at communicating and resolving customer problems on Twitter.
While many businesses seem to intuitively understand the desirability of main-
taining a presence on an SNS like Facebook, many businesspeople freely admit to 
being somewhat confounded by the success of Twitter, and the role that Twitter 
should play in a company’s marketing strategy.
Like other social media tools, the best way to gain an understanding of Twitter 
is to use it. The official Twitter interface is simple and efficient, but a large segment 
of the Twittersphere uses third-party apps that have been developed to enhance the 
site’s functionality and user experience. Some are considered essential tools in the 
life of the power Twitter user:
• TweetDeck is an advanced, split-screen app that allows users to view 
messages streaming from followers, people being followed, and people 
the user might wish to follow. It also makes it easy to quickly reply to 
incoming tweets, increasing the frequency of Twitter conversations. The 
TweetDeck interface makes it easy to participate in Twitter forums or 
online discussion groups similar to what takes place in a chat room. In 
2011, this popular Twitter application was acquired by Twitter and contin-
ues to be a popular interface application for people accessing the service 
from a computer.
• Twitpic allows users to add photos to their tweets. 
• Twitterfeed automatically tweets posts published on a blog using RSS 
technology.
• Twitterholic is a service that ranks users by number of followers, friends, and 
updates.
Many users believe Twitter is best suited for mobile devices like smartphones 
or tablets, which enable users to post spontaneous messages and updates regard-
less of their location. There are literally hundreds of third-party Twitter apps for 
computers and mobile devices, with more being written every day. You can find 
the most popular mobile apps by using an Internet search engine or searching your 
phone’s app store.
How Do People and Businesses Use Twitter?
Think of Twitter as a social network where the dominant focus is on status updates. 
People tweet messages to their followers that they think will be of interest. While 
some businesses still struggle with ways to use Twitter effectively, many have 
adopted strategies that engage consumers, enhance brand image and improve rev-
enue. Examples include: 
• Celebrities use Twitter to update loyal fans about their day-to-day activities.
• Social media experts like Jeremiah Owyang and Brian Solis use Twitter 
to share links to online material that people in their profession will find 
interesting.
Twittersphere: the universe 
of people who use Twitter, a 
microblogging service.

250  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
• Companies use Twitter to update customers about new products and special 
offers.
• Mobile food service trucks in large cities use Twitter to update customers 
about their current and future locations.
• News services like CNN and Mashable use Twitter as a “headline news” 
stream, sending links to news stories on their websites.
• Coupon and shopping services use Twitter to send daily deals and special 
offers to their followers.
• People use Twitter to send status updates to their friends, keeping others 
informed about their activities, sharing stories and links to online material 
they find interesting.
• Politicians use Twitter to communicate with their constituents, often linking 
to stories or material on their website that they believe will help support 
their positions on issues.
When users receive a tweet from someone they follow, they can “Reply” to 
the message, or retweet it by forwarding the message to everyone in their network. 
In this way, users engage in a dialogue of sorts with people they are connected to 
on the service. Tweets that are retweeted among many different users can go viral. 
People frequently attach descriptive keywords or hashtags, designated by the # sign, 
to their tweets to make it easier for others to find (e.g., #news, #politics, #fail).
TUMBLR BLOGS
Tumblr is often described as a microblogging service because it makes the post-
ing of multimedia content easy for users, and allows them to update their blogs 
frequently. However, Tumblr blogs can include just as much text as a regular blog, 
although most who use the service emphasize photographs and video as the primary 
content. This emphasis on multimedia makes the Tumblr blogs more visually com-
pelling. Tumblr is particularly popular among those who are blogging about things 
like fashion, entertainment, and the arts.
Questions
1. What is the difference between a blog and a microblog?
2. What is a blogging platform?
3. Why do marketers use blogs and microblogs?
4. What makes Twitter a more attractive communication channel than 
traditional media for many individuals and organizations?
5. How is Tumblr different from other types of blogging platforms?
A mashup is a Web application that combines information from two or more 
sources and presents this information in a way that creates some new benefit or 
service. Using AJAX technologies and APIs, websites and applications can pull 
information from a variety of sources. See IT at Work 7.6.
One of the most common examples of a consumer mashup that you are likely 
to encounter involves the integration of map data (from companies such as Google 
or Mapquest) with information like store names, locations, phone numbers, and 
consumer reviews from other websites.
By combining this information in a single location or application, users enjoy a 
powerful and visually compelling service. ProgrammableWeb maintains a directory 
of mashups at programmableweb.com/mashups/directory.
7.4  Mashups, Social Metrics, and Monitoring Tools

7.4     Mashups, Social Metrics, and Monitoring Tools     251  
Enterprise mashups combine data from internal business sources (e.g., sales 
records, customer information, etc.) and/or information from external sources for 
enhanced usefulness and productivity. For instance, a bank may utilize an enterprise 
mashup to display a mortgage application from its own records, the property location 
on a Google map, and information from county government property tax records.
WHAT MAKES A 
MASHUP APP SOCIAL?
To begin with, many of the most popular APIs used in mashup apps are from 
social media sites. That means the data involved in the mashup are likely to be 
user-generated social information. The other reason mashups are considered social 
media is that they represent the power to separate content from form—allowing 
Web developers (and sometimes users) greater control over how information is 
displayed and used on the Web.
Mashups also represent a change in philosophy for content creators. Traditionally, 
a business that created content operated a closed system where it maintained almost 
complete control over the “product.” On the social Web, content creators enjoy 
greater distribution by allowing others access to their digital information through an 
API. For instance, the Google brand name appears on thousands of websites due to 
its open source API. If Twitter did not have an open source API, awareness and use 
of the service would be far less than they are today because users would have to go to 
the Twitter site in order to use it. By giving up some control, these content creators 
enjoy much wider distribution and market penetration.
So while the ability to create powerful mashup applications has not yet reached 
most individual Web users, it has decentralized control over how content is dis-
played and used, which is a key principle of social technologies (Section 7.1). We 
anticipate that it will not be long before someone develops a technology that will 
make it easier for the average user to create his or her own custom mashup applica-
tions (for instance, see Yahoo Pipes).
Mashup technology also represents a tremendous opportunity for new Web-
based businesses with limited start-up capital. For example, the online directory 
and business review service, Yelp.com, uses the Google Maps API to make it easier 
for users to locate restaurants and bars in their area. In turn, Yelp has an API that 
allows sites like Zillow.com to use Yelp’s information when displaying information 
about homes and neighborhoods to prospective real estate customers.
Figure 7.14 Users can 
subscribe to online content 
using RSS technology.
© AKP Photos/Alamy
RSS TECHNOLOGY
Another technology that extends control of Web content beyond the creator is really 
simple syndication (RSS) (Figure 7.14). Traditionally, users had to visit multiple 
sites in order to view content at each location. This is potentially time-consuming 
and difficult for users who are interested in following several sources. RSS technol-
ogy allows users to subscribe to multiple sources (e.g., blogs, news headlines, video) 
and have the content displayed in a single application, called an RSS reader or RSS 
aggregator. Depending on the features of the aggregator, users can personalize how 
they want information from their news sources organized and displayed.

252  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
Businesses use mashups and RSS technology in a variety of 
ways. Examples include:
• 
Integrating Google Maps with information about com-
pany store or office locations, so that they appear 
together on a store locator webpage, making it easier for 
customers to locate the business.
• 
Use the Twitter API to add a Twitter stream box to an 
organization’s website, displaying a consistent stream of 
tweets about the company, product, or brand.
• 
Create a desktop widget program that imports and dis-
plays useful information like sports scores, weather, or 
stock prices on a user’s computer desktop or company 
website. Branded widgets display the sponsor’s name 
so that every time the user checks for updates, he or she 
sees the brand name. 
• 
Using RSS technology so customers and partners can 
subscribe to your blog, newsletter, product reviews, and 
articles. People are more likely to read content that is 
easy to access.
IT at Work 7 .6
How Businesses Use Mashups and RSS
Most RSS readers are available online for free. You can find articles that 
provide reviews, descriptions, and recommendations about which one to use by 
utilizing a search engine. If you do not have time to research all the options, any of 
the following will probably provide a good initial experience with the technology: 
feedly.com, theoldreader.com, Digg.com Reader, and Bloglines.com. All provide 
the essential functionality of allowing you to subscribe to RSS content. The readers 
tend to differ in terms of available social features and the aesthetics of the inter-
face. Feedly.com offers attractive displays that are visually compelling and contains 
social features allowing people to share what they are reading with their network. 
Some users, however, prefer a more rudimentary and basic interface, similar to 
what you will find on the Digg Reader.
MONITORING SERVICES
A fast-growing sector in the social technology field involves social monitoring 
services. Monitoring applications allow users to track conversations taking place 
on social media sites. The initial impetus for the growth of monitoring tools was 
the need for business organizations to better understand what people were saying 
about their brands, products, and executives (the “listening” part of the groundswell 
strategy model). Monitoring services can be used to identify industry experts, com-
mentators and opinion leaders who post regularly to social media sites. Once identi-
fied, public relations professionals can build relationships with these individuals and 
encourage them to become brand advocates who regularly portray the brand or 
company positively in their online writing and social media posts. See IT at Work 7.7.
In the next section, we describe two categories of social monitoring tools: 
subscription-based services and free monitoring services.
Subscription Monitoring Services
The most comprehensive social media monitoring tools require the user to pay 
a subscription or licensing fee. These tools not only monitor the social media 
environment for mentions of your brand or company name, but also provide 
analytics and tools for measuring trends in the amount of conversation occur-
ring, the tone or sentiment (e.g., positive, negative, neutral) of the conversation, 
and other important aspects of the social interactions occurring online. Some of 

7.4     Mashups, Social Metrics, and Monitoring Tools     253  
these tools are actually social media management platforms that help companies 
administer social media marketing campaigns and inbound marketing programs. 
The monitoring tools are just one of several features available in these enterprise-
level applications.
Most high-end monitoring tools report information using a dashboard interface, 
which graphically represents the data it collects. Some of the most popular among 
these paid services include Radian 6, Alterian SM2, Hubspot, Biz 360 Community, 
and Nielsen Buzz Metrics. While prices for these high-end monitoring services can 
vary widely (typically, hundreds of dollars a month), they are usually beyond the 
budget of individual users.
• 
To identify brand advocates—people who repeatedly 
discuss a particular topic.
• 
To find experts talking about technical or business topics.
• 
To assess reputation or sentiment in the online commu-
nity about a brand, person, or issue.
• 
To understand customers by listening—identifying topics 
of interest to the online community.
• 
To track trends in the volume or nature of online conver-
sations.
• 
To assess the relationship between marketing actions 
(e.g., product launch) and online conversations.
• 
To identify potential problems with your brand’s reputa-
tion before things get out of control.
IT at Work 7 .7
Businesses Monitor Social Activity. . . 
Free Monitoring Services
Fortunately, there are number of free monitoring tools that can be used by anyone. 
Some of these tools, like Twitter Search, are designed to monitor conversations on 
a single social media platform, while others, like Social Mention, are designed to 
provide feedback on activity across a number of social media platforms including 
Facebook, Twitter, and blogs. The following list provides a brief description of 
some free social monitoring services. 
Social mention Our favorite free monitoring tool can be found at socialmention.com. 
This tool aggregates content from over 80 different social media sites including 
Facebook, YouTube, and Twitter. The best thing about Social Mention is that it 
provides users with four metrics that give insight into the nature of conversations 
taking place on the Web.
Users can generate these statistics daily for a particular topic (e.g., brand name, 
public figure, current event) and record them in a spreadsheet. Over a period of 
time, it becomes easy to see trends developing with regard to factors such as how 
many people are talking about a topic or how they feel about a topic. This is useful 
information for the social media marketer.
Social mention metrics
• Strength—The likelihood that a particular topic is being discussed on social 
media platforms
• Passion—A measure of the degree to which people who are talking about 
your brand will do so repeatedly

254  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
• Sentiment—A measure of the tone of the conversation, which helps you 
understand if people are feeling positive, negative, or neutral about the topic
• Reach—A measure of the range of people discussing a particular topic
Go to socialmention.com and explore what people are talking about with 
regard to current events, celebrities, popular products, or any other issue you are 
interested in. See what you can learn from the four metrics listed by the site.
Twitter search This tool on the Twitter website generates a list of recent tweets 
containing a specific word or phrase. You can use the search engine to generate a 
list of tweets containing keywords related to an issue, a brand name, a company 
name, elected official, and so on. If your goal is to measure the sentiment of the 
conversation about a particular topic or brand, you can accomplish this informally 
by simply scrolling through the messages to get a feel for what people are saying 
(see twitter.com/search).
If you want to do a more formal analysis, randomly sample, say, 100 tweets and 
manually categorize each as positive, negative, or neutral. Repeat this on a daily 
basis and you will be able to identify trends in the sentiment of online conversations 
over time. Companies can use Twitter search to identify users who are having prob-
lems or complaining about their product and take corrective action by responding 
to specific tweets.
Klout Klout claims to measure a user’s influence across a number of social media 
sites including Facebook, Twitter, and more recently, LinkedIn, YouTube, and 
Foursquare. Klout reports a user’s influence using a score from 0 to 100. Klout’s for-
mula for determining the influence score has been criticized (Clough, 2011, Walker, 
2011). In fact, some believe that it is almost impossible to create a formula that truly 
measures influence (Masnick, 2011, Singer, 2011). That said, Klout does quantify 
aspects of a person’s potential to influence, which could be helpful to understand. 
As Klout continues to build and improve on its influence algorithm, this tool could 
prove increasingly valuable.
Google alerts Unlike the other tools listed above, Google alerts do not provide 
much in the way of metrics that describe social media activity. However, it is an 
extremely useful monitoring tool that conducts automated Google searches for 
new Web content. Searches can be general or specific to social content on blogs 
and discussion forums. Users receive regular e-mail updates with search results 
(see google.com/alerts). This tool is particularly useful for managers who need to 
be aware of any news stories, blog posts, and discussion forums where a particular 
product, brand name, company, or person is mentioned. It is great for monitoring 
competitive organizations. It is easy to use, and because the searches are auto-
mated, it is very convenient.
Social monitoring tools play an essential role in helping social media marketers 
gain insight into the conversations taking place on the Web. They represent a set 
of powerful tools in the arsenal of firms that seek to understand consumers, what 
they are interested in, what they are talking about, and what they are thinking. As 
such, it is important that you become familiar with these tools, their strengths and 
weaknesses.
Questions
1. Why are mashups considered part of social media?
2. Describe a typical consumer mashup.
3. What is an RSS reader?
4. Describe the ways in which businesses can benefi t from using social 
media monitoring tools.

7.5     Knowledge Sharing in the Social Workplace     255  
Face it: Working in groups can sometimes be a real pain. Whether you are working 
with a group of fellow students on a class project, or a team of employees charged 
with developing a marketing plan, there are all kinds of factors that can interfere 
with success.
However, in today’s competitive environment, businesses must be agile, able to 
respond quickly to a rapidly evolving marketplace. Employees must be able to work 
collaboratively, communicate effectively, and work together to make decisions and 
take action. Many businesses use Intranets to deploy tools that employees use for 
collaboration and productivity. An Intranet is a password-protected computer net-
work that uses Web-based technologies (e.g., browsers, webpages). Think of it as 
a private or internal Web. Unfortunately, many Intranets are based on older Web 
technologies that do not include the social features we have become comfortable 
with on the modern Web. Some companies, however, are updating their Intranets 
to take advantage of advanced social features and technology. This trend is some-
times referred to as Enterprise 2.0.
In this section, we review a number of social tools for collaboration that are 
available to everyone. Small businesses, startups, and nonprofits that lack resources 
to deploy modern Intranets can use these tools for increased productivity. Larger 
companies will use similar tools, but as part of their enhanced (Enterprise 2.0) 
Intranets.
7.5  Knowledge Sharing in the Social Workplace
TOOLS FOR MEETINGS 
AND DISCUSSIONS
Dialogue or synchronous communication is an important part of the collaborative 
process. This can pose a challenge, however, for teams that cannot meet face to 
face. In the last few years, services like Skype and ooVoo have become popular in 
the marketplace for offering the possibility of reasonably good-quality video calls 
between at least two people. 
Both services now make it possible to conduct video calls among small groups, 
making it easier to hold meetings. Google
 Hangouts is the latest entrant to this 
field of services, allowing up to 10 people to participate in a video chat on the 
Google
 social network (see Figure 7.15).
For something really unique, check out VenueGen.com. This service makes it pos-
sible for users to conduct meetings in a virtual world where users are represented by 
avatars. Similar in appearance to the role-playing platform Second Life, VenueGen 
is focused on the business organization’s need for online meetings, and has created 
virtual environments for a variety of group sizes. Small meetings between two people 
can take place in an office environment or a coffee shop. Larger groups can use 
Synchronous communication: 
dialogue or conversation 
that takes place in real time, 
without the long delays 
between exchanges that 
occur, for instance, in 
email or discussion board 
conversations.
Figure 7.15 On January 
30, 2012, President Barack 
Obama participated in an 
online interview held through 
a Google
 Hangout, making 
it the fi rst completely virtual 
interview from the White 
House.
© White House Photo/Alamy

256  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
SOCIAL BOOKMARKING 
TOOLS
Most Web browsers allow users to store links to online content by saving them to a 
list of favorites or bookmarks. This approach becomes cumbersome as more infor-
mation is saved because lists grow long and difficult to use. Organizing bookmarks 
into folders helps a bit, but the folders tend to hide information and users can forget 
what folder they have stored information in.
Diigo and Delicious
Social bookmarking tools allow users to tag Web content with keywords of their 
choosing. Users can retrieve links by searching on these keywords. Delicious.com 
is the most well-known social bookmarking tool. In addition to retrieving links 
tagged with keywords, users can search for Web content tagged by others. This is 
what makes the bookmarking system “social.” Delicious can serve as an alterna-
tive search engine when seeking information. Searches on Delicious are based on 
a folksonomy (folk taxonomy) producing results different from traditional search 
engines because they are based on the way human beings tag content, not a com-
puter algorithm.
Diigo.com is a newer social bookmarking service and contains additional fea-
tures that make it an even more powerful collaboration tool. In Diigo, users can 
form open or private groups for sharing links to Web content. Social tools on Diigo 
allow users in these groups to comment on and discuss links as well as indicate their 
approval of a link using a “Like” button. Diigo also has a highlight tool that allows 
users to feature excerpts from webpages for other members of the group. Because 
of these extra social features, Diigo is a powerful tool for collaboration. Public 
TOOLS FOR RESEARCH 
AND KNOWLEDGE 
SHARING
A common step in many collaborative projects involves the identification and shar-
ing of information relevant to the project topic. Search engines like Google, Yahoo, 
Bing, and others are among the most frequently used tools on the Web. Some of 
these large search engines are beginning to incorporate social features into their 
tools. Google makes it easy for users to share links on its SNS by placing a “
1” 
button next to each of the links in a search result. Yahoo includes a list of trending 
topics on its start page, featuring the topics that most people are searching on at 
the moment.
Searching the Web for information is not a particularly social activity, although 
there are social tools that can be used, in addition to search engines, to acquire 
information needed for a project. Discussion groups on SNSs can provide a forum 
for asking questions to groups of people. For instance, the American Marketing 
Association maintains a discussion group on LinkedIn that has over 6,500 members. 
Participants can ask questions and solicit input from other members of the group. 
Members can also monitor discussion groups, receiving periodic digests of group 
activity that can be scanned for material of interest. In a similar fashion, people 
frequently use Twitter as a way of asking questions and soliciting advice from their 
network.
Finally, as you learned in the previous section, social media monitoring tools 
can be used to search the Web for blog posts, tweets and other social activity by 
industry experts and commentators that might prove to be sources of valuable 
information. It is often possible to engage these experts on social media by com-
menting on blog posts, interacting on social networks or services like Twitter.
boardroom environments, and very large groups can use auditorium or theater-size 
rooms. Within the virtual world, users can talk, make gestures, and display content 
from documents, PowerPoint presentations, and spreadsheets, just as they would in 
a face-to-face meeting.
Folksonomy: a system of 
classifying and organizing 
online content into categories 
by the use of user-generated 
metadata such as keywords.

7.5     Knowledge Sharing in the Social Workplace     257  
groups on Diigo can take on the feel of an online community, with potentially 
large groups of people contributing, liking, and commenting on links related to a 
particular topic.
CONTENT CREATION 
AND SHARING
Sometimes, groups find it necessary to share documents and files as part of their 
collaborative efforts. In the past, e-mail was perhaps the easiest way for working 
teams to share documents. This approach has several drawbacks, perhaps the most 
obvious being the challenge of keeping different versions of the work organized. 
Dropbox
Dropbox.com is a cloud storage service that makes it easy to access your docu-
ments from any of the devices you work on. Think of it as a shared hard drive 
for your computer, phone, and tablet computer. Dropbox also allows you to 
share files and folders with others, making it a great tool for document sharing. 
There are two features of Dropbox that make it a great tool. First, saving files to 
Dropbox is just as easy as saving a file to your hard drive. Other services require 
you to manually upload and download files. Dropbox also maintains a version 
history for documents, making it easy to see changes made to a document and 
undo them if necessary. This is a great feature for teams working on collaborative 
writing projects.
Box.net
Like Dropbox, box.net is a cloud storage service but places greater emphasis on 
social tools and features, which make it a great choice for collaborating teams. Users 
can edit files stored on box.net without downloading to their hard drives. Like many 
other social companies, box.net has created an open source API, allowing third-
party developers to write applications for box.net users that offer additional sharing 
and collaboration features. Over 60 such apps have been developed so far.
Wikis
While Dropbox and box.net allow teams to collaborate on the creation of docu-
ments, a Wiki allows teams to collaborate on the creation of webpages. A wiki is 
a website that allows many people to add or update information found on the site. 
Wikis can be used as a work space for collaborative teams or they can become 
public websites built by groups of collaborators. The most popular wiki project is 
Wikipedia, the online encyclopedia (alexa.com, 2014). Businesses can create wikis 
for a particular product and allow employees and even customers to contribute 
information that will form a knowledge base resource for those who need informa-
tion about the product.
There are many different sites like wikispaces.com and wikidot.com that offer 
free, basic wiki services to users. 
Questions
1. How can working teams use social media as an alternative to face-to-
face meetings?
2. Why are social bookmarking services superior to the traditional method 
of saving “favorites” or “bookmarks” in a browser?
3. What are some ways you can use social media to solicit knowledge, 
information, and advice from experts on the Web?
4. What advantages do sites like Dropbox and box.net have over e-mail as 
a way of sharing and collaborating on creating documents?

258  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
Key Terms
application programming 
interface (API)
asynchronous JavaScript 
and XML (AJAX)
blog
cascading style sheets (CSS)
cloud storage service
crowdfunding
crowdsourcing
document object model 
(DOM)
enterprise mashups
extendable markup 
language (XML)
Giant Global Graph
hashtags
hypertext markup 
language (HTML)
JavaScript
mashup
microblog
network effect
Really Simple Syndication 
(RSS)
RSS aggregator
RSS reader
semantic Web
sharing sites
social bookmarking
social media
social monitoring service
social network analysis 
(SNA)
social networking service 
(SNS)
social Web
synchronous 
communication
terms of service (TOS) 
agreement
twittersphere
Usenet
Web 2.0
widget
wiki
XMLHttpRequest
Assuring Your Learning
 1. Explain the fundamental differences between 
Web 1.0 and Web 2.0.
 2. Defi ne social media and explain why these tech-
nologies are different from earlier manifestations 
of the Web.
 3. Compare the methods that companies chose to 
communicate with their customers using the broad-
cast model vs. the ways that companies can have 
conversations with their customers using Web 2.0 
tools.
 4. What are the four primary factors described in the 
text that set the stage for Web 2.0 or the social Web 
that we enjoy today?
 5. What is an API? Why should marketing profession-
als monitor changes in the kind of APIs available to 
Web developers?
 6. Explain Facebook’s Open Graph Initiative. How do 
Facebook’s social plug-ins play a role in the Open 
Graph program?
 7. Briefl y describe each of the following kinds of social 
media:
a. social networking service
b. blog
c. microblogging service
d. social bookmarking service
e. RSS reader
f. sharing communities
g. mashup
h. wiki
 8. Explain what is meant by “feature convergence” 
and how it is blurring the distinction between 
different types of social media tools.
 9. Each of the following was listed as an element of 
social media. Describe each and explain its role in 
shaping and defi ning the social Web.
a. user-generated content (UGC) 
b. content control
c. conversation
d. community (common values, culture) 
e. categorization by users (tagging) 
f. real people 
g. connections 
h. constant updating
i. 
content separated from form
j. equipment independence
 10.  If you were looking for a job or wanted to build 
your reputation as an expert in some area related 
to marketing, what social media tools would you 
use for personal branding and why?
 11.  How can companies utilize social media collabora-
tion tools to become more competitive?
 12.  Describe how mashups create new benefi ts and 
functionality from existing data or information.
 13.  Describe some common ways that marketers can 
benefi t by using social media monitoring tools.
 14.  How will concern for individual privacy affect the 
growth and expansion of social networking services 
and other social Web applications?
DISCUSS: Critical Thinking Questions

Assuring Your Learning     259  
1. Using online sources, research Facebook’s Open 
Graph initiative. Make a list of “pros” and “cons” 
regarding these changes from the viewpoint of a 
Facebook user.
2. Using Google’s blog search tool, identify some active 
blogs on a topic of interest to you and read a few posts. 
Leave comments in the response section (if available). 
See if the blog author or other readers reply.
3. Set up an account on two different RSS readers 
(e.g., Digg Reader and Feedly.com) and use them 
to subscribe to some blogs that are of interest to 
you. Prepare a report or presentation comparing 
the strengths and weakness of each application.
4. Using articles you can fi nd online, prepare a report 
on the economic activity that takes place on Second 
Life. Describe how people make money in the virtual 
world and identify the opportunities and challenges 
associated with making a living via Second Life.
5. If you have an account on Twitter, download 
Tweetdeck, an alternative interface for Twitter. 
Use Tweetdeck and prepare a brief report on the 
advantages or disadvantages of using this program.
6. Visit the LinkedIn page for college students: students.
linkedin.com. Using the information on this page, 
create a LinkedIn account and begin building your 
professional network. Search the Internet for addi-
tional tips on using LinkedIn to fi nd jobs and prepare 
a brief report on your fi ndings.
7. Using a search engine, fi nd four examples of mashup 
applications. Prepare a report describing each one. 
If possible, identify the website(s) where data are 
pulled from to create the application.
8. Create an account on diigo.com, the social book-
marking site. Actively use it to tag and categorize 
webpages that you want to remember for future 
viewing. Use the search engine on diigo.com to fi nd 
pages that other users have tagged. Compare the 
effectiveness of your searches to similar searches 
using Google and Yahoo.
EXPLORE: Online and Interactive Exercises 
1. Use socialmention.com to evaluate the nature of con-
versations people are having about three telecommu-
nications companies: AT&T, Verizon, and Sprint. Based 
on the four metrics provided by Social Mention, decide 
which company is viewed most favorably and least 
favorably by the marketplace. Using Twitter search, read 
a sample of tweets where people discuss the companies. 
Can you draw any conclusions as to specifi c reasons why 
the companies are viewed favorably or unfavorably?
2. Your boss would like you to recommend a free ser-
vice for storing and sharing documents in the cloud. 
Create accounts at box.net and dropbox.net. Explore 
each service so that you understand how it works. 
Make a recommendation and provide your reasons 
for the service you select.
3. The supervisor of your department recently read 
a story about companies that used Second Life to 
conduct virtual meetings on the service. Create 
an account on Second Life and spend a few hours 
learning how to use it. With a handful of other 
students, arrange to meet in Second Life for a 
brief discussion. Based on your experience, pre-
pare a recommendation for your supervisor stating 
whether or not you think using Second Life for 
meetings would be a good idea. Justify your recom-
mendation.
4. After reading Video Case 7.3 below, get together 
with two or three other students and brainstorm 
some ideas for how your college or university could 
create a viral video campaign. Use the success factors 
listed in the case to evaluate your ideas. Write up a 
brief recommendation for your best idea, describing 
how it performs on each factor.
ANALYZE & DECIDE: Apply IT Concepts to Business Decisions
CASE 7.2
Business Case: Social Customer Service 
In 2008 a little-known musician by the name of Dave Carroll 
initiated a social media fi restorm of bad publicity for United Air-
lines, Inc. (UAL) after the company refused to pay for damaging 
his expensive Taylor guitar during a layover at Chicago’s O’Hare 
Airport. After a frustrating year of negotiations with UAL, Carroll 
became convinced the company had created a system de-
signed to simply wear down customers to avoid paying claims. 
As a result, he launched what would become a legendary social 
media attack on UAL’s alleged corporate stonewalling by pro-
ducing three YouTube videos that went viral, attracting millions 

260  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
of viewers and generating countless news stories, blog posts, 
and even a Harvard Business School (2010) business case. (Read 
the full story and watch the videos at davecarrollmusic.com.)
 
While Carroll ultimately embarrassed the company into 
settling his claim, it is clear that United Airlines continues to 
struggle with not only its customer satisfaction levels, but 
also its ability to manage the airline’s online reputation ef-
fectively. That is not the case, however, at several other large 
companies that are increasingly learning to use social media 
to engage customers, correct problems, and enhance their 
brand image through social customer service.
Turning Complaints into Happy Customers
While business organizations were initially interested in social 
media because of its potential for branding and public rela-
tions, many organizations have begun to realize its potential 
for customer service and product support functions. In fact, a 
recent study by Forrester Research (2010) shows that customer 
service activities are the second most common application of 
social technologies by business organizations (marketing was 
fi rst). Even excellent companies sometimes make mistakes 
or fail to completely satisfy customers. Because the cost of 
retaining a customer is often less than the cost of acquiring a 
new customer, many organizations invest in customer service 
operations to assist customers when problems occur. Tradi-
tional customer service channels consist of phone (call centers), 
mail, and in-store support. Today, customers may also use 
e-mail for such exchanges, and a wide range of social chan-
nels including Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube. Furthermore, 
customers may not complain directly to the company on its 
offi cial Facebook or Twitter pages. Companies need to be able 
to identify unhappy customers that share negative comments 
outside of “offi cial” channels. Traditional wisdom suggests that 
when consumers have a negative experience with a company, 
they share it with as many as 10 people. But now, unhappy 
customers can potentially share their experience with hundreds 
of people using a single message on social media. Or, as David 
Carroll learned, the message might reach tens of millions.
The WOW Factor at Zappos
At online shoe retailer Zappos, customer service through all 
channels is designed to “WOW” customers (Figure 7.16). A 
10-person team of social customer service agents is trained 
and empowered to go the extra mile for customers who 
contact them through Zappos’ offi cial Twitter channel, 
@zappos_service. Agents have even gone as far as helping 
customers fi nd the shoes they want at a competing retailer. 
Zappos agents strive to personalize their service by talking 
to customers in a normal “voice,” sharing their names, 
and taking whatever time is necessary to address customer 
concerns. The company does not use scripted responses or 
policy documents restricting what agents can or cannot say 
to customers on the company’s Twitter customer service 
channel. The only objective is to WOW the customer. This 
helps customers feel as if they are dealing with a real person 
who cares about their needs. The absence of scripted 
guidelines for assisting customers does not mean Zappos 
takes customer service lightly. After a lengthy and care-
ful screening process, prospective Zappos agents receive 
weeks of training and become immersed in its customer-
focused culture during their initial stages of employment. 
Once the agent passes the training program, he or she is 
actually offered money to quit the company! This is done 
to ensure that only those agents who truly want to excel at 
Zappos remain with the company. This approach to cus-
tomer service is one that extends throughout the company, 
and refl ects Zappos’ corporate culture of happiness (see 
Figure 7.16). As a result, Zappos has earned one of the best 
reputations for its ability to please its customers, even when 
mistakes happen.
Comcast Makes a Turnaround 
with Social Media
Like United Airlines, cable giant Comcast was once the target 
of many social media public relations disasters. YouTube 
videos of service technicians falling asleep while on hold with 
their own customer service call center were embarrassing for 
Figure 7.16 Zappos CEOs 
and co-founders Tony Hsieh 
and Jenn Lim (shown here) 
have worked hard to create 
a culture of happiness across 
the company, including the 
customer service team. 
© Scott Harrison./Retna Ltd./Corbis

CASE 7.3     Video Case     261  
the company. Now, Comcast is considered a pioneer in the 
area of using social technologies for customer service. Under 
the leadership of Frank Eliason (now senior vice president 
of social media at Citibank), Comcast was one of the fi rst 
corporations to recognize the potential of using Twitter for 
customer service. Twitter allowed the company to respond 
more quickly to customer complaints than with traditional 
channels. In fact, because of the public nature of Twitter 
messages, Eliason and his team were able to identify upset 
customers even when they were not directly communicating 
with the company. By monitoring Twitter for all messages 
that mentioned Comcast, agents are able to offer assistance 
to sometimes surprised customers who do not realize the 
company is interested in helping them solve their problems. 
Despite Comcast’s innovations in social customer service, a 
quick scan of the Internet will produce evidence that lots of 
people still grow frustrated with Comcast’s inability to deliver 
cable and Internet service that meets their expectations. But 
by using social tools to engage customers on the major social 
platforms, Comcast has made great strides in helping to 
solve customers’ problems when they arise.
Cisco Systems Creates Social 
Tools for Customer Service
Cisco Systems, Inc. is an American multinational corporation 
and a market leader in the design and manufacture of computer 
networking equipment. Cisco not only uses social channels for 
customer service, but also leverages its expertise in networking 
and software development to create applications that other 
companies can use to provide multiple channel support 
services to customers. Cisco has developed a social customer 
service app called SocialMiner. This app makes it possible for 
companies to take a pro-active approach to social customer 
service, monitoring conversations on Twitter, Facebook, 
blogs, and other social media platforms. This makes it pos-
sible for service agents to identify and resolve issues as they 
emerge. The app also stores conversations in a database for 
later analysis, allowing companies to identify systematic 
problems and take corrective action to prevent problems 
from happening in the fi rst place.
Sources: Compiled from March (2011), Reisner (2009), Forrester 
Research (2010), davecarrollmusic.com.
Questions
1.  How does social media represent a threat to companies 
who limit their customer support services to traditional 
channels?
2.  When customers have a negative experience with a com-
pany, what are the various ways they can use social media 
to tell others about their experience?
3.  Explain why companies can no longer afford to limit their 
customer service to traditional channels (e.g., call centers).
4.  What are some of the frustrations customers encounter 
when seeking customer service support from a company?
CASE 7.3
Video Case: Viral Marketing: Will It Blend?
Founded in 1975, Blendtec is a Utah-based manufacturer of 
high-quality blenders that typically sell for between $300 to 
over $1,000. While the company’s products are perhaps the 
most expensive on the market, they enjoy a reputation for 
being among the strongest, most durable blenders available. 
Part of the reason for Blendtec’s reputation is the success of 
a promotional campaign that Advertising Age calls the “the 
number one viral campaign of all time” (Learmonth, 2010). 
The campaign has generated more views than any other viral 
marketing campaign in history.
 
You can watch the videos at the campaign website: willit-
blend.com. Or, you can initiate a search on the “Will It Blend” 
campaign at YouTube, or visit Blendtec’s YouTube channel: 
youtube.com/user/blendteconsumer.
The “Will It Blend?” Campaign
Prior to 2006, Blendtec was relatively unknown outside of 
the commercial food service equipment industry. That year 
the company’s new marketing director, George Wright, 
came up with the idea to make videos demonstrating the 
strength and durability of the blender by grinding up all sorts 
of unusual things: marbles, a McDonald’s Happy Meal, and 
even a garden rake. The videos, featuring company founder 
Tom Dickson in a white lab coat and goggles, were posted to 
YouTube and quickly generated millions of views as people 
shared them with others in their social network. The success 
of the early videos inspired the company to make additional 
episodes, resulting in over 130 videos. Some of the more out-
rageous episodes show Dickson grinding up iPhones, hockey 
pucks, a video recorder, an iPad, Bic lighters, and even a stun 
gun.
 
The Will It Blend? viral video campaign was effective 
because it did well on success factors that experts have 
identifi ed as essential for viral marketing campaigns.
Create Content that Appeals 
to a Wide Audience
By defi nition, viral campaigns involve millions of people view-
ing and sharing content. Therefore, successful campaigns 
are based on content that has mass appeal, as opposed to 
narrow or niche market segments. Even though Blendtec’s 
products are a specialty item with a price point that most 
consumers would fi nd prohibitive, the videos are of inter-
est to a larger audience. Many of the products that are 
“blended” in the videos (i.e., iPhones, iPads, Barbie dolls, 
and Nike sneakers) have broad-based appeal. 

262  Chapter 7     Social Networking, Engagement, and Social Metrics
Create Content that People Want 
to Share with Friends and Family
Viral marketing experts report that viral content tends to be 
entertaining, emotional, novel or unexpected, humorous or 
offers something free. Blendtec’s videos are both entertaining 
and novel because they use the blender in a completely 
unusual and unexpected way. Many of the videos are also 
funny, depending on the item being destroyed.
Make Use of Large Social Media Platforms 
for Easy Sharing
From the beginning, the Will It Blend? videos were posted 
to both YouTube and a company website created specifi cally 
for the campaign. Later, the company integrated Facebook, 
Twitter, Google
, and Pinterest into the campaign, which 
expanded sharing across these large social sites.
Keep Fans Engaged
The problem with many viral campaigns is that they fi zzle out 
after viewers tire of the original content. Great campaigns 
fi nd ways of building on initial successes. The Blendtec 
campaign has managed to maintain people’s interest since 
2006 by creating sequels to the initial episodes. The com-
pany actively solicited suggestions from fans about what they 
wanted to see blended. The most popular episode, added in 
2010, blended an Apple iPad and generated over 16.9 million 
views.
Employ Tactics to Generate Initial 
Interest and Traffi c
Successful viral campaigns create the impression that all 
the traffi c generated is organic, resulting purely from wide-
scale sharing by Internet users. However, in many cases, 
the campaign creators employ a number of strategies at 
the beginning of the campaign to jumpstart initial interest 
and awareness. Examples of such strategies include e-mail 
campaigns, promoting content to infl uential bloggers, SEO, 
optimizing your YouTube page and/or channel (if the content 
is in video format), promoting your content using PPC and/
or paid promotion of a video on YouTube. At the beginning 
of the Will It Blend? campaign, Blendtec encouraged its em-
ployees to share the videos with their friends and family. The 
company promoted its videos using Google’s Adwords and 
early videos were featured on YouTube’s homepage, which 
helped generate initial interest (Mendelson, 2013). Additional 
traffi c was generated later in the campaign as a result of 
public relations efforts that led to widespread news coverage 
and appearances on NBC’s The Tonight Show and the History 
Channel series Modern Marvels.
Campaign Results
The Will It Blend? campaign has generated over 294 million 
views across its 130
 video episodes on YouTube since 
2006 (McDonald & Horan, 2014). The company continues 
to build on the brand awareness created by the campaign. 
Blendtec has over 702,000 YouTube subscribers, 53,806 
“likes” on Facebook, and 24,700 followers on Twitter. 
While the company has clearly achieved its original objec-
tive of building awareness for its brand, Blendtec also 
experienced a 700 percent increase in retail sales between 
2006 and 2008, about two years after the beginning of the 
campaign (Briggs, 2009). The videos are so popular that 
the company even makes approximately $50,000 a month 
from advertising that YouTube places around the videos 
(Akman, 2012).
Sources: Compiled from Mendelson (2013), Learmonth (2010), 
McDonald & Horan (2014), Briggs (2009), Akman (2012).
Questions
1. Why do you think Blendtec’s video campaign was 
more appealing to viewers than a traditional product 
advertisement?
2. In addition to the success factors listed throughout this 
case, what other aspects of the Will It Blend? campaign 
contributed to its success?
3. On Blendtec’s YouTube channel, take a look at a handful 
of the most recent videos that have been added to the 
campaign. Does it appear that interest in the videos is 
declining or growing stronger?
4. Based on the number of views (listed just below each 
video on YouTube), what kinds of items seem to generate 
the greatest interest when featured in a Will It Blend? 
video? Based on this observation, what suggestions 
would you give the company for items to feature in 
future videos?
5. Why do you think the campaign had such a signifi cant 
impact on retail sales as opposed to commercial sales 
(e.g., sales to food service businesses)?
Abram, C. & L. Pearlman. Facebook for Dummies. Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2008.
Akman, M. “ ‘Will It Blend?’: An Early Social Media Success 
Case Study.” Delightwave.com, April 27, 2012.
alexa.com. “Alexa Topsites.” June 5, 2014.
American Express. “American Express Launches ‘Link, Like, 
Love’ on Facebook—First-Ever Platform to Deliver Deals, 
Access and Experiences Based on Cardmember ‘Likes’ and 
Interests.” Press release, about.americanexpress.com, July 19, 
2011.
Berners-Lee, T. “Giant Global Graph.” Timbl’s blog, 
Decentralized Information Group, November 2007. 
Briggs, C. “BlendTec Will It Blend? Viral Video Case Study.” 
socialens.com, January 2009.
References

References     263  
Carr, D. “Is Business Ready for Second Life?” Baselinemag.com, 
March 2007. 
Clough, A. “Klout’s Peer Index Score Is 40, Peer Index’s Klout 
Score Is 57. Do They Care?” LewisPR360, October 27, 2011.
comScore.com. “It’s a Social World: Top 10 Need-to-
Knows About Social Networking and Where It’s Headed.” 
December 21, 2011.
Deighton, J. and Kornfeld, L. “United Breaks Guitars”, 
Harvard Business School Case 510-057, hbr.org, January 6, 2010.
Facebook. “Social Plugins.” developers.facebook.com, June 10, 
2014.
Fiorenza, P. “Daily Dose: More Trouble for Banking Industry.” 
GovLoop.com, October 6, 2011.
Forrester Research. “Social Networking in The Enterprise: 
Benefi ts and Inhibitors.” June 2010.
Harvey, M. “Facebook Sets Up Google War with Vast 
Expansion through Open Graph.” thetimes.co.uk, April 22, 2010.
Heathfi eld, S. “Use LinkedIn for Recruiting Employees.” 
Humanresources.com, (Accessed, August 12, 2012. 
Hegaret, P., L. Wood, & J. Robie (eds.). “What Is the Docu-
ment Object Model?” World Wide Web Consorium, W3.org, 
November 2000.
Horrigan, J. “Home Broadband Adoption 2009.” Pew Internet 
& American Life Project, June 2009.
Kim, R. “American Express Delivers Deals via Facebook’s 
Social Graph.” GigaOm.com, July 19, 2011.
Learmonth, M. “The Top 10 Viral Ads of All Time.” Advertising 
Age (Adage.com), September 2010.
Lee, D. “How Twitter changed the world, hashtag-by-hashtag,” 
bbc.com, November 7, 2013.
Leiner, B., V. Cerf, D. Clark . . . S., D., Kahn, R., Kleinrock, L., 
Lynch, D., Postel, J., Roberts, L., Wolff. “A Brief History of 
the Internet.” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication 
Review 39, no. 5, October 2009.
Levine, R., C. Locke, D. Searls, & D. Weinberger. The Cluetrain 
Manifesto: The End of Business as Usual. Cambridge, MA: 
Perseus, 2000.
Li, C. & J. Bernoff. Groundswell: Winning in a World Trans-
formed by Social Technologies. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
Business Press, 2008.
March, J. “Zappos: Delivering WOW Customer Service 
through Twitter.” The Social Customer, November 25, 2011.
Masnick, M. “Is Infl uence a Number. . . And Is It Based on 
Twitter?” TechDirt.com, May 25, 2011.
McDonald, C. & M. Horan. “Will It Blend?” knowyourmeme.
com, March 2014.
Mendelson, B. J. “Why Does Blendtec Lie About Their Viral 
Marketing Success?” bjmendelson.com, December 2013.
Nielsen Company. “Facebook and Twitter Post Large Year over 
Year Gains in Unique Users.” May 2010.
Outlaw, S. “What Type of Crowdfunding Is Best for You?” 
Entrepreneur.com, October 3, 2013.
Quittner, J. “For Banks, There’s More Tech Behind Tweets.” 
AmercianBanker.com, June 24, 2011.
Reisner, R. “Comcast’s Twitter Man.” Bloomberg Business-
week, January 2009.
Sibona, C. & S. Walczak. “Unfriending on Facebook: Friend 
Request and Online/Offl ine Behavior Analysis.” Paper pre-
sented at 44th International Conference on System Sciences, 
Hawaii, January 2011.
Singer, A. “Obsessed With Your Klout Score? You’re Doing It 
Wrong.” thefuturebuzz.com, June 21, 2011.
Skinner, C. “Banks Have Bigger Development Shops than 
Microsoft.” Financial Services Club Blog, September 9, 2011.
Statista.com. “Number of Monthly Active Facebook Users 
Worldwide as of 1st Quarter 2014.” 2014.
technorati.com. “State of the Blogosphere 2011.” November 4, 
2011.
techterms.com. “Javascript.” June 10, 2014.
van Kesteren, A., J. Aubourg, J. Song, & H. Steen (eds.). “XML 
Http Request Level 1: W3C Working Draft 30 January 2014.” 
World Wide Web Consortium, W3.org, January 2014.
Vogelstein, F. “Great Wall of Facebook: The Social Network’s 
Plan to Dominate the Internet—And Keep Google Out.” 
Wired Magazine, June 2009.
W3C. “XML Essentials.” World Wide Web Consorium, W3.org, 
June 10, 2014.
Walker, L. “What to Do If Your Klout Score Drops.” 
LauraleeWalker.com, October 27, 2011.
Weaver, A. & B. Morrison. “Social Networking.” Computer, 
February 2008.
White, M. C. “Bank Transfer Day, the Day After.” Time 
Moneyland, November 7, 2011.
Wikipedia. “Ajax (Programming).” June 10, 2014. 
Wikipedia. “Crowdfunding.” June 10, 2014.

264
Chapter Snapshot
This is both an exciting and challenging time to be a 
retailer. Traditional brick-and-mortar stores face increas-
ingly intense competition from other traditional retailers 
as well as competitors in the online and mobile retail chan-
nels. Consumers, armed with mobile devices, have more 
information than ever before about products, prices, and 
alternative places to buy products. A particular source of 
frustration for traditional retailers is the practice of show-
rooming, where consumers visit a store to look at merchan-
dise, seek information and advice from salespeople, maybe 
even try on clothes, and then leave the store to make their 
purchases online from a company that offers lower prices.
Retail, E-commerce, 
and Mobile Commerce 
Technology
8
Chapter
1. Describe how the concept of omni-channel retailing is 
changing the nature of shopping for consumers.
2. Identify five key challenges faced by online retail 
businesses in the Business to Consumer (B2C) 
marketplace.
3. Identify various ways that e-businesses are facilitating 
trade between buyers and sellers in the Business to 
Business (B2B) marketplace.
4. Understand how mobile technologies are creating 
opportunities for new forms of commerce in established 
industries.
5. Recognize how mobile payment methods benefit both 
consumers and retailers.
Chapter Snapshot
Case 8.1 Opening Case: Macy’s Races Ahead 
with Mobile Retail Strategies
8.1 Retailing Technology
8.2  Business to Consumer (B2C) E-commerce
8.3  Business to Business (B2B) E-commerce 
and E-procurement
8.4 Mobile Commerce
8.5 Mobile Transactions and Financial Services
Key Terms
Assuring Your Learning
• Discuss: Critical Thinking Questions
• Explore: Online and Interactive Exercises
•  Analyze & Decide: Apply IT Concepts 
to Business Decisions
Case 8.2 Business Case: Chegg’s Mobile Strategy 
Case 8.3 Video Case: Searching with Pictures 
Using MVS
References
Learning Outcomes

265
CASE 8.1 OPENING CASE
Macy’s Races Ahead with Mobile Retail Strategies 
 
Online retailers also face significant challenges. 
Maintaining an e-commerce website requires ongoing 
investment in new technologies designed to enhance the 
online shopping experience, increase operational and logis-
tical efficiency, as well as maintain high levels of customer 
satisfaction. Thanks to social media, dissatisfied customers 
now have numerous forums for informing others about 
frustrating experiences they might have with a company. It 
can be difficult meeting customer expectations that seem to 
grow more and more demanding everyday.
 
Companies that are branching out into mobile com-
merce face challenges as well. For years, industry pundits 
have said that mobile commerce, or m-commerce, is going 
to be huge. But those predictions have failed to material-
ize for a number of reasons, leaving some to question their 
investments in mobile technology. However, there are 
signs that mobile devices have finally begun to make an 
impact on retailing in noticeable ways. Nevertheless, the 
question still remains whether or not this emerging chan-
nel will become as big a force as some have predicted for 
years. In this chapter, you will read about the forces that 
are shaping consumer shopping behavior, and the ways 
that traditional, online, and mobile retailers are using 
technology to address the many challenges they face.
Mobile devices, particularly smartphones, have become a key tool in the arsenal of 
modern-day shoppers. Using barcode scanner apps, customers in brick-and-mortar 
retail stores can quickly compare prices with other stores and online retailers. They 
can access product information, check expert and consumer product reviews, and 
even purchase products from online retailers. This practice, called showrooming, 
represents a significant threat to many traditional retailers who continue to ignore 
the impact of mobile consumer behavior.
Showrooming is frustrating to retailers who bear the costs of providing sales 
support, product inventory and maintaining a store front, only to see customers 
TABLE 8.1 
Opening Case Overview
Company 
Macy’s, Inc. 
The business 
 Macy’s is a premier department store retailer with a signifi -
cant online e-commerce website and mobile shopping app. 
Product lines 
 Macy’s department stores offers a range of products, includ-
ing fashionable clothing, jewelry, footwear, furniture, bedding, 
small kitchen appliances, cookware, and other household 
goods.
Business 
Implementation of an omni-channel retail concept that 
challenges  
 allows consumers to freely and seamlessly engage with 
Macy’s through a traditional storefront, e-commerce website, 
or mobile technology.
Digital 
Macy’s embraces technology to enhance the shopping 
technology  
 experience through the use of QR codes and SMS text 
messaging, mobile videos to provide information about 
merchandise, and an SMS database for distribution of mobile 
coupons and marketing communications.
Taglines 
“The Magic of Macy’s,” “Macy’s, way to shop!”
Barcode: A machine-
readable code consisting of 
numbers and a pattern of 
thick and thin lines that can 
be scanned to identify the 
object on which the code 
appears.
Showrooming: The practice 
of examining products in 
a traditional retail store, 
sometimes with the help 
of a salesperson, and then 
purchasing the product 
online.

266  Chapter 8     Retail, E-commerce, and Mobile Commerce Technology
purchase products at a lower price from an online retailer with lower overhead 
costs. Target recently wrote to several of its vendors asking them to create special 
products, only sold in Target stores, in an attempt to stifle consumer comparison 
shopping via mobile devices (Zimmerman, 2012). But other retailers, recogniz-
ing the pervasive nature of mobile shopping trends, are developing strategies to 
embrace and engage the mobile shopper.
Department store giant Macy’s (Figure 8.1) is recognized as a pioneer when 
it comes to using mobile technologies to enhance the shopping experience of its 
customers (Figure 8.2). Macy’s uses in-store displays to encourage customers to use 
mobile devices while shopping. The Backstage Pass Program is designed to enhance 
the in-store shopping experience at Macy’s. Using quick response (QR) codes 
and short message service (SMS) technology, customers can easily access fun and 
informative 30-second videos that highlight the retailer’s celebrity designers and 
fashion experts (see related videos at youtube.com/Macys). Mobile shoppers can 
access the videos by scanning the QR codes posted on displays in each department. 
Shoppers who do not have a QR code scanner can access the videos by texting a 
special keyword to Macy’s using codes supplied on the displays. Backstage Pass 
is an example of what marketers call a mobile display strategy. It is supported by 
Macy’s is one of the nation’s
premier retail organizations
specializing in the operation of
mid-range department stores.
Brand
Operates 840 department stores
in the U.S., Guam, and Puerto
Rico under the Macy’s and
Bloomingdales brand names.
Global Reach
QR codes, mobile video display,
augmented reality, coupons via
SMS, mobile payment.
Digital Technology
Macy’s, Inc.
Macy’s considers itself to be a
leader in omni-channel retailing
practices and innovation.
Corporate Culture
Figure 8.1 Macy’s, Inc. 
overview.
Quick response (QR) codes: 
A machine readable code 
typically used to store a link 
to a URL or web address 
that can be read by a mobile 
device.
Short message service 
(SMS): A technology used 
to send and receive text 
messages on mobile devices 
via a telecommunications 
network.
Figure 8.2 Macy’s 
encourages shoppers to 
use mobile technology in 
its stores through a variety 
of strategies, including 
mobile videos that describe 
merchandise, benefi ts from 
mobile check-in, and fun 
augmented-reality apps.
© gpointstudio/Shutterstock

CASE 8.1     Opening Case     267  
an integrated communications campaign involving traditional television and print 
media advertising. Macy’s can measure customer interest in the program by track-
ing the number of times customers watch the videos. Based on the initial success 
of the program, Macy’s has increased spending on mobile display strategies by 
70 percent (Kats, 2012). 
Another key mobile strategy used by Macy’s is the SMS database strategy, 
growing its list of customers who have opted-in to receive discounts and special 
offers via text message. According to Martine Reardon, executive vice president of 
national marketing at Macy’s, New York, the retailer is including SMS short codes 
in most of its printed coupons to encourage customers to opt-in to receive coupons 
and other offers via text message. Macy’s customers have responded well to these 
kinds of promotions, so growing the list of people who opt-in to this program should 
be easy.
With its mobile check-in strategy, Macys has partnered with Foursquare and 
Shopkick to create check-in programs that reinforce shopping behavior at retail 
outlets. Mobile customers using the Shopkick app on their phones receive points on 
their account just for visiting a Macy’s store. They may also receive special offers 
from Macy’s via the Shopkick app when they visit particular departments or scan 
featured merchandise. The points can be redeemed for restaurant vouchers, iTunes 
gift cards, and gift cards from a variety of participating retailers. Macy’s partnered 
with Foursquare and a charitable foundation created by insurance company Aflac. 
For every consumer who checks-in at Macy’s via the Foursquare app, Aflac donates 
$1 to its charity, The Aflac Cancer Center and Blood Disorders Service of Children’s 
Healthcare of Atlanta. Aflac made the same offer to customers who checked-in 
while watching Macy’s famous Thanksgiving Day Parade, using an entertainment 
check-in service called GetGlue.com (now called tvtag.com). These kinds of part-
nerships and programs not only reinforce store shopping behavior, but also enhance 
Macy’s positive brand reputation among target consumers.
Via the mobile payment strategy, customers can pay for products at Macy’s 
using Google Wallet, a mobile payment app (Figure 8.3). At the register, customers 
simply tap their phones on a Near-Field Communications (NFC) device in order 
to transfer funds to Macy’s. Google Wallet is one of several approaches to mobile 
payment competing to become the dominant alternative to traditional credit cards. 
Mobile payment is expected to become widespread in the near future as banks, 
retailers, and telecommunications companies gain experience with the technology. 
(Read more about mobile payment in Section 8.5.)
Figure 8.3 Customers at 
Macy’s can pay for purchases 
with their smartphones by 
using a mobile wallet app.
© LDProd/iStockphoto

268  Chapter 8     Retail, E-commerce, and Mobile Commerce Technology
In an augmented reality strategy, during the Thanksgiving and Christmas holi-
day season, Macy’s runs a program to benefit the Make-A-Wish Foundation. Over 
the past few years, Macy’s has donated $1 for every customer who visits a store and 
“mails” a letter to Santa. In 2011 Macy’s made that visit even more fun, inviting 
customers to take pictures of their children in special holiday displays using aug-
mented reality apps that inserted one of the animated characters associated with 
the campaign into the picture. Pictures could then be uploaded into a holiday card 
template, shared by e-mail, or posted to the customer’s Facebook page.
While other retailers are still trying to understand mobile consumer behavior, 
Macy’s is already adapting to a new retail environment where increasing numbers 
of consumers are using handheld devices. It has shown that traditional brick-and-
mortar retailers can enhance the in-store shopping experience using mobile tech-
nologies in a variety of ways.
Sources: Compiled from Zimmerman (2012), Tsirulnik (2011), Macy’s (2011), Johnson (2011), Kats (2012).
Augmented reality: A tech-
nology that superimposes a 
computer-generated image 
onto an image of the real 
world to provide information 
or entertainment.
Questions
1.  Describe how each of Macy’s mobile retail strategies enhances the 
in-store shopping experience for customers.
2.  What will most customers think about Target’s attempt to make mobile 
price comparison more diffi cult?
3.  How does Macy’s benefi t from the use of location-based apps like 
Foursquare and Shopkick?
4.  Why is it important that Macy’s get customers to “opt-in” to its program 
before sending promotional text messages?
5.  Does Macy’s Backstage Pass Program really add value to the customer, 
or is it just a “gimmick” with short-term benefi ts?
6.  Traditional retailers spend a considerable amount of money to maintain 
an inventory of products and provide salespeople to service in-store 
customers. Explain whether or not the practice of showrooming is 
unethical.  What can retailers do to respond to the showrooming trend?
Life is not easy for managers in the retail sector these days. The challenges faced by 
retailers have never been more complex, frustrating, and fraught with peril. Consumers 
are demanding, price-conscious, and easily swayed by competitors. Technology is both 
a blessing and a curse. Countless new and innovative technology “solutions” to retail-
ing problems are offered by a dizzying array of both established and new vendors. 
Many of the newest technologies promise to give retailers a competitive edge in the 
marketplace, but are unproven. Budgets for technology are limited, and making the 
wrong decision can lead to financial consequences, operational failures, and lost cus-
tomers. However, because of intense competition, retailers cannot afford to be too 
conservative, or they risk losing out to competitors with technologies that enhance the 
shopping experience, reduce costs, integrate sales channels, and improve record keep-
ing, data collection, and analysis of key performance indicators (KPIs).
8.1  Retailing Technology
KEEPING UP WITH 
CONSUMER DEMANDS 
AND BEHAVIOR
Understanding and responding to consumer needs and behavior is the key to sur-
vival for the modern retailer. The challenge, however, is increasingly complex as 
retailers are confronted with a number of difficult industrywide trends and changing 
consumer behavior (Galgey & Pattinson, 2013). 

8.1     Retailing Technology     269  
Empowered Price Sensitivity. Consumers have always been concerned about price. 
In today’s retail environment, the consumer is more empowered than ever to find the 
lowest price available for a product. Using the Web and mobile technology, consumers 
can look up information about alternative products and prices from a variety of local 
and online retailers using a mobile device. Retailers need clear strategies to respond 
to the empowered consumer by price-matching or finding ways to offer greater value.
Nonlinear Search and Influence Patterns. The path by which consumers pursue 
purchases today is often varied and unpredictable. In simpler times, consumers were 
largely influenced by mass media advertising that drove them to brick-and-mortar 
stores for purchase. While things were perhaps never quite that simple, consumers 
today are influenced by a range of new communications channels including social 
media, mobile ads, e-mail, search marketing, and other digital communications.
Channel Hopping. Just as consumers are influenced by a greater number of commu-
nications channels, their options for purchasing products have increased. Consumers 
can now purchase products through traditional retailers, online, and via mobile 
devices and apps. Some experts are beginning to view social media as a potential 
retail channel called social commerce. For instance, Dell reportedly sells millions of 
dollars of refurbished computer equipment each year through its @delloutlet Twitter 
account (Leslie, Chawla, Aaker, 2010). The manner in which consumers use each 
channel varies. Some consumers will use a brick-and-mortar store to gather informa-
tion about a product, but purchase it online. Others will do their research online, but 
prefer to purchase the product through a traditional retailer. Some may plan to pur-
chase the product at a store, but if they find the product they want is not available 
they will buy it from their mobile device while in the store. The many combinations 
of shopping channel, communications channel, and stage of the shopping process are 
enormous and make strategic planning a challenge. Modern retailers will increas-
ingly rely on data analytics to distinguish patterns or trends in consumer shopping 
behavior across channels to identify the best ways to satisfy customer needs. 
Digital Immigrants, Natives, and Dependents. Retailers have long been aware of the 
difference between digital immigrants and digital natives. Digital natives are the first 
generation to have grown up surrounded by digital devices (i.e., computers, smart-
phones, digital cameras, video recorders, etc.) and Internet connectivity. They are 
comfortable using technology to move easily between various retail channels to opti-
mize their purchasing on price, convenience, and desire for instant gratification. Digital 
immigrants, however, are older, and although they are increasingly comfortable with 
technology, they fundamentally view retail channels as separate and distinct. They 
are much less likely than natives to incorporate mobile technology into their shopping 
behavior. Digital dependents represent the emerging generation of young people who 
are growing up in a world of broadband connections, constant connectivity, and related 
technology and become uncomfortable if they do not have access to it. This generation 
will place even greater demands on retailers, expecting to use technology to accomplish 
all facets of the shopping experience. Brick-and-mortar retailers will continue to play 
an important role in the lives of this generation, but they will expect in-store shopping 
to be fully integrated with the technology they have come to depend on.
Need for Convenience. As economic and social factors lead to more stressful 
lives, consumers will be looking for products and shopping channels that reduce 
the impact on their time and financial resources, while satisfying their demand for 
immediate gratification and desirable goods and services.
THE OMNI-CHANNEL 
RETAILING CONCEPT
As the retailing world began to evolve as a result of digital technology and the 
Internet, new channels emerged that were initially thought to be separate and dis-
tinct. Most retailers and a fairly large segment of the consumer market still view 
online shopping (e-commerce) and mobile commerce (m-commerce) channels as 
competing with traditional brick-and-mortar stores. 

270  Chapter 8     Retail, E-commerce, and Mobile Commerce Technology
As you read in the opening case, Target feels threatened by customers who 
showroom its stores using mobile devices. However, as businesses learn about the 
full potential of mobile and other digital technologies, the distinction between the 
newer channels and in-store retailing is beginning to blur. While most businesses 
currently operate their e-commerce and mobile channels separately from the tradi-
tional retail channel, it is expected that strategies integrating the customer experi-
ence across channels will emerge, resulting in what the National Retail Federation 
(2011) refers to as the omni-channel retailing approach.
As illustrated in Figure 8.4, many businesses operate separate retail channels. 
For instance, in-store product prices may be different from those the customer finds 
on the company’s e-commerce website and direct mail catalog. Records of customer 
purchases from the e-commerce site may not be available to service personnel 
assisting the customer at the store level. But retail strategy is evolving. The ulti-
mate goal is to offer consumers multiple brand–based “touchpoints” that leverage 
the strengths of each channel. For instance, a company with a truly integrated or 
omni-channel strategy might spark a customer’s interest using mobile advertising or 
direct mail catalogs. The customer then visits a brick-and-mortar store to examine 
the product firsthand and speak to a salesperson. In-store purchases might be made 
using one of the mobile payment methods discussed later in this chapter. If the store 
does not have the particular size or color of the product desired, the customer might 
order it by accessing the store’s e-commerce site with his or her smartphone by 
scanning a QR code placed strategically on an in-store display. The product would 
then be delivered through the mail. Product returns could be handled through the 
mail or returned to the store, depending on what is most convenient for the cus-
tomer. Customer service reps in a call center would have a record of the customer’s 
purchase regardless of which channel the transaction had been completed through. 
The omni-channel strategy will also take into consideration the potential impact of 
social media, whereby customers interact with the brand on sites like Facebook or 
Twitter and share brand experiences with others in their social network.
Single Channel
The Legacy
Consumer contact with
retailers limited to single
channel.
Retailers only had a single
“touch point” with which to
connect with consumers.
Retailers operate separate channels
as independent “silos” that 
sometimes compete for consumer
attention.
Retailers have a single view of the
consumer, but continue to operate
separate channels as silos.
Retailers leverage the functionality of
each channel as well as their single view
of the customer to provide optimal
overall experience.
Customers enjoy an integrated,
value-added experience with brand
across multiple channels.
Customers see multiple but separate 
channels with which they can interact
with the same brand.
Customers see multiple retail
channels available for acquiring
goods and servies.
The Reality
The Aspiration
Nirvana
Multi-Channel
Cross-Channel
Omni-Channel
Figure 8.4 Retail strategy 
is evolving toward an 
omni-channel approach 
(adapted from National Retail 
Federation, 2011).
Questions
1. Describe the factors that infl uence consumer shopping behavior today.
2. What does the concept of digital native, digital immigrant, and digital 
dependent help us to understand about people’s use of technology 
during shopping activities?

8.2     Business to Consumer (B2C) E-commerce     271  
3. Why are retailers likely to view technology as both a blessing and a 
curse?
4. Describe how an omni-channel retailer is likely to be different from a 
traditional, single-channel retailer?
During the late 1990s, the idea of purchasing things online was still a novel concept. 
People who purchased books and other low-priced items from websites were seen 
as innovators. Nowadays, shopping for things online and finding the best deal by 
comparing online prices with those in brick-and-mortar stores are common con-
sumer behaviors. In the past decade, the variety of goods and services available 
through e-commerce sites has skyrocketed. If you look through older textbooks in 
the IT field, you will find authors predicting that e-commerce will only be successful 
with low-priced consumer goods. But we now know that this is simply not the case. 
People today purchase everything from toothpaste to cars and diamond rings online. 
E-commerce in the B2B sector is even larger than it is in the B2C marketplace.
Retail sales via online channels, financial services, travel services, and digital 
products (e.g., music- and movie-streaming services) are widely popular forms of 
B2C commerce. The most well-known B2C site is Amazon.com, whose IT develop-
ments received U.S. patents that keep it ahead of competition. Many of these are 
described in IT at Work 8.1. 
8.2  Business to Consumer (B2C) E-commerce 
Entrepreneur and e-commerce pioneer Jeff Bezos envi-
sioned the huge potential for retail sales over the Internet 
and selected books for his e-commerce venture. In July 1995 
Bezos started Amazon.com, offering books via an electronic 
catalog from its website. Key features offered by Amazon.com 
were broad selection, low prices, easy searching and order-
ing, useful product information and personalization, secure 
payment systems, and efficient order fulfillment. Early on, 
recognizing the importance of order fulfillment, Amazon.com 
invested hundreds of millions of dollars in building physical 
warehouses designed for shipping small packages to hundreds 
of thousands of customers.
Amazon has continually revised its business model by 
improving the customer’s experience. For example, custom-
ers can personalize their Amazon accounts and manage 
orders online with the patented One-Click order feature. This 
personalized service includes an electronic wallet (e-wallet), 
which enables shoppers to place an order in a secure manner 
without the need to enter their address, credit card number, 
and so forth, each time they shop. One-Click also allows 
customers to view their order status and make changes on 
orders that have not yet entered the shipping process. To 
emphasize its large inventory of books, Amazon obtained 
registered trademarks for its retail slogans: “Earth’s Biggest 
Selection” and “If It’s in Print, It’s in Stock.”
In addition, Amazon added services and alliances to attract 
more customers and increase sales. In January 2002 Amazon.
com declared its first-ever profit during the 2001 fourth quarter; 
2003 was the first year it cleared a profit in each quarter. 
Amazon has invested heavily in its IT infrastructure and 
obtained patents for much of the technology that powers its 
website. The select list of patents below gives a glimpse into 
the legal side of the e-commerce giant, and explains why 
numerous major retailers, such as Sears and Sony, have used 
Amazon.com as its sales portal. 
• 
6,525,747: Method and system for conducting a discus-
sion relating to an item
IT at Work 8 .1
Amazon.com’s IT Patents Create Competitive Edge
Electronic wallet (e-wallet): 
A software application that 
can store encrypted informa-
tion about a user’s credit 
cards, bank accounts, and 
other information necessary 
to complete electronic trans-
actions, eliminating the need 
to re-enter the information 
during the transaction.

272  Chapter 8     Retail, E-commerce, and Mobile Commerce Technology
• 
6,029,141: Internet-based customer referral system, also 
known as the Affiliate program
• 
5,999,924: Method for producing sequenced queries
• 
5,963,949: Method for data gathering around forms and 
search barriers
• 
5,960,411: Method and system for placing a purchase 
order via a communications network (One-Click purchase)
• 
5,826,258: Method and apparatus for structuring the que-
rying and interpretation of semi-structured information
• 
5,727,163: Secure method for communicating credit card 
data when placing an order on a nonsecure network
• 
5,715,399: Secure method and system for communicating 
a list of credit card numbers over a nonsecure network
Amazon launched the Kindle e-reader in 2007. Its suc-
cess demonstrated the viability of the e-book market and 
led to the entry of numerous competitors, such as Barnes & 
Noble’s Nook and the Apple iPad. E-books now account for 
about 30 percent of all books sold, and Amazon’s share of 
the e-book market is 65 percent (Bercovici, 2014). Since 2011 
Amazon has sold more e-books than print books (Miller and 
Bosman, 2011). See Figure 8.5.
In mid-2010 Amazon started rolling out a software 
upgrade for Kindle, adding the ability for users to share 
e-book passages with others on Facebook and Twitter. 
The new social networking feature in Version 2.5 adds 
another Web link to the standard Kindle and the larger Kindle 
DX, as Amazon finds itself in an increasingly competitive 
market because of the iPad’s features. The iPad is designed 
for reading digital books, watching online video, listening to 
music, and Web browsing, making it more of a tablet device 
than simply an e-reader.
Finally, as you read in Chapter 6, Amazon has been a 
pioneer in the development of recommendation engines 
designed to suggest products to customers based on their 
purchase history and shopping behavior. Amazon’s recom-
mendation system is considered among the best in the 
industry.
Sources: Compiled from Gonsalves (2010), Rappa (2010), Bercovici 
(2014), Miller & Bosman (2011).
Questions
1. Why is order fulfillment critical to Amazon’s success? 
2. Why did Amazon patent One-Click and other IT infra-
structure developments? 
3. How has Amazon adapted the Kindle to new technolo-
gies? 
4. Why would other retailers form an alliance with Amazon.
com?
Figure 8.5 Amazon now sells more e-books than 
print books and is considered the dominant e-book 
retailer.
Several of the leading online service industries are banking, trading of securities 
(stocks, bonds), and employment, travel, and real estate services. 
ONLINE BANKING 
Online banking includes various banking activities conducted via the Internet 
instead of at a physical bank location. Online banking, also called direct bank-
ing, offers capabilities ranging from paying bills to applying for a loan. Customers 
can check balances and transfer funds at any time of day. For banks, it offers an 
inexpensive alternative to branch banking. Transaction costs are about 2 cents per 
transaction versus $1.07 at a physical branch.
Most brick-and-mortar conventional banks provide online banking services and 
use e-commerce as a major competitive strategy. Customers are aware that if they 
bank exclusively with a brick-and-mortar institution, they may be missing out on 
high-paying investment options or competitive loan rates that easily undercut those 
of many traditional banking entities. 
© nicolamargaret/iStockphoto

8.2     Business to Consumer (B2C) E-commerce     273  
A Crisis of Confidence in Consumer Banking
While the first Internet-only bank, or direct bank, appeared 
in the mid-1980s, it wasn’t until around 2010 that these 
online institutions became mainstream. Some have attrib-
uted general consumer frustration resulting from the 2008 
economic crisis with generating consumer interest in new, 
agile banking institutions that appear to be more respon-
sive to consumer needs for convenience and customer 
support.
Banks have historically built their reputations on trust 
and consumer confidence that they would act ethically, pro-
tect consumers’ money, and make customer interests a pri-
ority. However, the financial crisis of 2008 led to wide-scale 
consumer mistrust and frustration with traditional banks and 
financial services companies. Banking is now considered one 
of the least trustworthy industries by consumers (Edleman, 
2013, O’Connell, 2013). Consumers also believe that irre-
sponsible behavior by banking organizations was a primary 
cause of the economic meltdown that led to high levels of 
unemployment and fiscal uncertainty in the U.S. and across 
the globe (The Financial Brand, 2013).
Many banks only made matters worse during this period 
when they instituted a number of business practices that 
further alienated consumers (O’Connell, 2013). During a 
time when consumers were already frustrated with financial 
institutions because of the economic crisis, many banks hiked 
interest rates on loans, reduced the interest rate they paid 
on consumer savings and checking accounts, made it more 
difficult for consumers to open credit accounts, imposed new 
types of fees on consumer services, and oftentimes failed to 
transparently disclose information about fees and interest 
rates in promotional messages and other forms of commu-
nication with consumers. As a result, consumer confidence 
in the banking industry dropped to an all-time low following 
the 2008 financial crisis (Gallup, 2014). See Figure 8.6.
In an effort to take advantage of widespread consumer 
frustration and dissatisfaction with traditional banking com-
panies, a number of new, smaller, and more agile banks are 
moving to offer alternative approaches to consumer banking 
services. Ally Bank is a popular Internet-only bank that is 
widely recognized for its success in developing a business 
model with significant appeal to retail banking customers. 
Overview of Ally Bank
Ally Bank, based in Midvale, Utah, is a subsidiary of Ally 
Financial, formerly GMAC, the financial unit of General 
Motors Corporation. Since its launch in 2009, Ally Bank has 
worked hard to create a public image that differentiates 
itself from business practices that caused consumers to mis-
trust and grow frustrated with traditional banks and financial 
service corporations. Ally’s marketing communications mes-
sages emphasize that it:
• 
Puts customer needs first.
• 
Offers consumers smart banking alternatives with no hid-
den fees and higher interest rates on savings and invest-
ment accounts.
IT at Work 8 .2
Ally Bank – Building Trust and Confidence Online
Figure 8.6 Consumer 
confi dence in the banking 
industry from 1979 to 2014. 
Source: Gallup, 2014
0.00%
*percent of consumers who indicated a “great deal” or “quite a lot” of confidence in banks
10.00%
20.00%
30.00%
40.00%
50.00%
60.00%
70.00%
1979
1981
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Consumer confidence in banking industry*

274  Chapter 8     Retail, E-commerce, and Mobile Commerce Technology
• 
Is friendly, transparent, and easy to work with, unlike 
large, fee-happy banks.
• 
Is new, innovative, fun and offers an attractive alternative 
to traditional banking corporations.
What Makes Ally Bank Different?
Apart from a brand image that differentiates Ally Bank from 
its competitors, the company uses technology to distinguish 
itself in three important ways:
1. The company is part of a growing group of Internet-only, 
or direct banks. Instead of brick-and-mortar bank branches, 
Ally Bank’s customers use the Web to access their 
accounts, make transactions, and monitor their funds.
2. Unlike other banks that have been slow to embrace 
social media, Ally Bank is recognized as a leader in the 
banking industry for its use of social media to engage 
consumers.
3. Ally Bank offers customers mobile banking apps to make 
doing business with the company even more convenient.
Internet banks provide customers with the convenience of 
24/7 banking services through the Web. Consumers access 
their account information using a computer, tablet or smart-
phone. Deposits are made by scanning or photographing 
checks and transferring the image to the bank. Checks can 
also be mailed to the bank. Internet banks typically offer 
savings and checking accounts, certificates of deposit, retire-
ment accounts, and various types of loans and mortgages. 
Because Internet banks do not bear the cost of maintaining 
physical branch offices, they often offer customers bet-
ter interest rates and lower fees than traditional banks. To 
retrieve cash, customers use ATM machines. Many Internet 
banks reimburse customers for fees they incur when using 
the ATM machines of other banks.
Social Media
Traditional banks have been reluctant to utilize social 
media channels for engaging consumers for fear of vio-
lating long-standing banking regulations that govern 
disclosures and consumer privacy. Given the current level 
of consumer frustration, many banks are probably also 
hesitant about what their customers are likely to say about 
them through comments, ratings, and reviews on social 
media. This hesitation to embrace new media has created 
an opportunity for upstart banking organizations such as 
Ally Bank. Since the Internet bank lacks a physical pres-
ence, social media is the primary channel for interacting 
with customers in ways that promote trust, confidence, 
and loyalty, key ingredients for maintaining long-term 
financial relationships.
Ally Bank is recognized as an industry leader when 
it comes to its innovative use of social media. According 
to Smith (2014), Ally Bank excels in three areas of social 
media:
• 
Communicating the brand via social channels
• 
Using data to drive social marketing decisions
• 
Cross-platform integration of marketing strategies
Examples of Ally’s social media marketing include using 
Twitter to offer personal finance advice. Ally has also teamed 
up with Bankrate.com to sponsor a monthly, hour-long 
TweetChat (discussion group) called #AllyBRchat, where 
participants discuss a range of personal finance issues. The 
firm’s Facebook page is used to engage consumers with links 
to Ally’s “Straight Talk Blog,” opinion polls, and educational 
videos. On Ally Bank’s YouTube channel, visitors will find 
installments of financial advice programs with titles such as 
“Ally Bank Financial Etiquette,” “Discovering Retirement,” 
and “Behind the Scenes with Kiplinger.” Across all of these 
social platforms, Ally Bank offers consumers information, 
advice, and tools by posting over 1,500 pieces of content 
every month (Tejwani, 2012).
Ally Bank’s Mobile Strategy
Ally Bank’s adoption of mobile technology follows the 
bank’s philosophy of putting the customer first and creating 
the most convenient ways for them to access and manage 
their money. According to Carrie Sumlin, a Digital Deposits 
Executive at Ally Bank, the company’s goal with both 
mobile and Web technology is to make sure that all applica-
tions live up to the promise of transparency, simplicity, and 
ease of use (Yurcan, 2014). First introduced in April 2012, 
Ally’s mobile apps offer a wide range of functionality includ-
ing account management, bill payment, fund transfers to 
external banks, and a tool for finding ATM and cash-back 
locations. Managers at Ally Bank are constantly evaluat-
ing customer reaction to the mobile apps by monitoring 
how the apps are used, which devices are being used, and 
customer feedback collected through social media, Web-
based consumer surveys, and calls to their customer service 
center.
Results
In a study of 22 leading banks, credit unions, and finan-
cial service firms conducted by the research firm Change 
Sciences, Ally Bank was ranked #1 for its use of social 
media. The study cited the importance of “authenticity” in 
social media communications—going beyond advertising 
by addressing customer needs and communicating in a per-
sonal tone or real voice instead of a corporate tone (Yurcan, 
2012, Tejwani, 2012).
A 2011 study by the Ponemon Institute ranked Ally Bank 
among the top five most-trusted banks in the industry based 
on a survey of 5,571 consumers.

8.2     Business to Consumer (B2C) E-commerce     275  
Ally Bank was rated among the best in the nation by the 
Pew Charitable Trusts for its use of best disclosure practices, 
evidence that the company is succeeding in its goal to be 
transparent about fees and other information important to 
consumers (Malone, 2014). 
Ally Bank is regularly recognized by organizations 
and publications like Money Magazine, Kiplinger, Forester 
Research, and Bank Tracker as being among the best banks in 
the industry, providing the best banking website, and provid-
ing an excellent customer experience. For an extensive list of 
awards and recognitions, see the Media Center—Awards and 
Recognitions page on the Allybank.com website.
Conclusion
Ally Bank is clearly an innovator and a disruptive competitor 
in an otherwise tradition-bound industry that has not always 
been responsive to consumer needs. The company has 
distinguished itself by its innovative, technology-driven 
approach to providing financial services, a provocative and 
engaging marketing and branding strategy, and an ability 
to communicate with consumers through social media chan-
nels. In the short time that Ally Bank has been in business, it 
has attracted over 825,000 customers, manages $45 billion 
in retail deposits, and achieves customer satisfaction levels 
of over 90 percent (Ally Financial, 2014). It is recognized as a 
leader in the direct banking segment of the consumer bank-
ing industry.
Questions
1.  Visit Ally Bank’s Facebook page. Identify examples of 
how the company speaks in an authentic or real voice to 
its customers.
2. How has Ally Bank attempted to take advantage of nega-
tive consumer sentiment toward traditional banks in the 
industry?
3.  As Ally Bank develops its mobile banking service, what 
guides the company’s development of the necessary 
technological applications?
4.  Visit Ally Bank’s YouTube channel. After reviewing video 
clips of Ally’s past advertising campaigns, how would you 
describe its brand image?
5.  Visit Allybank.com and review the information about its 
banking services. Do you think that Internet-only banks 
will eventually attract a significant number of customers 
away from traditional banks? 
INTERNATIONAL AND 
MULTIPLE-CURRENCY 
BANKING
International banking and the ability to handle trading in multiple currencies are 
critical for international trade. Electronic fund transfer (EFT) and electronic letters 
of credit are important services in international banking. An example of support for 
e-commerce global trade is provided by TradeCard (tradecard.com). TradeCard 
offers a software-as-a-service (SaaS) model that provides supply chain collaboration 
and a trade finance compliance platform. 
Although some international retail purchasing can be done by giving a credit 
card number, other transactions may require cross-border banking support. For 
example, Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank (hsbc.com.hk) has developed a special 
system, HSBCnet, to provide online banking in 60 countries. Using this system, the 
bank has leveraged its reputation and infrastructure in the developing economies of 
Asia to rapidly become a major international bank without developing an extensive 
new branch network.
Electronic fund transfer 
(EFT): A transfer of funds 
from one bank account to 
another over a computerized 
network.
ONLINE JOB MARKET
Most companies and government agencies advertise job openings, accept résumés, 
and take applications via the Internet. The online job market is especially effective 
and active for technology-oriented jobs. While sites like dice.com and monster.com 
can still be helpful, job seekers nowadays are employing a variety of social media 
tools, including the use of LinkedIn.com, to develop a network of contacts and 
establish a personal, online reputation. In many countries, governments must adver-
tise job openings on the Internet. In addition, hundreds of job-placement brokers 
and related services are active on the Web. 
ISSUES IN ONLINE 
RETAILING
Despite the tremendous growth of online retailers, many face challenges that can 
interfere with business growth. Major issues include: 
1. Resolving channel confl ict. Sellers that are click-and-mortar companies, 
such as Levi’s or GM, face a confl ict with their regular wholesale and retail 

276  Chapter 8     Retail, E-commerce, and Mobile Commerce Technology
distributors when they circumvent those distributors by selling online directly 
to customers. (These distributors are other businesses that carry the compa-
ny’s product.) This situation is called channel confl ict because it is a confl ict 
between an online selling channel and physical selling channels. Channel con-
fl ict has forced some companies to limit their B2C efforts, or not to sell direct 
online. An alternative approach is to try to collaborate in some way with the 
existing distributors whose services may be restructured. For example, an auto 
company could allow customers to confi gure a car online, but require that the 
car be picked up from a dealer, where customers could also arrange fi nancing, 
warranties, and service.
2. Resolving confl icts within click-and-mortar organizations. When an established 
company sells online directly to customers, it creates confl ict with its own offl ine 
operations. Confl icts may arise in areas such as pricing of products and services, 
allocation of resources (e.g., advertising budget), and logistics services provided 
by the offl ine activities to the online activities (e.g., handling of returns of items 
bought online). To minimize this type of confl ict, companies may separate the 
online division from the traditional division. The downside is that separation can 
increase expenses and reduce the synergy between the two organizational parts.
3. Managing order fulfi llment and logistics. Online retailers face tough order fulfi ll-
ment and logistics problems when selling online because of the need to design 
systems to accept and process a huge volume of small orders, to physically pick 
items from warehouse shelves and put them into boxes, to be sure that the cor-
rect labels are applied, and to accept returns. The return process is referred to as 
reverse logistics. 
4. Determining viability and risk of online retailers. Many pure online retailers 
went bankrupt in the dot.com era, the result of problems with cash fl ow, custom-
er acquisition, order fulfi llment, and demand forecasting. Online competition, 
especially in commodity-type products such as CDs, toys, books, or groceries, 
became very fi erce due to the ease of entry into the marketplace. As Porter’s 
(2008) fi ve competitive forces model explains, low entry barriers intensify com-
petition in an industry. So a problem most new and established online retailers 
face is to determine how long to operate while you are still losing money and 
how to fi nance those losses.
5. Identifying appropriate revenue (business) models. One early dot.com model 
was to generate enough revenue from advertising to keep the business afl oat 
until the customer base reached critical mass. This model did not always work. 
Too many dot.coms were competing for too few advertising dollars, which went 
mainly to a small number of well-known sites such as AOL, MSN, Google, and 
Yahoo. In addition, there was a “chicken-and-egg” problem: Sites could not 
get advertisers to come if they did not have enough visitors. To succeed in 
e-commerce, it is necessary to identify appropriate revenue models and modify 
those models as the market changes.
Channel conflict: 
Competition between a 
manufacturer’s distribution 
partners who sell through 
different channels. Channel 
conflict can occur at the 
wholesale, retail, or internal 
sales department level.
ONLINE BUSINESS AND 
MARKETING PLANNING
Online marketing planning is very similar to any other marketing plan. It is not a 
best practice, though, and somewhat strange, to devise separate online and offline 
plans because that is not how customers perceive a business. Here are several online 
business and planning recommendations:
1. Build the marketing plan around the customer, rather than on products.
2. Monitor progress toward the one-year vision for the business in order to identify 
when adjustments are needed, and then be agile enough to respond.
3. Identify all key assumptions in the marketing plan. When there is evidence that 
those assumptions are wrong, identify the new assumptions and adjust the plan.
4. Make data-driven, fact-based plans.

8.3     Business to Business (B2B) E-commerce and E-procurement     277  
Questions
1. Describe how digital content and services can lead to signifi cantly lower 
costs.
2. Why does channel confl ict sometimes occur when companies sell their 
products through both traditional and online channels?
3. How has Amazon maintained its competitive edge?
4. Describe some of the ways that Ally Bank has become one of the most 
successful direct banks in the industry today.
5. Explain why retail banking has  become one of the least trusted indus-
tries by consumers since the early 2000s.
6. List three online marketing planning recommendations.
In business-to-business (B2B) markets, the buyers, sellers, and transactions 
involve only organizations. B2B comprises about 85 percent of e-commerce dol-
lar volume. It covers applications that enable an enterprise to form electronic 
relationships with its distributors, resellers, suppliers, customers, and other part-
ners. By using B2B, organizations can restructure their supply chains and partner 
relationships.
There are several business models for B2B applications. The major ones are 
sell-side marketplaces and e-sourcing (the buy-side marketplace).
8.3  Business to Business (B2B) E-commerce and E-procurement
SELL-SIDE 
MARKETPLACES
In the sell-side marketplace model, organizations sell their products or services to 
other organizations from their own private website or from a third-party site. This 
model is similar to the B2C model in which the buyer is expected to come to the 
seller’s site, view catalogs, and place an order. In the B2B sell-side marketplace, 
however, the buyer is an organization. The two key mechanisms in the sell-side 
model are forward auctions and online catalogs, which can be customized for each 
buyer.
Sellers such as Dell Computer (dellauction.com) use auctions extensively. In 
addition to auctions from their own websites, organizations can use third-party auc-
tion sites, such as eBay, to liquidate items. Companies such as Overstock.com help 
organizations to auction obsolete and excess assets and inventories.
The sell-side model is used by hundreds of thousands of companies and is 
especially powerful for companies with superb reputations. The seller can be 
either a manufacturer (e.g., IBM), a distributor (e.g., avnet.com is an example 
of a large distributor in IT), or a retailer (e.g., Walmart.com). The seller uses 
e-commerce to increase sales, reduce selling and advertising expenditures, 
increase delivery speed, and reduce administrative costs. The sell-side model is 
especially suitable to customization. For example, organizational customers can 
configure their orders online at cisco.com and other sites. Self-configuration of 
orders results in fewer misunderstandings about what customers want and much 
faster order fulfillment.
E-SOURCING
E-sourcing refers to many different procurement methods that make use of an 
electronic venue for identifying, evaluating, selecting, negotiating and collaborating 
with suppliers. The primary methods are online auctions, RFQ (request for quote) 
processing, and private exchanges. E-sourcing also applies to many other secondary 
activities, which add to the cycle time and transaction costs when performed using 
traditional methods. Secondary activities include trading partner collaboration, 
contract negotiation, and supplier selection. 

278  Chapter 8     Retail, E-commerce, and Mobile Commerce Technology
E-PROCUREMENT 
Corporate procurement, also called corporate purchasing, deals with the transac-
tional elements of buying products and services by an organization for its opera-
tional and functional needs. Organizations procure materials to produce finished 
goods, which is referred to as direct procurement, and products for daily opera-
tional needs, which is referred to as indirect procurement. E-procurement refers to 
the reengineered procurement process using e-business technologies and strategies. 
Strategies and solutions linked to e-procurement have two basic goals: 
• Control costs: The first goal is to control corporate spending. Organizations 
want to spend intelligently for procurement activities to maximize the value 
of their spending, that is, to ensure that money spent to procure items results 
in procuring the right products at the best value. Corporate e-procurement 
constitutes a substantial portion of an organization’s operational spending. 
For example, it is common for large manufacturing organizations to spend 
millions of U.S. dollars procuring products and services. Organizations thus 
design e-procurement systems to facilitate and control overall procurement 
spending.
• Simplify processes: The second goal is to streamline the procurement pro-
cess to make it efficient. Inefficiencies in the procurement process introduce 
delays in ordering and receiving items and tax internal resources. 
The two goals of cost control and streamlining can be met in three ways: 
1. Streamline the e-procurement process within an organization’s value chain. Do-
ing so reduces the number of employees needed to process purchasing, reduces 
the procurement cycle time to order and receive items, and empowers an organi-
zation’s staff with enough information about the products and services to enable 
them to make intelligent decisions when procuring items. 
2. Align the organization’s procurement process with those of other trading part-
ners, which belong to the organization’s virtual supply chain. Alignment can be 
achieved by automating the process from end-to-end, including trading partner’s 
systems, and simplifi es the buying process. This enables suppliers to react effi -
ciently to buyers’ needs. 
3. Use appropriate e-procurement strategies and solutions. Organizations analyze 
spending patterns in an effort to improve spending decisions and outcomes.
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE 
EXCHANGES
Exchanges are sites where many buyers and sellers conduct business transactions. 
They may be public or private, depending on whether or not they are open to the 
public.
Vertical exchanges serve one industry (e.g., automotive, chemical), along 
the entire supply chain. Horizontal exchanges serve many industries that use the 
same products or services (e.g., office supplies, cleaning materials). Four types of 
exchanges are:
1.  Vertical exchanges for direct materials. These are B2B marketplaces where 
direct materials—materials that are inputs to manufacturing—are traded, usually 
in large quantities in an environment of long-term relationship known as system-
atic sourcing. An example is PlasticsNet.com, a vertical marketplace for industry 
professionals. 
2. Indirect materials in one industry are purchased as needed using a practice 
called spot sourcing. Buyers and sellers may not even know each other. In verti-
cal exchanges, prices change continuously (like a stock exchange), based on the 
matching of supply and demand. Auctions are typically used in this kind of B2B 
marketplace. Some question exists as to how viable the market is for this type 
of exchange. Several companies that have been previously cited as successful 
indirect material vertical exchanges have gone out of business: paperexchange.
com, chemconnect.com, esteel.com, and Altra Energy Technologies.

8.4     Mobile Commerce     279  
3. Horizontal exchanges. These are many-to-many e-marketplaces for indirect ma-
terials, such as offi ce supplies, light bulbs, and cleaning materials used by any in-
dustry. Because these products are used for maintenance, repair, and operations 
(and not resold to generate revenue), these indirect supplies are called MRO 
supplies. Prices are fi xed or negotiated in this systematic exchange. Examples 
are Worldbid.com, Globalsources.com, and Alibaba.com. 
 
American Express applied its own experience in indirect purchasing to 
develop tools that improve compliance with established procurement rules on 
indirect purchases, or MRO supplies. Instead of a pile of catalogs or personal 
supplier preferences, the system relies on a master catalog that lists only 
approved products from authorized vendors. One of the big gains is the elimination 
of maverick buying. Maverick buying is outside the established system. If the 
procurement process is too complicated, people will go outside the system, and 
buy from a local vendor. Maverick buying can prove costly not only because that 
vendor’s prices may be high, but it can also keep the company from achieving 
volume levels that could trigger a new tier of discounts. 
 
Since catalog purchases have high transaction costs, American Express put 
catalogs from multiple suppliers and from various categories of spending into its 
master catalog, CatalogPro. This catalog makes it easier for users to fi nd the right 
items and purchase at contract rates. 
4.  Functional exchanges. Needed services such as temporary help or extra space 
are traded on an as-needed basis. For example, Employease.com (recently pur-
chased by ADP) can fi nd temporary labor using employers in its Employease 
Network (eease.com). Prices are dynamic, and vary depending on supply and 
demand.
Another important facet of managing procurement is demand management—
knowing or predicting what to buy, when, and how much. The best procurement 
cost is zero, when people are not buying what they do not need.
Questions
1. Briefl y differentiate between the sell-side marketplace and e-sourcing.
2. What are the two basic goals of e-procurement? How can those goals 
be met?
3. What is the role of exchanges in B2B?
4. Explain why maverick buying might take place and its impact on 
procurement costs.
In 1997 two Coca-Cola vending machines that accepted payment via SMS text mes-
sage were installed in Helsinki, Finland. Ever since, industry experts and pundits 
have been predicting that mobile commerce  was about to become “the next big 
thing” in marketing and the sale of consumer goods. Before we explore how mobile 
commerce has evolved since 1997, let us define some terms related to this topic:
Mobile commerce, or m-commerce: The buying or selling of goods and services 
using a wireless, handheld device such as a cell phone or tablet (slate) computer.
Mobile e-commerce: The use of a wireless handheld devices to order and/or 
pay for goods and services from online vendors. Example: Ordering a pair of 
shoes from Zappos.com using a mobile app, or purchasing music from iTunes 
from your iPod.
8.4  Mobile Commerce

280  Chapter 8     Retail, E-commerce, and Mobile Commerce Technology
Mobile retailing: The use of mobile technology to promote, enhance, and add 
value to the in-store shopping experience. Example: Using a coupon on your 
cell phone when checking out at the Hard Rock Café, or “checking-in” to a retail 
location using a mobile app from ShopKick.com or Foursquare.com.
Mobile marketing: A variety of activities used by organizations to engage, 
communicate, and interact over Wi-Fi and telecommunications networks with 
consumers using wireless, handheld devices. Example: Sending special offers to 
customers who have opted-in to receive discounts via SMS text message or adver-
tising a brand on a popular mobile game app like Angry Birds.  For additional 
illustrations of mobile marketing, see IT at Work 8.3.
These four terms are not mutually exclusive. Mobile e-commerce, mobile retail-
ing, and mobile marketing are all forms of mobile commerce. Mobile e-commerce 
emphasizes the use of mobile apps and mobile websites for carrying out transac-
tions and does not necessarily involve interaction with a traditional retail store. 
Mobile retailing, on the other hand, emphasizes in-store shopping using a mobile 
device, but could include situations where the customer ultimately orders from a 
website or mobile app. Mobile marketing is the term used to describe promotional 
strategies and tactics that encourage both mobile e-commerce and mobile retail. 
This overlap is a reflection of the evolution toward the omni-channel retail concept 
discussed earlier in the chapter (see Figure 8.4).
Although there have been some interesting and even successful examples of 
m-commerce since 1997, predictions about mobile technology becoming a pervasive 
force in consumer retailing have proven overly optimistic. There are several reasons 
why consumers and businesses have been slow to embrace m-commerce:
• Relatively primitive mobile devices (compared to modern smartphones and 
tablets)
• Concerns about privacy and security
• Slow network connection speeds
• Limited market size
• Limited and inconvenient mobile payment options
• Lack of technological standardization (devices, OSs, browsers, etc.)
However, many of these barriers have been reduced or eliminated. As you read 
in the previous section, the number of people who now own mobile devices, particu-
larly smartphones, has grown dramatically. According to one widely quoted statistic, 
more people own cell phones today than own toothbrushes! Telecommunications 
carriers have expanded their coverage of populated areas using high-speed net-
works. Modern smartphones and tablet devices have features that make shopping 
via bright colorful screens fun and easy. While security will always be an evolv-
ing concern, consumer comfort with completing transactions on mobile devices 
continues to grow. A number of mobile payment methods are emerging that are 
more convenient than traditional transaction methods. So after years of waiting, it 
appears the stage is finally set for earlier predictions about m-commerce to come 
true. In this section, we will describe some of the many ways businesses and con-
sumers are using mobile technologies to buy and sell goods and services. 
INFORMATION: 
COMPETITIVE 
ADVANTAGE IN 
MOBILE COMMERCE
Integrating mobile technology with a brand’s retail and e-commerce strategy pro-
vides another important benefit to business: customer information and identifica-
tion. When customers interact with a brand using a mobile device, information 
is collected about the customer that can be used to optimize the interaction. For 
instance, when customers use a brand’s mobile app to shop for products, their 
shopping experience can be customized based on the company’s knowledge of 
previous purchases, payment methods, product preferences, and even location. 

8.4     Mobile Commerce     281  
In-Store Tracking. In-store shopping experiences can be optimized through mobile 
technology that can track a customer’s movement through a retail store. This is 
analogous to e-commerce sites that track the pages a customer looks at in order to 
better understand consumer interests and to make decisions about website design. 
Tracking how a customer moves through a store, noting what displays the cus-
tomer looks at, or what departments the customer spends the most time in can be 
extremely helpful for understanding individual consumer preferences as well as cre-
ating optimal store layout. Systems for tracking customers based on signals emitted 
from cell phones and other mobile devices are under development. It is expected 
that they will be available on a commercial basis in the near future.
Although the goal of in-store tracking is to provide an enhanced shopping 
experience for the consumer, most people are likely to find this kind of monitoring 
a violation of privacy. In plain language, many will find it creepy. Businesses that 
are not careful about how they implement these programs will experience customer 
backlash and may even run afoul of new privacy laws and regulations. Therefore, it is 
important that brands involved in mobile e-commerce and mobil retailing have clear 
privacy statements and use an opt-in system to obtain permission from customers 
before tracking their online and offline shopping behaviors. Customers are generally 
willing to give up some degree of privacy as long as companies explain how collecting 
the information will benefit them and identify the safeguards used to protect custom-
ers’ information. Companies often reward customers for providing information and 
opting-in to monitoring programs. This is generally accomplished through loyalty 
programs that offer discounts and special premiums to customers who opt-in.
Few businesses fully utilize mobile tracking and monitoring systems at present. 
But as brands become more sophisticated with mobile technology, it is expected 
they will strive to gain a competitive advantage by using this information to provide 
better service, convenience, and a more enjoyable shopping experience, both online 
and in traditional stores.
Quick Response (QR) Codes. In Japan, many products are tagged with QR codes. 
Consumers in that country frequently scan QR codes to access product informa-
tion from a mobile device. Using a barcode scanner app and the camera feature 
of a mobile device, customers scan the QR code containing a link to an Internet 
webpage. You read in the case at the beginning of this chapter how Macy’s uses 
QR codes on in-store displays to direct customers to promotional videos that fea-
ture its products. The QR code is supposed to be an easier alternative to typing a 
URL address into a mobile browser (see Figure 8.7). While QR codes have not 
been as popular in the U.S. as they are in Asia, marketers have used them in print 
advertising and direct mail ads with some success. Charitable organizations use 
QR codes on the outside of direct mail solicitations. Scanning the code takes the 
user to a video explaining the mission of the organization and typically makes a 
more compelling request for a donation than is possible through print media. 
Figure 8.7 Smartphone users 
can scan QR codes that help 
them easily access product 
information on the Internet 
without the hassle of typing 
a URL code into a mobile 
browser. 
Mobile browser: A Web 
browser that is optimized 
to display Web content 
effectively on a small mobile 
device such as a smart 
phone.
© pressureUA/iStockphoto

282  Chapter 8     Retail, E-commerce, and Mobile Commerce Technology
Additionally, responses to the QR code promotions can be tracked and used to 
evaluate program effectiveness.
Some experts believe, however, that QR code technology is never going to be 
as popular in the U.S. as it is in Asia. They cite studies that report many smartphone 
users simply do not know what to do with a QR code. Other research suggests that 
users think the scanning process is either inconvenient or that QR codes frequently 
direct users to pages that do not really contain anything of interest. For QR codes 
to become something American consumers use frequently, businesses will have 
to prove that they help mobile users find content that is interesting and valuable. 
Mobile visual search technology is emerging as an alternative to QR codes. See 
Video Case 8.3 at the end of this chapter for additional information.
Mobile visual search 
engine: A search engine that 
uses an image instead of a 
text-based query to search 
for information on the Web.
Have you ever played popular mobile games like Angry Birds 
(Figure 8.8), Candy Crush, or the highly addictive Flappy 
Bird? Media research firm Nielsen (2011) reports that games 
are the most popular mobile apps in the U.S. While many 
apps in this category are free, 93 percent of app download-
ers are willing to pay for game apps, compared to 76 percent 
for news apps, another popular category. Mobile gamers 
spend an average of 7.8 hours a month playing games, but 
smartphone users appear to be heavier users of this cat-
egory, with iPhone owners playing 14.7 hours/month and 
Android owners playing 9.3 hours/month. Reports of market 
size and growth rates differ on the exact amounts, but agree 
this category is sizable and growing rapidly. Estimates of 
2013 mobile game revenue range from approximately $12 
billion to $17 billion and analysts predict the market could 
grow to as much as $22 billion by 2015.
To put this in perspective, in 2009, iOS and Android 
mobile gaming apps accounted for just 11 percent of the 
portable (handheld) gaming market dominated by Sony and 
Nintendo. By 2013, mobile games accounted for 27 percent 
of the gaming market and are projected to rise to 35 percent 
by 2017. Clearly, mobile gaming apps have become a dis-
ruptive force in the marketplace, displacing two historically 
strong companies. Even more impressive is the fact that the 
above statistics are based on revenues produced by paid 
downloads and don’t reflect the millions of free games 
downloaded every year. Many mobile games are available as 
free apps supported by advertising revenues. Some analysts 
estimate that ad revenue produced by mobile games was 
approximately $297 million in 2013 (eMarketer, 2013).
Sources: Compiled from Dotson (2012), Nielsen (2011), Asante (2012), 
eMarketer (2013).
Questions
1. Why did established companies like Nintendo and Sony 
fail to gain an early position in the growing mobile gaming 
market?
2. How are mobile games different from traditional video 
games? What advantages do mobile game apps have 
over traditional video games?
3. Gaming and social media are among the most popular 
mobile app categories in the U.S.  What do you think this 
says about the role of mobile devices in the lives of U.S. 
consumers?
4. Since many gaming apps are free, how do developers 
make money in this category?
IT at Work 8 .3
Angry Birds Make Mobile Game Developers Happy
Figure 8.8 Angry Birds is such a popular mobile game 
that it generates additional revenue from sales of 
clothing, plush toys, posters, lunch boxes, and even 
bed linens. 
© Ian Dagnall/Alamy

8.4     Mobile Commerce     283  
MOBILE 
ENTERTAINMENT
Mobile entertainment is expanding on wireless devices. Most notable are music, 
movies, videos, games, adult entertainment, sports, and gambling apps. For more 
information about the most popular mobile app category, mobile gaming, see IT at 
Work 8.3.
Sports enthusiasts enjoy a large number of apps and services on their mobile 
devices. Apps exist to check game scores; track news about specific athletes, teams, 
or sports; take part in fantasy team contests like fantasy football; and participate 
in sports-oriented social networking services. A number of sports-related games 
like mobile golf and sports trivia apps are widely available. There are even apps 
designed to provide tips and information for improving your own athletic perfor-
mance. Apps are available to record workout times, schedule training exercises, 
record heart rates and a variety of other information related to athletic training. 
The iPhone even has an app that analyzes a person’s golf swing and provides advice 
for improving performance.
ESPN is widely acknowledged as a leader in mobile marketing to the sports fan. 
It offers a number of popular branded mobile apps that deliver information and 
entertainment to its target audience. It also utilizes well-designed mobile websites 
and has a large database of fans that have opted-in to receive sports-related news 
alerts sent to their phones via text messages. 
Industry analysts predict that recent improvements in mobile devices will lead 
to an even bigger increase in the number of people who watch video clips, movies, 
and television programming on their mobile devices. The screen size of devices 
like Apple’s iPad makes watching video programming more attractive than on a 
smartphone. However, the number of people viewing video on smartphones seems 
to be increasing as well (Google, IPSOS OTX MediaCT, 2011). Companies like 
theChanner.com offer television programming to mobile device users. Popular 
streaming services such as Netflix and Hulu now offer mobile apps for iOS  and 
Android  devices.
The iTunes Store continues to be a leading in distributor of digital music, 
movies, TV shows, e-books, and podcasts available to consumers for a fee. While 
most iTunes content is available to be purchased, there are frequently e-books, 
movies, and other digital content available for free. Mobile users can also access 
music from digital streaming sites like Pandora.com and Grooveshark.com. Both 
of these services offer free streaming music. Users can upgrade their accounts by 
paying a subscription fee, which then reduces the amount of advertising they are 
exposed to.
While still relatively small, the mobile gambling industry is expected to grow 
substantially over the next few years. Some predict this type of mobile com-
merce could generate as much as $20 billion in the near future. Primary growth 
of this market is expected to take place in Japan and other Asian countries, such 
as horse racing in Hong Kong. Current laws in the U.S. prohibit most forms of 
online gambling; consequently, gambling via mobile devices is largely unavail-
able in the U.S.
Many mobile apps are available for consumers interested in home-based enter-
tainment activities. The Food Network offers an app with tips and recipes for fine 
dining and entertaining. Martha Stewart’s Digital Magazines publishes a number 
of home entertainment and lifestyle mobile apps (see marthastewart.com/apps). 
Mobatech is the maker of a mobile bartending app with numerous recipes for cock-
tails and party drinks. 
HOTEL SERVICES AND 
TRAVEL GO WIRELESS
In recent years, smartphones and other mobile devices have become essential 
travel aids. Most major airlines, hotel chains, and Internet travel agencies have 
developed mobile apps to help travelers manage their arrangements. Airlines 
frequently give passengers the option of receiving up-to-date information about 
their flights via SMS text messaging. Google Maps is perhaps one of the most 

284  Chapter 8     Retail, E-commerce, and Mobile Commerce Technology
popular apps used by travelers, particularly those traveling by automobile. Even 
AAA, the automobile club, has a mobile app that helps drivers plan their trips 
and an app for drivers who need roadside assistance. Other interesting mobile 
travel tools include apps that translate text when traveling abroad, apps for 
finding nearby Wi-Fi hotspots, and apps created by a number of popular travel 
guides.
Most large hotels chains and many independent hotels and inns offer guests 
in-room, wireless high-speed Internet connections, although this is not always a 
free service. Some of these same hotels offer Wi-Fi Internet access in public areas 
like the lobby and meeting rooms. Larger hotel chains have apps that allow guests 
to make reservations, check their bills, and locate hotel services using a mobile 
app. Starwood, Hilton and other hotels are experimenting with mobile check-in 
programs whereby guests use their mobile devices to gain access to their rooms 
using NFC or SMS text message technology. This makes it possible to check-in to 
the hotel without having to stop first at the front desk.  Many airlines now offer 
travelers the option of loading a boarding pass onto their mobile devices (see 
Figure 8.9).
Figure 8.9 Travelers use 
mobile apps to book 
reservations, fi nd directions, 
and locate reviews and 
recommendations for a 
wide range of travel and 
hospitality services. 
MOBILE SOCIAL 
NETWORKING 
People are increasingly using mobile devices to connect with social networking sites 
such as Facebook and Twitter. According to Nielsen (2011), social media apps are 
the third most popular kind of mobile app (after games and weather apps). Much 
like Web-based social networking, mobile social networking occurs in virtual com-
munities. All of the most popular social networking sites offer apps that allow users 
to access their accounts from a smartphone or other mobile device. Some experts 
predict that mobile social media will continue to be a primary driving force in the 
growth of the mobile market.
Industry analysts expect advertising in the mobile chan-
nel to heat up. Increasing numbers of smartphones, better 
browsers, enhanced GPS capabilities, and better ways of 
measuring advertising effectiveness are all factors powering 
this growth. The following are a few examples of wireless 
advertising in action.
IT at Work 8 .4
Wireless Marketing and Advertising in Action
© Aleksandra Gigowska/Shutterstock

8.4     Mobile Commerce     285  
Location-Based Marketing. Foursquare.com is one of the 
most popular apps in the growing field of mobile location-
based marketing and mobile advertising. The Foursquare 
app makes use of the mobile device’s GPS system to 
determine the user’s location. Part of Foursquare’s success 
is the fact that most users do not view it as an advertising 
program. Structured as a mobile social media game, users 
“check-in” from their phones when they visit retail shops 
and restaurants. Users provide information and ratings 
based on their reaction to these outlets. This information 
is shared with advertisers and friends who are also part of the 
Foursquare network. Foursquare develops a profile of users 
based on the kinds of businesses they frequent and can use 
this information to better target consumers with advertising 
messages. Foursquare reinforces member use of the service 
by awarding badges to members for various types and levels 
of usage. Members who are the most frequent shoppers at 
a particular location are awarded the title of Mayor and may 
receive special attention and discounts from the retailer. 
The company provides advertisers with information about 
target customers that they usually do not have: their loca-
tion. This helps advertisers deliver timely messages that can 
be more relevant and meaningful to consumers, increasing 
the chances that the ads will lead to a purchase transaction. 
See Figure 8.10.
Another popular location-based mobile marketing app is 
Shopkick. When the Shopkick app is activated, users receive 
points when they visit a participating retailer. Retailers use 
the app to encourage and reward specific kinds of shopper 
behavior. Shopkick points are used to reward consumers for 
visiting specific locations in a store, purchasing products, 
scanning featured products, and even participating in brief 
surveys. Shoppers often receive targeted discounts and pro-
motional offers when they are in a store. Shopkick users can 
trade in their points for restaurant vouchers, iTunes cards, or 
gift cards from participating retailers.
Augmented Reality (AR). These apps utilize a special tech-
nology that will become more commonplace in the future. 
Augmented reality involves computer-generated graphic 
images that are superimposed on pictures of real things 
(e.g., people, rooms, buildings, roads, etc.). This technology 
can be used by advertisers in several ways. For instance, a 
mobile phone user might point his or her phone camera at 
an office building and activate an AR app that generates the 
logos of all food-service outlets (e.g., Starbucks, Subway, 
McDonalds) inside the building. Furniture retailer IKEA offers 
shoppers an AR app that allows them to project images of its 
products onto pictures of the rooms in their homes so they 
can “visualize” how the products will look (MobiAdNews.
com, 2009). Industry experts expect that AR advertising will 
grow as smartphone users become more familiar with the 
concept (see Figure 8.11).
Figure 8.10 The NBC Universal store at Rockefeller Center in New York City 
encourages customers to check-in to the store using the popular Foursquare app. 
Mobile location-based 
marketing: a marketing 
strategy that uses informa-
tion from a mobile device’s 
GPS or customer’s mobile 
check-in on a social network 
to determine the content of 
marketing communications 
they receive on the device 
(e.g., advertisements, 
coupons, special offers).
© Richard Levine/Alamy
Jon Simon Feature Photo Service/NewsCom
Figure 8.11 IBM’s augmented reality shopping 
app automatically delivers personalized coupons, 
customer reviews, and hidden product details (such as 
whether packaging is biodegradable) to smartphones 
as consumers browse store shelves. The app transforms 
marketing promotions from intrusions into services 
that customers welcome. 

286  Chapter 8     Retail, E-commerce, and Mobile Commerce Technology
Mobile Directories. Companies like Signal Mind, Mobile 
Marketing Studio, and Mowbi Mobile Directories sell mobile 
directory software to businesses and organizations that want 
to create local mobile directories. Businesses that purchase 
these apps can generate revenue by selling listings in their 
directory and offering a variety of marketing promotions, like 
mobile coupons, to companies that pay to be listed in the 
directory. Another popular directory service, Yellow Pages, 
uses augmented reality as part of its mobile strategy. You 
can find several interesting examples of augmented reality 
applications on YouTube. Simply go to YouTube and enter 
“augmented reality” in the search engine.
Sources: Compiled from Moore (2010) and Whitfield (2010).
Questions
1. Although the benefits of location-based apps for busi-
ness are perhaps obvious, many previous attempts to get 
people to use apps that identify their location have met 
with limited results. Why do you think consumers are less 
enthusiastic about location apps and what would it take 
to prompt people to use a location-based app regularly?
2. Review the Foursquare and Shopkick apps and explain 
which one you think people will be most likely to use. 
Explain your answer.
3. At present, augmented reality apps are still relatively 
new and have not enjoyed high levels of adoption. What 
do you predict will happen with this technology? What 
applications of augmented reality seem most interesting 
to you? What barriers will have to be overcome to get 
people to use this technology?
Questions
1. Describe some of the ways that people are using mobile devices to 
shop for products and services.
2. What are some ways in which traditional brick-and-mortar retailers 
can use mobile technology to enhance a customer’s in-store shopping 
experience?
3. List the types of mobile entertainment available to consumers.
4. List some ways that travelers and travel-related businesses are using 
mobile technology.
5. How are companies using QR codes to promote products and services 
to mobile consumers? Why are QR codes not as popular in the U.S. as 
they are in Asia and other parts of the world?
6. Explain why the mobile gaming market represents such a lucrative 
market opportunity.
8.5  Mobile Transactions and Financial Services
MOBILE PAYMENT 
SYSTEMS
Consumers use mobile devices for a wide range of shopping or commercial activi-
ties. As discussed in the case at the beginning of this chapter, shoppers are using 
mobile devices to compare prices, research products prior to purchase, and identify 
alternative product options and alternative retailers. Increasingly, mobile devices are 
becoming an attractive way to pay for products. According to comScore’s Mobile 
“Future in Focus” report (2012), mobile payment activity during the holiday shop-
ping season (October–December) increased over 80 percent from 2010 to 2011. 
Other industry reports, such as the “World Payments Report” (Capgemini et al., 
2011), suggest that the overall use of mobile payment systems will continue to 
increase at least 50 percent a year for the next three years. Some forms of mobile 
payment represent an attractive option for consumers who do not have credit cards. 

8.5     Mobile Transactions and Financial Services     287  
Additionally, retailers may benefit from new payment options that carry lower 
transaction costs compared to what banks charge when credit cards are used.
As mobile commerce grows, a greater demand exists for payment systems that 
make transactions from smartphones and other mobile devices convenient, safe, 
and secure. A number of businesses have attempted to meet this demand using a 
variety of technologies. There are two basic transaction types of interest: using a 
mobile device for the online purchase of goods and services (e.g., ordering a book 
from Amazon.com) and for payment of goods and services in a traditional brick-
and-mortar store. Here are examples of some approaches under development:
Charge to Phone Bill with SMS Confirmation (see zong.com and boku.com). 
This e-commerce payment solution is a lot easier than entering credit card 
and other information on a small mobile handheld device. It requires users to 
set up an account with a payment company like zong.com. When completing 
an online transaction, users click the “ZONG–Buy with Mobile” button and 
enter their phone number. They receive an SMS text message with a secure 
PIN number that they enter on the e-commerce website to complete the trans-
action. The amount of the charge is then added to the payer’s phone bill and 
the telecom carrier remits this amount to the payee. Telecom companies may 
deduct a service charge from the amount paid. (Zong was recently purchased 
by PayPal.)
Near-Field Communications (NFC) (see Google Wallet and Isis Mobile 
Wallet). Another approach to mobile payment is designed for payments in tra-
ditional retail stores. At check-out, the mobile user simply passes or taps his or 
her phone on a merchant terminal and payment is transferred. Users receive an 
SMS text message confirmation. While Google Wallet has received consider-
able attention in the technology press, in part because of Google’s power and 
influence in the industry, relatively few consumers can use this option. Only a 
small number of phones have the required NFC feature. Additionally, the pro-
gram is only available to people with Citi MasterCard with PayPass or Google’s 
prepaid credit card. To be successful, the program will have to expand beyond 
these limitations.
Phone-Displayed Barcode That Retailer Scans. A number of companies are 
developing mobile payment systems that generate a QR code on the user’s 
phone, which is, in turn, scanned by the retailer. Starbucks uses this approach 
with its mobile payment system (Tsirulnik, 2011). Customers create an 
account with Starbucks as part of the retailer’s loyalty program and transfer 
money to a prepaid account. Upon check-out, a user activates the Starbucks 
app, which creates a barcode that can be scanned at check-out. The funds 
are then deducted from the user’s account. Other companies are working on 
programs that could be used at a variety of retailers, much as you currently 
use a credit card.
Credit Card 
 Webform. Using a mobile Web browser, the buyer makes online 
purchases by entering his or her credit card number and other identifying 
information just the way that person would if using a personal computer. This 
process can be cumbersome given the smaller screens and keyboards on most 
mobile devices, but it is an option.
Transfer of Funds from Payment Account Using SMS (see obopay.com and 
paypal.com). Using this approach, the user creates an account at a company 
like obopay.com and transfers money into it from a bank or credit card account. 
Using a mobile phone and SMS, the user can then transfer money to anyone 
else with a mobile phone number. The receiver must create an account at the 
payment company in order to retrieve the funds. 
Mobile Phone Card Reader (see Square.com and Paypal.com). This novel 
approach requires mobile phone users to insert a small card reader into the 

288  Chapter 8     Retail, E-commerce, and Mobile Commerce Technology
audio jack of their mobile device. The card reader, which resembles a small 
cube (Square) or pyramid (PayPal), allows those with accounts at Square or 
PayPal to make or receive credit card payments without a merchant account. 
See Figure 8.12.
User Scan of 2D Tags Generated by Retailer (see Cimbal.com). This payment 
system uses QR codes or 2D tags (a barcode-like image) to identify the mer-
chant or payee. The buyer scans the merchant’s tag using a special smartphone 
app and then approves a funds transfer when it shows up on the device. Person-
to-person transfers are also possible since the app can generate custom QR tags 
that individuals may scan from one another’s mobile devices.
Almost all of the payment systems described above are illustrated by 
videos on Youtube.com. Interested readers are encouraged to view these video 
resources for a more complete explanation of how the different mobile payment 
systems work.
Wireless payment systems transform mobile phones into secure, self-
contained purchasing tools capable of instantly authorizing payments over 
the cellular network. One advantage of many mobile payment systems over 
traditional credit card systems is the ability to handle micropayments, or 
transactions involving relatively small sums of money. The ability to make 
micropayments allows individuals to use their mobile devices to do things 
like purchase a beverage from a vending machine or make a payment to a 
municipal parking meter. Many cities in Europe, and a growing number in 
the U.S., have adopted mobile phone payment systems for parking and report 
dramatic increases in revenue because of the reduction in loss due to theft and 
broken meters, and the reduced expense associated with collecting cash from 
traditional meters.
Mobile Bill Payments. In addition to paying bills through wireline banking or 
from ATMs, a number of companies are now providing their customers with the 
option of paying bills directly from a cell phone. Western Union, HDFC Bank in 
India, Citibank, and several other institutions worldwide currently offer mobile 
bill payment services. This trend is proving particularly attractive to mobile users 
in developing countries where many people do not have bank accounts.
Figure 8.12 With a small 
card reader plugged into a 
mobile device, merchants 
and individuals can accept 
credit card payments.
MOBILE BANKING AND 
FINANCIAL SERVICES
Mobile banking is generally defined as carrying out banking transactions and other 
related activities via mobile devices (Figure 8.13). The services offered include bill 
payments and money transfers, account administration and checkbook requests, 
balance inquiries and statements on an account, interest and exchange rates, and 
so on. 
© PhotoInc/iStockphoto

8.5     Mobile Transactions and Financial Services     289  
Banks and other financial institutions allow customers to use mobile devices for 
a wide range of services (see Table 8.2). 
People access financial services using a combination of mobile media channels 
including short message service (SMS), mobile Web browsers, and customized apps. 
Mobile banking is a natural extension of online banking services, which have grown 
in popularity over the last decade. 
Throughout Europe, the U.S., and Asia, an increasing percentage of banks 
offer mobile access to financial and account information. In 2009 ABI Research 
evaluated 29 U.S. banks on accessibility of their mobile banking services. Six of 
the banks received top marks: BB&T, Eastern Bank, Fifth Third Bank, Northeast 
Bank, USAA, and Wells Fargo. Bank of America and Chase also received positive 
evaluations.
In Sweden, Merita Bank has pioneered many services and the Royal Bank of 
Scotland offers mobile payment services. Banamex, one of Mexico’s largest banks, 
is a strong provider of wireless services to customers. Many banks in Japan allow 
all banking transactions to be done via cell phone. Experts predict that growth in 
the mobile banking services sector could reach between 894 million and 1.5 billion 
customers globally by 2015. The Asia-Pacific region is expected to emerge as the 
predominant market for mobile banking services (berginsight.com, 2010, Global 
Industry Analysts, 2010).
TABLE 8.2 
Most Common Mobile Banking Services
Account alerts, security alerts, and reminders
Account balances, updates, and history
Customer service via mobile
Branch or ATM location information
Bill-pay (e.g., utility bills) and delivery of online payments by secure agents and 
mobile phone client apps
Funds transfers
Transaction verifi cation
Source: Mobile Marketing Association (2009).
Figure 8.13 Mobile banking, 
stock trading, and payment 
services have increased in 
recent years. 
© bloomua/Shutterstock 

290  Chapter 8     Retail, E-commerce, and Mobile Commerce Technology
SHORT CODES
Banks and financial service organizations have two basic options for providing 
mobile services. Smartphone users can download dedicated apps to conduct bank-
ing transactions. The other option is to provide service through SMS (text message) 
technology. As you know, text messaging is still widely popular, even with people 
who use smartphones. Many mobile financial services make use of short codes for 
sending SMS texts. A short code works like a telephone number, except that it is 
only five or six characters long and easier to remember. Businesses lease short codes 
from the Common Short Code Association (CSCA) for $500 to $1,000 a month. The 
lower price is for randomly assigned codes, whereas companies that want a specific 
short code pay a higher monthly rate. Once a company has leased its short code, it 
can begin using that code in promotions and interactive exchanges with customers.
Short codes are used for a wide variety of SMS text services, not just financial 
services. For example, voting on the popular television show American Idol is done 
with short codes. Each contestant is assigned a specific short code and viewers are 
encouraged to send text messages indicating which performer they like the best. 
The annual MTV Movie Awards also uses short code voting, which allows viewers 
to pick the winning entry in certain prize categories. On some telecommunications 
networks, ring tones are sold using short codes and SMS texts. 
TABLE 8.3 
Mobile Banking Security Risks
Cloning Duplicating the electronic serial number (ESM) of one phone and using 
it in second phone, the clone. This allows the perpetrator to have calls and other 
transactions billed to the original phone.
Phishing Using a fraudulent communication, such as an e-mail, to trick the 
receiver into divulging critical information such as account numbers, passwords, 
or other identifying information.
Smishing Similar to phishing, but the fraudulent communication comes in the 
form of an SMS message.
Vishing Again, similar to phishing, but the fraudulent communication comes in 
the form of a voice or voicemail message encouraging the victim to divulge 
secure information.
Lost or stolen phone Lost or stolen cell phones can be used to conduct fi nancial 
transactions without the owner’s permission.
Sources: Compiled from Howard (2009), McGee (2008), and Mobile Marketing 
Association (2009).
SECURITY ISSUES
At present, the benefits associated with mobile banking seem to outweigh potential 
security threats. However, as the number of people who engage in mobile banking 
increases, the likelihood that criminals will target mobile financial activity is sure to 
grow as well. What kinds of threats exist to mobile banking? Table 8.3 lists the most 
common mobile banking risks.
Questions
1. What are the two basic technologies used for mobile banking and 
fi nancial services?
2. Why have e-wallets not been widely adopted and what will makers of 
e-wallets need to do to make this payment method more attractive to 
consumers?

Assuring Your Learning     291  
3. What are the most common types of mobile banking activities consumers 
perform?
4. What are the most common security risks associated with online retailers?
5. Research some of the mobile payment systems currently available to 
merchants and consumers.
6. What is a micropayment and why is it benefi cial to consumers and 
businesses that mobile payment systems can process these types of 
transactions?
Key Terms
2D tags
augmented reality
barcode
digital dependents
digital immigrants
digital natives
disruptive innovation
electronic fund transfer 
(EFT)
electronic wallet (e-wallet)
e-procurement
e-sourcing
horizontal exchanges
in-store tracking
micropayments
mobile check-in strategy
mobile commerce, 
m-commerce
mobile display strategy
mobile location-based 
marketing
mobile marketing
mobile payment
mobile retailing
mobile visual search 
engine
omni-channel retailing
quick response (QR) 
codes
short code
short message service 
(SMS)
showrooming
SMS database strategy
social commerce
Assuring Your Learning
 1. What is showrooming? Are customers who engage 
in it acting ethically? Provide reasons for your 
answer.
 2. What are some creative and constructive ways for 
traditional retailers to respond to showrooming?
 3. Describe the ways in which online retailer Amazon.
com has acted strategically to maintain its position 
as a leading e-commerce site. What does this suggest 
about what it takes to be successful in e-commerce 
today?
 4. How is Amazon’s investment in the Kindle and 
e-books consistent with other trends in consumer 
behavior today?
 5. Why is mobile technology potentially important to 
the banking industry? What consumer needs does it 
fulfi ll?
 6. Identify and describe fi ve key challenges faced by 
online retailers in the market today.
 7. Why is the online B2B market so much larger than 
the online B2C market?
 8. Explain the fundamental difference between buy-
side and sell-side exchanges in the online B2B 
market.
DISCUSS: Critical Thinking Questions
 9. What is the difference between direct procurement 
and indirect procurement? Why do you think this 
distinction is important?
 10.  What are the two primary goals of companies who 
engage in e-procurement and what strategies do 
they use to achieve those goals?
 11.  Discuss the benefi ts of a B2B exchange to sellers 
and buyers.
 12.  Discuss the various ways to pay online in B2C. 
 13.  Why do you think that company employees engage 
in maverick buying? What can companies do to 
limit maverick buying?
 14.  Explain how mobile computing technology is being 
used by brick-and-mortar retailers to enhance the 
in-store shopping experience.
 15.  QR codes are very popular in Japan and other parts 
of Asia.  Manufacturers place QR codes on product 
packages and advertisements, making it easy for 
consumers to access information about the products 
using a mobile device.  Why do you think QR codes 
are not popular with U.S. consumers?  Do you think 
QR codes will eventually become accepted by U.S. 
consumers?  Why or Why not?

292  Chapter 8     Retail, E-commerce, and Mobile Commerce Technology
 16.  How are people using mobile devices to conduct 
banking and other fi nancial services?
 17.  Evaluate the various mobile electronic payment 
processes described in this chapter. Which do you 
think are likely to emerge as the dominant method 
for mobile payment? Explain your answer.
 18.  What are some of the risks faced by consumers who 
use mobile devices for banking and other fi nancial 
transactions?
 19.  What are the key benefi ts of using a mobile wallet? 
Do you think new improvements to this mobile 
application will make it more attractive to end-users?
 20. How has mobile computing changed the retail shop-
ping behavior of consumers?
 21. Describe the mobile entertainment market and the 
ways people can use their mobile devices to have fun.
 22. Why is mobile social networking expected to grow 
dramatically in the next few years?
 23. How is mobile computing creating an attractive 
opportunity for advertisers? Will consumers be 
receptive to this type of communication? Why or 
why not?
 24. List some location-based services and explain their 
value to both businesses and mobile device users.
1. Assume you are interested in buying a car. You can 
fi nd information about fi nancing and insurance for 
cars at autos.msn.com or autobytel.com. Decide what 
car you want to buy. Confi gure your car by going to 
the car manufacturer’s website. Finally, try to fi nd 
the car at autobytel.com. What information is most 
supportive of your decision-making process? Was the 
experience pleasant or frustrating?
2. Visit amazon.com and identify at least three specifi c 
elements of its personalization and customization fea-
tures. Browse specifi c books on one particular subject, 
leave the site, and then go back and revisit the site. 
What do you observe? Are these features likely to 
encourage you to purchase more books in the future 
from Amazon.com? How does the “One-Click” 
feature encourage sales from mobile devices?
3. Read Google’s new privacy policy at www.google.
com/policies/privacy. What types of information does 
Google collect about people who use its services? 
How can people either restrict or avoid having 
Google collect information about them? How does 
Google say it uses the information it collects about 
people who utilize its services?
4. Conduct a study on selling diamonds and gems on-
line. Each group member investigates one company 
such as bluenile.com, diamond.com, thaigem.com, 
tiffany.com, or jewelryexchange.com.
a. What features are used in these sites to educate 
buyers about gemstones?
b. How do the sites attract buyers?
c. How do the sites increase trust in online 
purchasing?
d. What customer service features are provided?
e. Would you buy a $5,000 diamond ring online? 
Why or why not?
5. If you have a smartphone, download the shopping 
app Shopkick.com. Use the app for a few weeks and 
then prepare a report or presentation about your 
experience. Describe how Shopkick uses behavioral 
reinforcement to encourage specifi c kinds of shop-
ping behaviors (e.g., store visits, looking for promo-
tional products, participating in marketing surveys, 
etc.). Explain whether or not you think you will 
continue using this application.
EXPLORE: Online and Interactive Exercises
1. Go to nacha.org. What is the National Automated 
Clearing House Association (NACHA)? What is 
its role? What is the Automated Clearing House 
(ACH)? Who are the key participants in an ACH 
e-payment? Describe the “pilot” projects currently 
under way at ACH.
2. Visit IBM’s “Many Eyes” website at www.ibm.com/
manyeyes. Select visualizations from the left-side 
menu bar. Generate two visualizations. How does 
visualization improve understanding of the datasets?
ANALYZE & DECIDE: Apply IT Concepts to Business Decisions
3. Have each team study a major bank with extensive 
e-commerce offerings. For example, Wells Fargo 
Bank is well on its way to being a cyberbank. 
Hundreds of brick-and-mortar branch offi ces are 
being closed. In the spring of 2003, the bank served 
more than 1.2 million cyberaccounts (see wellsfargo.
com). Other banks to consider are Citicorp, 
Netbank, and HSBC (Hong Kong). Each team 
should attempt to convince the class that its e-bank 
activities are the best.

CASE 8.2     Business Case     293  
4. As an independent IT contract worker, you must 
often arrange travel to and from your clients’ places 
of business. You do not typically have time to always 
explore every travel website when planning travel, so 
you wish to identify the one that over time will work 
the best for you. Working in a small group of three to 
four people, use the Internet to explore the follow-
ing travel sites: orbitz.com, travelocity.com, kayak.
com, concierge.com, and expedia.com (search “online 
travel sites” for additional options). Select a handful 
of travel destinations and see how helpful each site is 
in terms of:
a.  Finding the lowest airfare.
b.  Identifying hotels for business travel.
c.  Recommendations for dining and other location-
based services.
d.  Evaluate the site for its ability to aid in interna-
tional travel arrangements.
e.  Availability and usefulness of travel tips, adviso-
ries, and other helpful information.
 
Prepare a report comparing how each site performed 
in terms of its ease of use, helpfulness, and best over-
all deal. Which site would you recommend? 
5. Using Youtube.com or any other video-sharing site, 
watch examples of augmented reality handhelds 
and promotional campaigns. Write a brief report 
describing your reaction to this new technology and 
predict if it will become more commonplace in the 
future.
CASE 8.2
Business Case: Chegg’s Mobile Strategy
Mobile technologies are considered a disruptive innovation 
because they have the capability of transforming traditional 
business practices by  creating new value networks, spawning 
new markets, and eventually displacing earlier technologies. 
Popular examples of disruptive innovation include Apple’s 
iTunes service that replaced music CDs with downloadable 
digital mp3 fi les. Netfl ix and other movie-streaming services 
disrupted the previous model of distributing movies on DVDs 
through brick-and-mortar retail outlets. Several companies 
are now exploring the use of mobile technologies as a disrup-
tive innovation in the college textbook market. 
 
End-users (college students) have traditionally had very 
little power in the college textbook market. Textbook pub-
lishers promoted their products to college professors who 
decided what books to require for their courses. Competition 
at the retail level was for the most part nonexistent—students 
almost always had to purchase textbooks from a college 
bookstore or a used textbook from another student.
 
All that began to change, however, with the emergence 
of e-commerce. Nowadays, students have a range of options 
for purchasing new and used textbooks, renting textbooks, 
reading books online, or purchasing textbooks in an e-book 
format. Publishers and booksellers who once held fairly 
secure positions in the distribution channel now face com-
petition from a variety of nonconventional sources, including 
online retailers (e.g., Amazon), C2C e-commerce sites (e.g., 
Craigslist, eBay, half.com), and publishers who sell directly to 
students (e.g., Flatworld Knowledge).
Chegg.com
As part of this industry restructuring, Chegg.com began rent-
ing textbooks to students in 2007, creating an alternative to 
purchasing from college bookstores and online booksellers 
like Amazon.com. While renting textbooks was an innovative 
approach at the time, Chegg managers realized that to 
remain competitive, they needed to position their company 
in a way that was not focused on a particular product form 
(e.g., printed textbook) or distribution method (e.g., retail 
bookstore). Instead, Chegg set out to create a learning net-
work for students, offering a range of products and services 
through various channels that enhance students’ educational 
experience. See Table 8.4. 
 
Mobile technology has been a key component of 
Chegg’s value strategy from the beginning. In 2009, just two 
years after entering the rental market, Chegg created a mo-
bile website and an SMS-based service that made it possible 
for students to check rental prices for textbooks by texting 
the ISBN number of the book they were interested in. The 
following year, Chegg launched an app for iPhone and iPad 
users. Android users can still access services from the com-
pany’s well-designed mobile site. In 2012 Chegg launched a 
cloud-based e-textbook reader designed to give students 
access to their textbooks from a wide range of mobile devices. 
While Chegg is not the fi rst company to make textbooks 
available online, the e-textbook reader provides powerful 
features for highlighting text, taking notes, and checking 
word defi nitions. Users can view Key Highlights, or mate-
rial crowdsourced from the highlighting activities of other 
students using the reader. Finally, readers can access Chegg’s 
Always on Q&A Service, where students ask questions about 
various academic subjects and often receive an answer back 
from subject matter experts within hours.
 
Despite Chegg’s innovative and customer-oriented 
strategy, it faces an increasingly competitive marketplace. 

294  Chapter 8     Retail, E-commerce, and Mobile Commerce Technology
Well-funded competitors such as Amazon.com and Barnes 
& Noble now offer textbook rentals and e-textbooks with 
some of the same features as Chegg’s reader. CourseSmart 
is another online vendor offering digital content from major 
publishers such as Pearson, Cengage, McGraw Hill, and John 
Wiley & Sons (the publisher of this textbook). CourseSmart 
provides a number of mobile apps for various devices as well 
as the capability to read texts through mobile browsers (no 
app download necessary). Finally, Apple has announced its 
desire to transform the textbook market in much the same 
way it changed the music business. However, the existing list 
of companies that are already practicing disruptive innovation 
may make it more diffi cult for Apple to have quite the same 
impact as it did in the music business.
Questions
1. Evaluate the mobile features of Chegg’s textbook 
program. Does it offer services that are truly helpful to 
college students or are they just a gimmick?
2. Go to Chegg.com to view a demo of its e-textbook reader. 
After reviewing the service, evaluate whether the reader 
will motivate students to obtain their textbooks from 
Chegg instead of using alternative textbook suppliers.
3. How does Chegg’s mobile price comparison service pro-
vide a benefi t to college students? Do you think it helps 
to increase rentals and purchases from Chegg?
4. What other ways could Chegg use mobile technologies 
to provide further value to college students?
5. Using a mobile device, check the purchase and/or rental 
prices of the textbooks you are using this semester. Com-
pare these with prices from alternative vendors (e.g., your 
college bookstore, Amazon.com, half.com, etc.). Prepare 
a table comparing your overall cost from each supplier. 
Based on your fi ndings, do you plan to change the way 
you obtain textbooks in the future?
Sources: Chegg.com (2010), Conneally (2012), Wired Academic 
(2012), Crook (2009), Eldon (2012). 
TABLE 8.4 
The Chegg Learning Network
Purchase New/Used Textbooks
Online, mobile app, or mobile website
Renting Textbooks
Online, mobile app, mobile website, and bookstores and rental stands at select 
colleges
Homework Help Q&A
Online and mobile website
e-Textbooks
Cloud-based mobile textbook reader
Course Reviews, Grade Distributions, and Schedule Planning Tools
Online and mobile website
Source: Chegg.com (2012).
CASE 8.3
Video Case: Searching with Pictures Using MVS 
Earlier in the chapter, you read that U.S. consumers were not 
responding to QR code marketing with the same enthusi-
asm as Asian consumers. In response, some companies are 
experimenting with an alternative to QR codes called mobile 
visual search (MVS) technology. MVS is an image recognition 
technology that proponents claim will be more attractive to 
consumers.
 
With an MVS app, users scan the pictures they fi nd on 
product labels, catalogs, or advertisements. This initiates a 
search function that returns information to the user. Depend-
ing on the MVS app used, the search information might be 
general in nature, similar to what you get when conducting a 
search on Google. Or, the app may return specifi c information, 
for instance, a page where the user can order the product. 

References     295  
This technology has spawned a new industry of mobile visual 
search services that include companies like Snaptell (now 
owned by Amazon), PixlinQ (LTU Mobile), BuzzAR, 
Mobile Acuity, and, of course, Google (see Figure 8.14).
 
Find and watch videos of three different MVS applica-
tions on YouTube or other video-sharing sites: 
Figure 8.14 Mobile visual 
search using Google’s 
Goggle app. 
MVS Application/ 
Videos at 
Developer  
YouTube.com
Goggles/Google
 
 Search for “Google 
Goggles Experiment 
Video”
PixlinQ/LTU Mobile  
Search for “Shopgate—
 
Mobile Shopping”
Buzzar
 
 Search for “buzzAR- 
mobile visual search 
platform” 
Get the latest news and information about MVS by searching 
on the phrase “mobile visual search” using Google or some 
other search engine. Compare and contrast MVS with 
marketing strategies using QR codes.
Questions
1. If consumers begin to use MVS on a wide-scale basis, 
how should businesses adjust their marketing practices 
to take advantage of this technology?
2. Based on the videos and additional research, how do the 
MVS services differ from one another?
Ally Financial. “Company Overview – CEO Letter.” media.
ally.com, May, 2014.
Asante, J. “Mobile Gaming Powers Up: ‘99 Cents Is the New 
Quarter.’” NPR.org, April 3, 2012.
Bercovici, J. “Amazon vs. Book Publishers, by the Numbers.” 
Forbes.com, February 20, 2014.
Berginsight.com. “Berg Insight Predicts 894 Million Mobile 
Banking Users by 2015.” April 2010.
Capgemini, the Royal Bank of Scotland plc (RBS), and Efma. 
“World Payments Report.” capgemini.com, 2011.
Chegg.com. “Chegg.com Introduces Two New Ways for Col-
lege Students to Easily Rent Their Textbooks.” PRNewswire, 
August 11, 2010.
comScore, Inc. “Mobile Future in Focus.” comscore.com, 
February 2012.
References
© Gregory R. Wood

296  Chapter 8     Retail, E-commerce, and Mobile Commerce Technology
Conneally, T. “Everything You Need to Know about 
e-Textbooks before Apple Gets Involved.” Betanews.com, 
January 17, 2012.
Crook, J. “Chegg Adds Mobile Components to Textbook 
Rental Service.” Mobile Marketer, August 31, 2009.
Dotson, C. “How Mobile Games Leapt from Cult to Cultural 
Phenomenon.” Mashable.com, January 20, 2012.
Eldon, E. “Chegg Launches Mobile Reader for Online 
Textbooks.” Techcrunch.com, January 18, 2012.
Edelman. “2013 Edelman Trust Barometer Reports Financial 
Services Is Least Trusted Industry Globally.” Edelman.com, 
April 9, 2013.
eMarketer. “Half of Mobile Users to Play Games in 2013.” 
eMarketer.com, May 30, 2013
Galgey, W. & S. Pattinson. “The Future Shopper: How Changing 
Shopper Attitudes and Technology Are Reshaping Retail.” 
White paper, the Futures Company/Kanter Retail, 2013.
Gallup, Inc. “Confi dence in Institutions 1973–2014”, Gallup.com, 
Sept. 18, 2014.
Global Industry Analysts. “Global Mobile Banking Customer 
Base to Reach 1.1 Billion by 2015.” February 2010.
Gonsalves, A. “Amazon Kindle 2.5 Adds Social Networking.” 
InformationWeek, May 3, 2010.
Google, IPSOS OTX MediaCT. “The Mobile Movement: 
Understanding Smartphone Users.” April 2011.
Howard, N. “Is It Safe to Bank by Cell Phone?” MSN Money, 
July 2009.
Johnson, L. “Macy’s, Afl ac Partner for Holiday Donation 
Campaign.” Mobile Commerce Daily, November 29, 2011.
Kats, R. “Macy’s Mobile Spend Up 70pc: FirstLook Keynote.” 
Mobile Marketer, January 20, 2012.
Leslie, S., R. Chawla, & J. Aaker. “Deals @Delloutlet: How 
Dell Clears Inventory Through Twitter.” Stanford Graduate 
School of Business, Case M-334, May 10, 2010.
Macy’s. “Macy’s Backstage Pass.” Press release, February 2011.
Malone, C. “The Loyalty Storm Brewing for Banks, Wireless 
and Cable Companies.” Business2community.com, 
September 15, 2014.
McGee, B. “Mobile Banking Security—Phishing for Answers?” 
Netbanker.com, January 2008.
Miller, C. & J. Bosman. “E-Books Outsell Print Books at 
Amazon.” New York Times, May 19, 2011.
MobiAdNews.com. “IKEA Uses Mobile Augmented Reality to 
Engage Shoppers’ Imagination.” August 2009.
Mobile Marketing Association. “Mobile Banking Overview 
(NA).” January 2009.
Moore, G. “Foursquare Leads New Mobile Advertising 
Model.” Masshightech.com, April 2010.
National Retail Federation. “Mobile Retailing Blueprint: 
A Comprehensive Guide for Navigating the Mobile 
Landscape.” January 4, 2011.
Nielsen. “Play Before Work: Games Most Popular Mobile App 
Category in US.” NielsenWire, July 7, 2011.
O’Connell, B. “Consumer Frustration Threatens Billions in 
Revenue at 10 Banks This Year.”  TheStreet.com, July 23, 
2013.
Porter, M. “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy.” 
Harvard Business Review, 86, no. 1 January 2008, pp. 86–104. 
Rappa, M. “Case Study: Amazon.com.” DigitalEnterprise.com, 
2010.
Smith, C. “Trio of Online Banks Dominate Social Media Chan-
nels.” Thefi nancialbrand.com, April 28, 2014.
Tejwani, A. “One Bank that Got Social Media right – Ally 
Bank (Case Study).” Sociallycharged.com, Sept. 17, 2012.
The Financial Brand. “Majority of Americans Still Hold a 
Grudge Against Banks.” thefi nancialbrand.com, April 8, 2013.
Tsirulnik G. “Macy’s Is 2011 Mobile Marketer of the Year.” 
Mobile Marketer, December 9, 2011.
Whitfi eld, T. “Augmented Reality for Mobile Advertising.” 
Econsultancy.com, February 2010.
Wired Academic. “Chegg Trots Out Its HTML5 E-Textbook 
Reader, Challenging Inkling, Cengage, Kno, et al.” January 
28, 2012.
Yurcan, B. “Ally, USAA Top Bank Social Media Study.” 
Banktech.com, March 15, 2012.
Yurcan, B. “Ally Bank’s Mobile Strategy.” Banktech.com, April 
18, 2014.
Zimmerman, A. “Showdown Over ‘Showrooming’: Target Asks 
Vendors for Help Keeping Comparison Shoppers.” Wall 
Street Journal, January, 23, 2012.

Chapter Snapshot
Every business is managed through multiple business 
functions, each responsible for managing certain aspects 
of the business. Consider an electronics company. The 
finance function is responsible for acquiring capital 
needed for research and development (R&D) and other 
investment processes. The marketing function is respon-
sible for product promotion and pricing, identifying tar-
get customers, and improving the customer experience 
(CX). The operations function plans and coordinates 
all the resources needed to design, manufacture, and 
Effective and Effi cient 
Business Functions
9
Chapter
1. Describe various types of functional systems and how they 
support managers and workers at the operational level.
2. Define how manufacturing, production, and transporta-
tion information systems enable organizational processes 
and support supply chain operations and logistics.
3. Explain how sales and marketing information systems 
support advertising, market research, intelligence gath-
ering, getting products and services to customers, and 
responding quickly and efficiently to customers’ needs.
4. Describe how accounting, auditing, and finance appli-
cation systems meet compliance mandates, help deter 
fraud, and facilitate capital budgeting and forecasting.
5. Analyze how human resources information systems 
(HRIS) improve business-to-employee (B2E) communica-
tions, workforce productivity, and compliance with fed-
eral employment laws; and discuss ethical issues related 
to the use of HRIS data.
Learning Outcomes
297
Optimizing Performance with Enterprise 
Systems and Analytics
Part 3
Chapter Snapshot
Case 9.1 Opening Case: Ducati Redesigns 
Its Operations
9.1  Solving Business Challenges 
at All Management Levels
9.2  Manufacturing, Production, and 
Transportation Management Systems
9.3  Sales and Marketing Systems
9.4  Accounting, Finance, and Regulatory 
Systems
9.5  Human Resource Systems, Compliance, 
and Ethics
Key Terms
Assuring Your Learning
• Discuss: Critical Thinking Questions
• Explore: Online and Interactive Exercises
•  Analyze & Decide: Apply IT Concepts 
to Business Decisions
Case 9.2 Business Case: HSBC Combats Fraud in 
Split-Second Decisions
Case 9.3 Video Case: United Rentals Optimizes 
Its Workforce with Human Capital Management
References

transport products. The IT function is responsible for 
the technology infrastructure, data management, and 
social, mobile, and cloud services. Accounting manages 
assets and meet compliance mandates. Human resource 
(HR) recruits, trains, and develops a talented workforce. 
These business functions involve complex processes that 
depend on access to data, collaboration, communication, 
and data analysis to pinpoint what must be done—and 
employees’ workflows to make that happen.
While most attention is on external interests—
customers, competitors, and partners—they are only part 
of the solution. Business success also depends on internal 
factors—the efficiency and effectiveness of managers, 
employees, core business processes and functions. A wide 
range of specialized technology, such as Salesforce.com 
and eXtensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL) 
for financial reporting, supports problem solving, deci-
sion making, and compliance (Figure 9.1).
Business is messy, sometimes chaotic. Resolving 
those situations requires human creativity, critical think-
ing, and judgment—all of which relate back to corporate 
culture, training, and empowerment of employees. These 
topics are covered in Chapter 9.
Ultimately, data from functional systems are used by 
enterprise applications, including business intelligence 
(BI), e-commerce, customer relationship management 
(CRM), and supply chain management (SCM), as shown 
in Figure 9.2.
Figure 9.2 Data from 
functional area ISs support 
enterprise apps. 
298
•  Real time data employees
   can trust
•  Useful dashboards and mashups
•  Real time collaboration
•  Knowledge sharing
•  Enterprise social computing
•  Data analytics and reporting
•  Automated and standardized
   core processers
•  Customer acquisition and
   retention
•  Customer experience
•  Customer relationships
•  Social networking
•  Digital marketing
•  B2C commerce
•  Supplier and vendor relationships
•  Sourcing decisions
•  Supply chain management
•  B2B commerce
•  Regulatory reporting
•  Compliance reporting
Internal support
External support
Customers
Partners & Regulators
Employees
Figure 9.1 Comparison of the IT capabilities that enterprises provide to 
employees, consumers, business partners, and regulators. 
Accounting
External Systems
Customers
Partners
Government
Support Systems
Finance
Manufacturing, Production, &
Transportation
Acccouuntiing
Government
Financce
Manufacturing, Production, &
Transportation
Integr
ation 
I
n
t
e
g
r
a
t
i
o
n
 
Integr
ation 
Transaction
Processing
Systems
Human Resources
Sales &
Marketing
Knowledge Management,
Customer Relationship
Management, Compliance
I
n
t
e
g
r
a
t
i
o
n

CASE 9.1 OPENING CASE
Ducati Redesigns Its Operations
Figure 9.3 Ducati Motor 
Holding overview.
CASE 9.1     Opening Case     299  
COMPANY OVERVIEW
Ducati Motor Holding manufactures motorcycles known worldwide for their preci-
sion engineering, lightning speed, and sleek design and for customers who are pas-
sionate about their motorcycles. Six models make up the product lines, with prices 
starting at $15,000 to the $90,000 Superleggera Superbike, which produces up to 
200 HP at the crankshaft. Ducati is owned by Audi through its Italian subsidiary 
Lamborghini. Its 2013 net sales were $518 million. 
Awards
In March 2014 Ducati received five awards at the annual Motorrad des Jahres 
(Motorcycle of the Year) event in Stuttgart, Germany. Ducati’s Multistrada and 
Diavel were awarded Motorcycle of the Year in the Allrounder and Cruiser cat-
egories, respectively (Figure 9.4). Ducati’s models are benchmarks in innovative 
design and technology. 
Product Lines
In addition to six motorcycle brands, the company sells parts, apparel, accessories, 
and other items to create the Ducati experience. Dealers need to be familiar with 
thousands of products and customization options for their customers. 
BUSINESS CHALLENGES 
Companies worldwide were faced with tougher competition and economic condi-
tions after the financial meltdown in 2008. And as global manufacturers, geography 
was a marketing challenge.
Internally, its sales staff struggled with conflicting or outdated data on product 
inventory, availability, and ordering time schedules. The source of the problem was 
multiple communication systems and data silos that were not coordinated. 
High-performance motorcycles
with precison engineering and
innovative designs.
Motorcycle apparel, accessories,
and gear.
Brand
Ducati’s distribution and sales
operation spans a thousand
dealers in 88 countries, with
primary focus on the European,
North American, and Asia Pacific
markets.
Global Reach
New dealer communication
application for mobile devices
called DCS, or Ducati
Communication System.
iPad app to communicate with
dealer network and customers.
Digital Technology
Ducati Motor Holding
Build motorcycles that dominate
the dreams of the most passionate
motorcycle enthusiasts.
Implement best practices with
dealerships and customers.
Create a single point of access to
Ducati’s original equipment
manufacturers and back-end
systems.
Business Strategy

300  Chapter 9     Effective and Efficient Business Functions
Figure 9.4 Ducati Multistrada and Diavel were awarded Motorcycle of the Year 
in 2014 in their class for their innovative design and technology.
To resolve these challenges and grow the business, Ducati focused on:
1. improving the sales process
2. engaging the customer in the design of its motorcycles, and 
3. decreasing the cost of operations 
The plan was to redesign dealer operations, business processes, and communication 
tools to align them with leading industry practices. 
TABLE 9.1 
Opening Case Overview
 
Ducatiusa.com and Ducati.com 
 
Founded in 1926. Has 911 employees.
Company 
 Ducati’s main factory site and headquarters are located 
in Bologna, Italy, with an additional assembly factory in 
Thailand.
Industry
  
 Racing-inspired motorcycles characterized by 
“Desmodromic” performance engines, and innovative 
design and technology. 
Product lines 
 Six models: Diavel, Hypermotard, Monster, Multistrada, 
Streetfi ghter, and Superbike.
Digital technology
 
 New dealer communication application for mobile de-
vices called DCS, or Ducati Communication System. The 
interface lets dealers easily fi nd, send, and receive all the 
information they need to place orders and track them 
through production and delivery. The high-performance 
global communication system serves more than 5,500 
users worldwide in seven languages. 
Business challenges
 
 Because of competition and tough economic 
conditions worldwide, motorcycle dealerships had to 
offer customers better value and after-sales services. 
© imageBROKER/Alamy
© Johnrob/iStockphoto

CASE 9.1     Opening Case     301  
Partnership with Accenture and Apple 
Ducati selected Accenture to help redesign operations and processes; and to roll 
out a new integrated communication application for its dealers worldwide. Ducati 
equipped its sales network with iPads and developed a custom in-house app called 
DCS, or Ducati Communication System. The DCS app gives dealers a single point 
of access to Ducati’s back-end systems. The DCS is an SAP-based interface used 
by dealers to easily find, send, and receive data necessary to place orders through 
a point-of-sale (POS) device; and then to track orders through the production and 
delivery processes. 
Authorized dealers receive updates directly through the Apple App Store. They 
also have access to a configurator app on their iPads to configure a customer’s 
dream motorcycle. An e-mail detailing the customized motorcycle and accessories 
is then sent to the customer. Dealers communicate in real time with colleagues and 
complete the sale without delay.
Intuitive User Experience
The familiar user experience was designed to be the same for desktop computers, 
iPads, and iPhones. 
Cristiano Silei, vice president of Global Sales at Ducati, said: “It was clear from 
the start that iPad was the right device. It’s the simplicity, the immediate usability. 
Everyone understands how it works in just a few minutes.” 
Visiting a dealership is a very emotional experience for customers. Dealers want 
to make the experience unforgettable. According to Silei, the iPad helps gives the 
future Ducati owner a richer experience. 
In addition to providing real time sales support, the DCS app on iPad acts as 
a training interface to keep dealers updated on Ducati’s evolving product line. A 
change management program helped dealers transition smoothly from the old solu-
tion to DCS. DCS was quickly embraced by Ducati dealers, whose positive feedback 
included comments like “It’s a game changer” and “a great time saver.” 
PERFORMANCE 
IMPROVEMENTS
Ducati’s high-performance global DCS was deployed to 88 countries across four 
continents. DCS serves more than 5,500 users worldwide in seven languages. 
By leveraging dealer communication, Ducati is able to capture and consolidate 
local and global sales activity, spare parts, warranty, and service activity. As a 
result: 
• Ducati is able to capture and consolidate local and global sales activity, 
spare parts, warranty, and service activity, improving the company’s ability 
to respond daily to changing consumer demand.
• Dealers run all parts of their business and have a robust tool to execute their 
operational, growth, and customer objectives. 
• Dealers respond more quickly to customer demands and market conditions, 
making each dealership easier for customers to do business with. 
• Dealers are equipped with leading practices for their processes to help them 
better serve customers in a simple, streamlined fashion.
The dealer system is one of the most innovative and effective user experiences 
in the industry. It is user-friendly and sleek, and reinforces Ducati’s brand. 
Sources: Compiled from Ducati websites (2014), LexisNexis company profi les (2014), Apple.com (2014), 
Accenture.com (2014).

302  Chapter 9     Effective and Efficient Business Functions
Questions
1. What pressured or motivated Ducati to implement new digital 
technology? 
2. What costs could Ducati cut? What costs could it not cut? For example, 
could Ducati cut its research and development (R&D) budget? Explain 
your answers.
3. Why did Ducati need to improve communications with dealers?
4. Explain the capabilities and benefi ts of the DCS. 
5. Why was it important to implement a change management program? 
6. What other factors contributed to the success of DCS? Explain their 
contributions. 
7. Visit the Apple iPad store at apple.com/ipad and search for “ducati.” 
Review the Ducati Communication System app. Explain how the DCS 
app gives the future Ducati owner a richer experience.
The three major organizational levels are modeled as a pyramid in Figure 9.5. 
Starting at the base of the pyramid the levels are operational, managerial or admin-
istrative, and strategic. The timeframe transitions from in the moment to long term, 
and the perspective changes from daily to a few years.
The organizational levels correspond to the three major types of managers: 
operational, tactical, and strategic managers. To be fully effective, operational, tac-
tical, and strategic goals and plans must be aligned. That is, they must be consistent, 
mutually supportive, and focused on achieving the enterprise’s mission.
9.1  Solving Business Challenges at All Management Levels
Figure 9.5 Three organizational levels, their concerns, and strategic and tactical 
questions, planning, and control.
MANAGEMENT LEVELS
Strategic planning is a top management activity that sets priorities, focuses energy 
and human and technology resources, strengthens operations, and ensures that 
employees and business partners work toward common goals. Strategic plans are 
Mission is a set of outcomes 
an enterprise wants to 
achieve.
Strategic plan is a document 
used to communicate the 
company‘s goals and the 
actions needed to achieve 
them.
Strategic level
How do we do it?
How do we generate 
revenues & profits to sustain 
ourselves and build our
brand?
How well do we do it?
How can we be more 
efficient?
Market,
Customer,
Products,
& Services
Business Model
& Organization
Policies, Processes,
& Technology
Managerial or
administrative
level
Operational
level
What do we do? What is our
direction?
What markets & customers
should we be targeting and
how do we prepare for them?

9.1     Solving Business Challenges at All Management Levels     303  
BUSINESS FUNCTIONS 
VS. CROSS-
FUNCTIONAL BUSINESS 
PROCESSES
Originally, information systems were designed to support the accounting function. 
Systems for other functions were rolled out later. The consequences of this frag-
mented roll-out approach were data silos that supported various business functions, 
but that could not support cross-functional business processes. For example, taking 
customers’ orders for contact lenses is a relatively easy process, but the order fulfill-
ment process to move products from those orders to the customers includes checking 
credit and collecting payment, picking shipping departments to pack the product, 
printing the mailing label, preparing for shipping, and notifying customers that their 
orders are on the way. Work flows and data flows between departments that are not 
coordinated result in delays, errors, poor customer service, and higher costs. 
Departments or functions interact by passing data from one to the other. In the 
process, files are generated to record the details of such activity. 
Data requirements of the operational-level units are extensive and relatively 
routine because they have fixed sources of input and tasks follow standard operat-
ing procedures (SOPs). SOPs are easily automated or supported by functional area 
information systems.
SOPs are an integral part of a quality control system because they provide indi-
viduals with information to perform jobs properly. A key benefit of SOPs is that 
they minimize variation and promote quality through consistent implementation of 
a process or procedure within the organization, even if there are temporary or per-
manent personnel changes. SOPs are written, for example, for handling purchase 
orders, order fulfillment, customer complaints, recruitment and hiring, emergency 
response, and disaster recovery. Data that are lost or compromised have financial 
implications. As such, it is critical that businesses have SOPs to ensure that data are 
secure and accurate, and that their integrity is maintained. Tech Note 9.1 gives an 
outline of SOPs to secure transaction data. 
Standard operating 
procedures (SOPs) are a 
set of written instructions on 
how to perform a function 
or activity. SOPs provide 
the framework for complex 
processes to be managed 
more effectively.
visionary and future-oriented. Data from external sources—the economy, markets, 
competitors, and business trends—are essential to their SWOT (strengths, weak-
nesses, opportunities, and threats) analysis, planning, and decisions. As the environ-
ment changes, strategic plans are reexamined and adjusted. 
At the tactical level, middle-level managers design business processes, proce-
dures, and policies to implement strategic plans. 
Operational-level managers and supervisors work most closely with the work-
force and customers and play a more interpersonal role than any of the other levels 
of management. They depend on detailed data in real time or near real time to do 
their jobs, get work done, and close the deal. They need to track inventory levels, 
sales activity, marketing campaigns, production; meet or expedite delivery sched-
ules; and resolve disruptions. The Ducati dealers and their DCS and iPad apps are 
examples of the work and data requirements. Decision making is mostly immedi-
ate or short-term because decisions are made to close the deal or control ongoing 
activities and operations. Feedback and control are vital to identify deviations from 
goals as soon as possible in order to take corrective action. Data captured or created 
within the company are most important at this level. 
TECH NOTE 9.1 Standard Operating Procedures 
Data security: Data must be protected from malicious or unintentional corruption, 
unauthorized modifi cation, theft, or natural causes such as fl oods.
Data accuracy: Data validation is used to detect and correct data entry errors, such 
as address data and customer names.

304  Chapter 9     Effective and Efficient Business Functions
Data integrity: Data integrity with real time systems involves the ACID test, which 
is short for atomicity, consistency, isolation, and durability:
• Atomicity: If all steps in a transaction are not completed, then the entire 
transaction is canceled.
• Consistency: Only operations that meet data validity standards are 
allowed. For instance, systems that record checking accounts only allow 
unique check numbers for each transaction. Any operation that repeated 
a check number would fail to ensure that the data in the database are 
correct and accurate. Network failures can also cause data consistency 
problems.
• Isolation: Transactions must be isolated from each other. For example, 
bank deposits must be isolated from a concurrent transaction involving a 
withdrawal from the same account. Only when the withdrawal transaction 
is successfully completed will the new account balance be reported.
• Durability: Backups by themselves do not provide durability. A system 
crash or other failure must not cause any loss of data in the database. 
Durability is achieved through separate transaction logs that can be used 
to re-create all transactions from a known checkpoint. Other ways include 
database mirrors that replicate the database on another server.
BASIC FUNCTIONAL 
AREA SYSTEMS 
The basic functional area information systems and examples of their apps are the 
following.
• Manufacturing and production: materials purchasing, quality control, sched-
uling, shipping, receiving. For example, to produce small appliances, a manu-
facturer needs to order materials and parts, pay for labor and electricity, 
create shipment orders, and bill customers.
• Accounting: accounts receivable, accounts payable, general ledger, budget-
ing. Accounting systems keep account balances up to date, disburse funds, 
and post statements.
• Finance: cash management, asset management, credit management, finan-
cial statement reporting to comply with federal and industry-specific regula-
tions and government agencies.
• IT: cloud computing services, service-level agreement (SLA) management, 
software license management, user accounts management, information and 
network security.
• Sales and marketing: pricing, social media promotions, market research, 
demand forecasts, sales campaign management, order tracking, and online 
and mobile order processing and sales (see Figure 9.6). 
• HR: payroll, recruitment and hiring, succession planning, employee benefits, 
training, compensation, performance appraisal, compliance with federal and 
state employment regulations.
In online transaction processing (OLTP), events or transactions are processed 
as soon as they occur. Data are accessed directly from the database, and reports can 
be generated automatically (Figure 9.7). IT at Work 9.1 describes a real time sales 
and reporting system. 
These functions are supported by TPSs that monitor, collect, store, process, 
and distribute data for all financial and nonfinancial transactions, such as hiring and 
managing business contracts. 

9.1     Solving Business Challenges at All Management Levels     305  
Figure 9.6 A billboard in 
New York City’s Times Square 
advertises the services of 
SquareUp, a credit card 
reader system for Apple and 
Android mobile devices.
Figure 9.7 Information fl ows 
triggered by a transaction or 
event. 
First Choice Ski holds a 14 percent market share of the online 
UK ski vacation industry. TUI Travel, its parent company, is 
an international leisure travel group, which operates in 180 
countries and serves more than 30 million customers. In the 
highly competitive tour operator industry, profit margins are 
tight. Being lean and responsive is essential to maintaining 
profitability. By using Yahoo! Web Analytics and real time 
reporting, First Choice Ski was able to monitor and quickly 
respond to the behaviors of visitors on its travel website. 
Figure 9.8 is an example of a Web analytics interface.
First Choice Ski Tracks Customers’ Behavior
At First Choice Ski, customers spend a lot of time researching 
and selecting their vacations. Simon Rigglesworth, e-commerce 
manager, explained: “We see users return multiple times 
from multiple sources such as paid search, e-mail and even 
social networking as they try to find the vacation that suits 
them the best. Capturing as much information as possible 
allows us to identify the best way to complete the sale and 
optimize for it.”
IT at Work 9 .1
Tracking Customer Behavior
© Richard Levine/Alamy
INPUTS
Transaction
Manager
TPS
PROGRAMS
• • •
Update
database
& produce
TPS
reports
Detail Reports,
Documents, Other
Outputs
Exception
Reports
PROCESSES
OUTPUTS
Operational
Database
with Master
Transaction Files
Hard Drive
Internal and
External
Data
Entry
Downloading
and Uploading
Queries
and Answers
User
EVENTS
DETAILS
Exceptions

306  Chapter 9     Effective and Efficient Business Functions
After experimenting with fee-based analytics packages, 
First Choice Ski selected Yahoo! Web Analytics (YWA), which 
is free. Web analyst Penelope Bellegarde used the Search 
Phrases Report in YWA to leverage factors driving visitors to 
First Choice Ski. She said: “If we notice a specific destination 
is driving a lot of visits to the site, then it is very likely we will 
promote that destination on the homepage.”
The Internal Campaign Report helps First Choice Ski 
monitor and manage its many travel promotions. For exam-
ple, Bellegarde monitors the number of clicks and number of 
sales generated by each campaign, and when a low ratio of 
sales to clicks is noticed, the company adjusts the campaign 
accordingly.
Performance Improvements
Using these different datasets and tools from YWA, TUI 
redesigned and changed the content of its First Choice Ski 
homepage. Afterward the bounce rate (transfer out) from 
the homepage decreased 18 percent, and the exit rate 
decreased 13 percent. Most important, the number of sales 
generated from the homepage increased 266 percent. “We 
are now generating quantifiable, actionable, data-driven 
processes for prioritizing and reviewing web site develop-
ments,” says Rigglesworth.
Sources: Compiled from firstchoice-ski.co.uk and Yahoo.com.
Questions
1. How does the ski travel site’s quick response to visitors’ 
clickstream behavior relate to its profit margin?
2. Consider this measurement principle: You cannot man-
age what you cannot measure. Explain how the case 
illustrates this principle.
3. Does Web analytics impact barriers to entry and rivalry 
among incumbents in this industry? 
Questions
1. Explain the core concerns and time horizons of each level of management.
2. Defi ne what a standard operating procedure (SOP) is and give an example.
3. Explain each component of the ACID test.
4. Explain the differences between batch and online processing.
5. Describe the fl ow of information in transaction processing.
Day-to-day operations are connected by data and processes that they share. 
Decisions made in sales departments, for example, cause ripple effects in other func-
tional departments—accounting, finance, IT, manufacturing/production, and HR. 
9.2   Manufacturing, Production, and Transportation 
Management Systems
Figure 9.8 Example of a 
Web analytics interface.
© NAN/Alamy

9.2     Manufacturing, Production, and Transportation Management Systems     307  
Likewise, financial decisions, such as stricter credit requirements, impact sales and 
production. Ideally, functional systems enable: 
• Transparency: being able to access current data to learn what is needed in 
order to make informed decisions without delay.
• Quick response: being able to respond appropriately to changes in condi-
tions, demand, or new opportunities.
MANUFACTURING AND 
PRODUCTION SYSTEMS 
The production and operations management (POM) function is responsible for 
processes that transform inputs into value-added outputs, as shown in Figure 9.9. 
These inputs include human resources, such as workers, staff, and managers; facili-
ties and processes, such as buildings and equipment; they also include materials, IT, 
and information. Outputs are the goods and services a company produces.
POM is responsible for decisions and activities, including product design and 
delivery problems. The design and management of operations strongly influence 
material costs, inventory availability, and quality control. For these reasons, POM is a 
function management resorts to in order to improve performance and the bottom line.
Figure 9.9 Production 
operations management 
(POM) systems process and 
transform inputs into outputs.
TRANSPORTATION 
MANAGEMENT 
SYSTEMS
Transportation management systems (TMSs) are relied on to handle transporta-
tion planning, which includes shipping consolidation, load and trip planning, route 
planning, fleet and driver planning, and carrier selection. TMSs also support vehicle 
management and accounting transactions. 
Four trend factors contributing to the growth of TMS include:
1. Outdated transportation systems need to be upgraded or replaced. Many sys-
tems were installed over 10 years ago—before tablet computers and mobile 
technologies had become widespread in business. Similar to most legacy (old) 
systems, they are infl exible, diffi cult to integrate with other newer systems, and 
expensive to maintain.
2. Growth of intermodal transport. Intermodal transportation refers to the use of 
two or more transport modes, such as container ship, air, truck, and rail, to move 
products from source to destination. See Figure 9.10 for examples. Many more 
companies are shipping via intermodals and their older TMSs cannot support or 
deal with intermodal movement, according to Dwight Klappich, a research vice 
president for Gartner.
Data
Data
Data
Action
Action
Environment
• Customers
• Government regulations
• Competitors
• Technology
• Suppliers
• Economy
•  Capital
•  Materials
•  Equipment
•  Facilities
•  Supplies
•  Labor
•  Knowledge
•  Time
•  Energy
Inputs
•  Storage
   goods
•  Storage
•  Alterations
•  Transportation
•  Inspection
Transformation
Process
  goods
•  Facilitating
    goods
•  Services
Outputs
Monitoring and
control
•  Storage

308  Chapter 9     Effective and Efficient Business Functions
 
 
When brick-and-mortar manufacturers began selling online, for example, 
they learned that their existing TMSs were inadequate for handling the new line 
of business. Shippers that expand globally face similar challenges when they try 
to manage multiple rail, truck, and ocean shipments. Thus, there is a growing 
need for more robust TMSs to handle multidimensional shipping arrangements.
3. TMS vendors add capabilities. The basic functions performed by a TMS include 
gathering data on a load to be transported and matching those data to a histori-
cal routing guide. Then the TMS is used to manage the communication process 
with the various carriers. New feature-rich TMSs are able to access information 
services to help the shipper identify optimal routes given all current conditions. 
For example, the latest TMSs can interact directly with market-data benchmark-
ing services. An automated, real time market monitoring function saves shippers 
time and errors, and cuts costs signifi cantly.
4. TMSs handle big data. Transportation tends to generate a high volume of trans-
actional data. Managing the data is not easy. TMS vendors are developing sys-
tems that make valuable use of the big data that are collected and stored. By 
drilling down into specifi c regions or focusing on particular market trends, for 
example, shippers can use their big data to make better decisions.
IT at Work 9.2 describes a cloud-based software-as-a-service (SaaS) TMS.
Figure 9.10 Examples of intermodal transportation ports. Container ships from 
around the world are unloaded in the Brooklyn, New York (left), and Bayonne, 
New Jersey (right), shipyards. Containers are tracked as they are loaded onto 
trucks or rail and transported across the country.
Agistix introduced Total Visibility, a new cloud-based SaaS 
transportation management system (TMS). Using the cloud, 
shippers have access from any location at any time. The leased 
nature of the SaaS makes it affordable to more shippers. 
Total Visibility provides shippers with real time visibility 
to eliminate blind spots. Visibility is achieved by capturing 
shipment estimates, so clients can better forecast spend (costs) 
and meet compliance reporting requirements. Real time data 
IT at Work 9 .2
Total Visibility, a SaaS Transportation System
© Randy Duchaine/Alamy
© Robert Quinlan/Alamy

9.2     Manufacturing, Production, and Transportation Management Systems     309  
allow customers to know what is happening and to ana-
lyze big data to ensure their supply chain is functioning as 
designed.
Total Visibility aggregates and standardizes a company’s 
shipping activities and provides shippers with a comprehensive 
view into every shipment they have paid for anywhere in the 
world. The key benefits of Total Visibility for shippers are 
real time visibility to all shipments in transit across all carri-
ers, all service levels, all modes, international and domestic, 
inbound and outbound. 
LOGISTICS 
MANAGEMENT 
Logistics management deals with the coordination of several complex processes, 
namely ordering, purchasing or procurement, inbound logistics, and outbound 
logistics activities. Logistics management systems:
• Optimize transportation operations.
• Coordinate with all suppliers.
• Integrate supply chain technologies.
• Synchronize inbound and outbound flows of materials or goods.
• Manage distribution or transport networks.
These systems enable real time monitoring and tracking of supply chain ship-
ments, schedules, and orders. You will read about supply chain management in 
more detail in Chapter 10.
Inbound logistics refers 
to receiving.
Outbound logistics refers 
to shipping.
Inventory control systems 
are stock control or inventory 
management systems.
Safety stock is extra inventory 
used as a buffer to reduce 
the risk of stockout. Also 
called buffer stock.
Stockout: inventory shortage.
INVENTORY CONTROL 
SYSTEMS
Inventory control systems are important because they minimize the total cost 
of inventory while maintaining optimal inventory levels. Inventory levels are 
maintained by reordering the quantity needed at the right times in order to meet 
demand. POM departments keep safety stock as a hedge against stockouts. Safety 
stock is needed in case of unexpected events, such as spikes in demand or longer 
delivery times.
Managing inventory is important to profit margins because of numerous costs 
associated with inventory, in addition to the cost of the inventory. Inventory control 
systems minimize the following three cost categories:
1. Inventory holding costs: warehousing costs (see Figure 9.11), security costs, in-
surance, losses due to theft or obsolescence, and inventory fi nancing costs based 
on the interest rate
2. Ordering and shipping costs: employees’ time spent ordering, receiving, or pro-
cessing deliveries; and shipping fees
3. Cost of shortages: production delays and missed sales revenues because of 
stockouts
To minimize the sum of these three costs, the POM department has to decide 
when to order and how much to order. One inventory model that is used to answer 
both questions is the economic order quantity (EOQ) model. The EOQ model 
takes all costs into consideration. 
Just-in-Time Inventory Management Systems
Just-in-time (JIT) and lean manufacturing are two widely used methods or mod-
els to minimize waste and deal with the complexity of inventory management. 
Minimizing inventory costs remains a major objective of supply chain management.
JIT inventory management attempts to minimize holding costs by not taking 
possession of inventory until it is needed in the production process. With JIT, costs 
associated with carrying large inventories at any given point in time are eliminated. 
However, the trade-off is higher ordering costs because of more frequent orders. 
Figure 9.11 Inventory 
holding and managing costs 
can signifi cantly increase cost 
of goods sold (CGS).
© Huntstock, Inc /Alamy

310  Chapter 9     Effective and Efficient Business Functions
Because of the higher risk of stockouts, JIT requires accurate and timely monitoring 
of materials’ usage in production.
Everything in the JIT chain is interdependent, so coordination and good rela-
tionships with suppliers are critical for JIT to work well. Any delay can be very 
costly to all companies linked in the chain. Delays can be caused by labor strikes, 
interrupted supply lines, bad weather, market demand fluctuations, stockouts, lack 
of communication upstream and downstream in the supply chain, and unforeseen 
production interruptions. In addition inventory or material quality is critical. Poor 
quality causes delays, for example, fixing products or scrapping what cannot be 
fixed and waiting for delivery of the reorder.
JIT was developed by Toyota because of high real estate costs in Tokyo, Japan, 
that made warehousing expensive. It is used extensively in the auto manufacturing 
industry. For example, if parts and subassemblies arrive at a workstation exactly 
when needed, holding inventory is not required. There are no delays in produc-
tion, and there are no idle production facilities or underutilized workers, provided 
that parts and subassemblies arrive on schedule and in usable condition. Many JIT 
systems need to be supported by software. JIT vendors include HP, IBM, CA, and 
Steven Engineering.
Despite potential cost-saving benefits, JIT is likely to fail in companies that have:
• Uncooperative supply chain partners, vendors, workers, or management.
• Custom or nonrepetitive production.
Lean Manufacturing Systems
In a lean manufacturing system, suppliers deliver small lots on a daily or frequent 
basis, and production machines are not necessarily run at full capacity. One objec-
tive of lean manufacturing is to eliminate waste of any kind; that is, to eliminate 
anything that does not add value to the final product. Holding inventory that is not 
needed very soon is seen as waste, which adds cost but not value. A second objec-
tive of lean manufacturing is to empower workers so that production decisions can 
be made by those who are closest to the production processes.
Oracle, Siemens, and other vendors offer demand-driven lean manufacturing 
systems. Like any IS, JIT needs to be justified with a cost–benefit analysis. And 
all JIT success factors apply to lean manufacturing. For example, JIT requires that 
inventory arrive on schedule and be the right quality. For companies subject to bad 
weather or labor strikes, lean manufacturing may not be suitable.
Quality Control Systems
Manufacturing quality control (QC) systems can be stand-alone systems or part of 
an enterprisewide total quality management (TQM) effort. QC systems provide 
data about the quality of incoming materials and parts, as well as the quality of in-
process semifinished and finished products. These systems record the results of all 
inspections and compare actual results to expected results.
QC data may be collected by sensors or RFID (radio frequency identification) 
systems and interpreted in real time, or they can be stored in a database for future 
analysis. Reports on the percentage of defects or percentage of rework needed can 
keep managers informed of performance among departments. KIA Motors intro-
duced an intelligent QC system to analyze customer complaints, so it could more 
quickly investigate and make corrections.
Other POM Technologies
Many other areas of POM are improved by information systems and tools. Production 
planning optimization tools, product routing and tracking systems, order manage-
ment, factory layout planning and design, and other tasks can be supported by POM 

9.2     Manufacturing, Production, and Transportation Management Systems     311  
subsystems. For example, a Web-based system at Office Depot matches employee 
scheduling with store traffic patterns to increase customer satisfaction and reduce 
costs. Schurman Fine Papers, a manufacturer/retailer of greeting cards and specialty 
products, uses special warehouse management software to improve demand fore-
casting and inventory processes. Its two warehouses efficiently distribute products 
to over 30,000 retail stores.
COMPUTER-
INTEGRATED 
MANUFACTURING AND 
MANUFACTURING 
EXECUTION SYSTEMS
Computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM) systems control day-to-day shop floor 
activities. In the early 1980s, companies invested greatly in CIM solutions even 
though they were complex, difficult to implement, and costly to maintain. They had 
required the integration of many products and vendors.
Prior to CIM, production managers were given many pieces of informa-
tion such as time, attendance, receiving reports, inspection reports, and so on to 
figure out how to accomplish production tasks. The information was frequently 
late, rarely current or reliable, voluminous, and extremely difficult to assimilate. 
CIM helps production managers better use information to execute manufacturing 
plans.
Manufacturing execution systems (MESs) manage operations on the shop 
floors of factories. Some MESs schedule a few critical machines, while others man-
age all operations on the shop floor. Functions of MES programs include: compiling 
a bill of materials, resource management and scheduling, preparing and dispatching 
production orders, preparing work-in-progress (WIP) reports, and tracking produc-
tion lots. For instance, an MES can schedule and track each step of the production 
phase of a particular job, and then print out the bill of materials for the operator 
and the production steps to complete at each phase. It repeats this process for each 
operator and each step until a particular job is complete. 
CIM and MES are very similar concepts, but there are differences. MES typi-
cally refers to a broader infrastructure than CIM. MES is based much more on stan-
dard reusable application software, instead of custom-designed software programs 
on a contract-by-contract basis. MES tries to eliminate the time and information 
gap of early years on the shop floor by providing the plant with information in real 
time. Corporate business functions are given timely plant information to support 
business planning decisions. For the most part, the term CIM is more commonly 
used, and will be used in the rest of this section.
Today’s CIM systems provide scheduling and real time production monitoring 
and reporting. CIM data-driven automation affects all systems or subsystems within 
the manufacturing environment: design and development, production, marketing 
and sales, and field support and service. CIM systems can perform production 
monitoring, scheduling and planning, statistical process monitoring, quality analy-
sis, personnel monitoring, order status reporting, and production lot tracking. The 
manufacturer BAE has implemented CIM.
MESs are generally installed on-premises, but cloud-based solutions are becom-
ing available. MES is a subset of enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems, which 
you will read about in Chapter 10.
BAE Systems uses CIM in Its Combat Aircraft Facility 
BAE Systems is a global company headquartered in London, England, engaged in 
the development, delivery, and support of advanced defense, security, and aero-
space systems. BAE is among the world’s largest military contractors.
In September 2010 BAE opened a titanium-machining facility to manufacture 
components for the F-35 Lightning II combat aircraft. It took 10 months to com-
plete the facility, during which time engineers at BAE considered a number of ways 
to ensure that it would be able to accommodate the high throughput of titanium 
military aircraft parts cost-effectively. According to Jon Warburton, BAE’s F-35 
program manager, after conducting a thorough examination of numerous potential 

312  Chapter 9     Effective and Efficient Business Functions
manufacturing solutions, the BAE team finally decided to deploy a highly auto-
mated CIM system (Wilson, 2011). The CIM system ensures that titanium parts for 
the aircraft can be manufactured on a JIT basis. To do so, it coordinates the orders 
received at the plant, as well as the movement of raw materials and tooling, and 
optimizes the use of the machine tools.
A key element of the CIM strategy was the deployment of two flexible manu-
facturing systems (FMSs) that can accommodate the manufacture of different parts 
at different volumes. When an order for a part is received, the data relating to it are 
passed to the FMSs, which schedule the manufacture of a part in the most expedient 
way by examining the current workload across each of eight machine tools. Each 
FMS can store up to 1,000 cutting tools in a racking system ready to be loaded into 
the machine tools. A series of twin robot systems deliver the stored cutting tools 
into each machine, as well as replenishing any worn tools. The biggest challenge 
faced by the team in the development of the facility was to ensure that the FMS 
and the machine tools communicated effectively with one another and with BAE’s 
CIM system.
Reasons Why Companies Invest in CIM
The benefits of CIM are as follows: (1) It simplifies manufacturing technologies 
and techniques, (2) automates as many of the manufacturing processes as pos-
sible, and (3) integrates and coordinates all aspects of design, manufacturing, 
and related functions. CIM is comprehensive and flexible, which is especially 
important in the redesign or elimination of business processes. Without CIM, it 
may become necessary to make large investments to change existing ISs to fit new 
processes.
Questions
1. What is the function of POM in an organization? 
2. What trends are contributing to the growing use of TMS?
3. Defi ne logistics management.
4. What are the three categories of inventory costs?
5. What are the objectives of JIT?
6. Explain the difference between EOQ and JIT inventory models.
7. What is the goal of lean manufacturing?
8. What is CIM?
Sales and marketing information systems can expand the capacity to create new 
products, services, channels, and market opportunities that lead to new revenue 
streams. IT at Work 9.3 describes such an example. In general, sales and marketing 
systems support advertising, market research, intelligence gathering, getting prod-
ucts and services to customers, and responding to customers’ needs. Many of these 
systems are depicted in Figure 9.12.
Chapters 7, 8, and 10 covered or will discuss sales and marketing systems and 
strategies, including ecommerce and customer relationship management (CRM). 
This chapter, specifically this section, focuses on data-driven marketing and the 
capabilities of sales and marketing ISs.
9.3  Sales and Marketing Systems

9.3     Sales and Marketing Systems     313  
Figure 9.12 Sales and marketing systems and subsystems.
Market Intelligence
Systems
Target Marketing
Systems
Customer Support
Systems
Sales Systems
Dealer Systems
Delivery 
Systems
•  Customer Profiling 
    and Segmentation
•  Market Tracking
•  Competitor
 Surveillance
•  New Product
 Development
•  Decision Support, BI Predictive Analysis
•  Trend Monitoring
•  Cross-Selling
•  ADS for Pricing
•  Marketing and Sales
 Support and Services
•  Value-Added
 Partnerships
•  Dealers’
 Communications
•  Business Management
 Support Functions
•  Database Marketing
•  Telemarketing
•  Niche/Regional
 Marketing and
 Microsegmentation
•  Customer Profitability 
 Analysis 
•  Internet Marketing
•  Communications
 with the Field
•  Sales Process/
 Account Management
•  Selling Aids/Sales
 Force Support
•  Selling Aids/Point
 of Purchase
•  Prospecting
•  Wireless Sales Force
   Automation
•  Internet Marketing
•  Customer
 Communications
•  Customer Satisfaction
•  Service and Support
•  Training/User
 Education
•  Usage Enhancement
•  Customer Portals
•  Social Networking
•  EDI
•  Demand Forecasting
•  Inventory
 Management
•  Order Entry and
 Fulfillment
•  Invoicing
•  Sourcing
•  Time-to-Market
 Reduction
•  RFID
Channel Systems
Manufacturing
R&D/Design
Distribution
Accounting/
Finance
The Selling
Company
Google Customer Surveys is a service publishers can use to 
generate revenues from their online content. The service is 
an alternative to having a paywall for online news content. 
For example, when users visit the websites of partners like 
the New York Daily News and Texas Tribune, they find 
several articles partially blocked. To continue reading the 
full article, they have to answer a question or microsurvey 
provided by Google.
Adweek
Adweek’s editors, reporters, and designers spend a lot of 
time analyzing how digital technology transforms businesses 
and the people they cover. They needed to monetize their 
digital assets to keep the brand profitable. To that end, 
Adweek partnered with Google on a new Web-based rev-
enue play. By answering a single marketing question per day, 
readers receive full access to Adweek.com and reporting, 
analysis, and video. 
Market Research
One or two market research multiple-choice questions are 
asked, for instance, ‘Which types of candy do you usually 
buy for your household?” Possible answers: none, chocolate, 
hard candies, gummies, toffees. Advertisers pay Google to 
IT at Work 9 .3
Google Customer Surveys

314  Chapter 9     Effective and Efficient Business Functions
host the surveys, and the sites receive 5 cents per response 
from Google. To minimize the possibility that people select 
untruthful answers leading to poor-quality data, Google 
makes the questions as engaging as possible. And if users 
start to just answer the first question on each page, or answer 
too quickly, the program notices that behavior and forces 
readers to answer new questions.
DATA-DRIVEN 
MARKETING
Data-driven, fact-based decision making increasingly relies on data that are hot—
impacting the business or potential customer right now, or in real time. One use 
of hot data is push-through pay-per-click (PPC) marketing, which refers to online 
advertising that “appears” on the screens of consumers’ devices based on their loca-
tion, behavior, interests, or demographic information. Unlike pull-through ads that 
appear based on the user’s keyword searches, push-through ads use data about the 
person to determine whether the ad should appear. This capability creates oppor-
tunities for highly targeted advertising programs. For example, Facebook members 
self-report data about their location, age, interests, and so on. Based on these data, 
advertisers can request that their ad be pushed to Facebook members who fit a 
specific profile based on demographic, geographic, or behavioral factors. 
MARKETING 
MANAGEMENT
The following are some representative examples of how marketing management is 
being accomplished.
Pricing of Products or Services
Sales volumes as well as profits are determined by the prices of products or services. 
Pricing is a difficult decision, particularly during economic recessions. Prices can be 
changed frequently, as you read in IT at Work 9.1. Flash sales engage fans or cus-
tomers and trigger quick sales. Flash sales work by offering customers an incredible 
deal for a very short time. This sales method lends itself perfectly to the immediacy 
of social media.
Salesperson Productivity
The performance of salespeople is collected in the sales and marketing TPS and 
used to compare performance along several dimensions, such as time, product, 
region, and even the time of day. Actual current sales can be compared to histori-
cal data and to expectations. Multidimensional spreadsheet software facilitates this 
type of analysis.
SALES AND 
DISTRIBUTION 
CHANNELS 
Marketers need to determine the optimal ways to distribute their products and 
services through a combination of electronic, mobile, and physical channels. For 
example, integrating a PPC advertising campaign with other online and offline 
advertising initiatives generally provides the best overall results. 
Here are representative topics relating to sales and distribution channels:
• In Macy’s stores and many other retailers, customers can check current sale 
prices on digital screens with barcode readers.
• Customers use Exxon Mobil Speedpass to fill their tanks by waving a token, 
embedded with an RFID device, at a gas-pump sensor. Then the RFID 
starts an authorization process, and the purchase is charged to the debit or 
credit card linked to the account. 
• Home Depot and many supermarkets installed self-check-out machines. 
Self-service kiosks cut labor costs for retailers, and can reduce customers’ 
check-out times, as shown in Figure 9.13. 

9.4     Accounting, Finance, and Regulatory Systems     315  
Sales productivity can be boosted by Web-based call centers. When a customer 
calls a sales rep, the rep can look at the customer’s history of purchases, demograph-
ics, services available where the customer lives, and more. This information enables 
reps to provide better customer service.
Sales automation software is especially helpful to small businesses, enabling 
them to rapidly increase sales and growth. One leading software is Salesforce.com, 
which is a CRM application that is offered as a software as a service (SaaS). You 
will read about Salesforce.com in detail in the CRM section of Chapter 10.
Profitability Analysis
In deciding on advertising and other marketing efforts, managers need to know the 
profit contribution or profit margin (profit margin 
 sale price minus cost of good) 
of certain products and services. Profitability metrics for products and services can 
be derived from the cost accounting system. For example, profit performance analy-
sis software available from IBM, Oracle, SAS, and Microstrategy is designed to 
help managers assess and improve the profit performance of their line of business, 
products, distribution channels, sales regions, and other dimensions critical to man-
aging the enterprise. Several airlines, for example, use automated decision systems 
to set prices based on profitability.
Marketing activities conclude the primary activities of the value chain. Next we 
look at the functional systems that are support activities, also called secondary activi-
ties, in the value chain: accounting, finance, and human resources management.
Questions
1. Explain push-through marketing and pull-through marketing. 
2. List two sales and distribution channels.
3. Describe profi tability analysis.
Accounting and finance departments control and manage cash flows, assets, 
liabilities, and net income (profit). Financial accounting is a specialized branch 
of accounting that keeps track of a company’s financial transactions and prepares 
financial statements, such as balance sheets and income statements. Investors, regu-
lators, and others rely on the integrity and accuracy of external financial statements. 
Accounting must comply with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) 
and the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). 
Corporations whose stock is publicly traded must also comply with the report-
ing requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), a regulatory 
agency of the U.S. government. Using standardized guidelines, the transactions are 
recorded, summarized, and presented in a financial report or financial statement 
such as an income statement or a balance sheet. However, the objective of financial 
accounting is not simply to report the value of a company. Rather, its purpose is 
to provide sufficient and accurate information for others to assess the value of a 
company for investment or other purposes.
9.4  Accounting, Finance, and Regulatory Systems
Income statement summa-
rizes a company’s revenue 
and expenses for one quarter 
of a fiscal year or the entire 
fiscal year. Also known as 
a P&L (profit and los) or 
earnings statement.
FASB develops accounting 
standards and principles.
FINANCIAL 
DISCLOSURE: 
REPORTING AND 
COMPLIANCE
As part of an organization’s compliance obligations, the accounting function 
must attest (verify) that there are no material weaknesses in internal controls. 
A weakness in an internal control is a major cause of fraud, which is also known 
as white collar crime. The prevention, detection, and investigation of financial 
fraud are needed to reduce the risk of publicly reporting inaccurate information. 
Figure 9.13 Self-check-out 
kiosks reduce labor costs.
© Marmaduke St. John/Alamy

316  Chapter 9     Effective and Efficient Business Functions
TABLE 9.2 
Three of the Worst Accounting Scandals of All Time 
Company and 
Fraudsters
Damages
How They Did It
Penalties
Bernie Madoff 
Investment Securities 
LLC (2008)
Bernie Madoff, his 
accountant David 
Friehling, and CFO 
Frank DiPascalli
Tricked investors out of 
$64.8 billion through the 
largest Ponzi scheme in 
history.
Investors were paid 
returns out of their own 
money or money from 
other investors—rather 
than from profi ts.
150 years in prison for 
Madoff 
 $170 billion 
restitution. Prison time for 
Friehling and DiPascalli.
Lehman Brothers (2008)
Lehman executives and 
the company’s auditors, 
Ernst & Young
Hid over $50 billion in 
loans disguised as sales.
Allegedly sold toxic assets 
to Cayman Island banks 
with the understanding 
that they would be bought 
back eventually. Created 
the impression Lehman 
had $50 billion more in 
cash and $50 billion less 
in toxic assets than it 
actually had.
Forced into the largest 
bankruptcy in U.S. 
history.
Enron (2001)
CEO Jeffrey Skilling and 
former CEO Ken Lay
Shareholders lost $74 
billion, thousands of 
employees and investors 
lost their retirement 
accounts, and many 
employees lost their jobs.
Kept huge debts off its 
balance sheets.
Lay died before serving 
time; Skilling received 
24 years in prison. The 
company fi led for bank-
ruptcy. Arthur Andersen 
was found guilty of 
fudging Enron’s accounts.
High-profile examples of financial misrepresentations are Bernard L. Madoff 
Investment Securities (2008), Lehman Brothers (2008), Enron (2001), and many 
related to the subprime mortgage crisis. Table 9.2 describes three of the worst 
accounting fraud cases of all time. The FBI investigates white collar crime and 
reports on the subject at its website FBI.gov.
Accounting Software Packages
Accounting software is a foundational technology for many companies, and as a 
business grows, powerful, effective accounting solutions are critical. Most account-
ing software packages offer the same basic features necessary for managing finances: 
accounts receivable (A/R), accounts payable (A/P), general ledger, billing and 
invoicing, purchase and sales orders, and reporting. In addition to basic functional-
ity, the top accounting solutions offer additional features to give users more power, 
flexibility, and customization. Often accounting solutions are closely integrated 
with enterprise systems, such as ERP systems that include an extensive accounting 
module. 
Many providers offer cloud-based solutions. SaaS accounting software solu-
tions include the features of traditional systems, with the added benefit of anytime, 
anywhere accessibility and updating. 
Financial misrepresentation 
occurs when a company has 
intentionally deceived one or 
more other parties.

Financial Disclosure 
The SEC’s financial disclosure system is central to its mission of protecting investors 
and maintaining fair, orderly, and efficient markets. Since 1934 the SEC has required 
financial disclosure in forms and documents. In 1984 the SEC began collecting elec-
tronic documents to help investors obtain information, but those documents made 
it difficult to search for and find specific data items. To eliminate that difficulty and 
improve how investors find and use information, the SEC sought a new disclosure sys-
tem that required data disclosure, whereby data items are tagged to make them easily 
searchable. The reporting (disclosure) system was based on electronic data tagging, 
or eXtensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL). Beginning in 2012, the SEC 
mandated new interactive data reporting requirements as described in IT at Work 9.4. 
XBRL Tagging
XBRL is a language for the electronic communication of business data. Each item, 
such as cash or depreciation expense, is tagged with information about various attri-
butes, such as calendar year, audited/unaudited status, currency, and so on. XBRL-
tagged data can be read by any software that includes an XBRL processor, which 
makes them easy to transfer among computers. Creating XBRL documents does not 
require XML computer programming. Software is available to tag data, submit tagged 
data to various recipients, and receive and analyze tagged data from other sources. 
Figure 9.14 shows how XBRL documents are created. XBRL helps companies:
Figure 9.14 Overview of the 
creation of XBRL documents.
Financial institutions
Investors
Public
Regulators
Analysts
Sources:
ERP
Databases
Information Generation
Financial Data
USAA GAAP Taxonomy
Standards
Company Extension Taxonomy
XBRL Documents
Distribution,
Consumption
Output
Validate
and Publish
Files
9.4     Accounting, Finance, and Regulatory Systems     317  

318  Chapter 9     Effective and Efficient Business Functions
• Generate cleaner data, including written explanations and supporting notes.
• Produce more accurate data with fewer errors that require follow-up by 
regulators.
• Transmit data more quickly to regulators and meet deadlines.
• Increase the number of cases and amount of information that staffers can handle.
The SEC requires data reporting using XBRL tags, and those 
reports require XBRL software.
In March 2012 the SEC adopted the U.S. GAAP Financial 
Reporting Taxonomy, which is based on XBRL. Public com-
panies, called filers, registered with the SEC must submit 
their financial reports as tagged interactive data files (FASB.org, 
2012). Interactive data make it easier for investors to analyze 
and compare the financial performance of public compa-
nies. Prior to XBRL, reports were noninteractive. Investors 
who wanted specific data had to manually search lengthy 
corporate annual reports or mutual fund documents. As 
more companies use interactive data, sophisticated analysis 
tools used by financial professionals are now available to 
average investors. 
Interactive data increase the efficiency of reporting 
processes, including the ability to consolidate financial data 
from different operating systems. Banks also submit their call 
reports to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) 
in XBRL format.
IT at Work 9 .4
XBRL Reporting Compliance
FRAUD PREVENTION 
AND DETECTION
Fraud is a crime with severe financial consequences, as you observed in Table 9.2. 
Fighting fraud is an ethical duty—and essential to public trust and the integrity of a 
company’s brand. Insider fraud is a term referring to a variety of criminal behaviors 
perpetrated by an organization’s employees or contractors. Other terms for this 
crime are internal, employment, or occupational fraud.
Why Fraud Occurs
Fraud occurs because internal controls to prevent insider fraud—no matter how 
strong—will fail on occasion. Fraud risk management is a system of policies and 
procedures to prevent and detect illegal acts committed by managers, employees, 
customers, or business partners against a company’s interests. Although each cor-
poration establishes its own specific procedures, fraud risk management involves 
assessing a company’s exposure to fraud; implementing defenses to prevent and 
detect fraud; defining procedures to investigate, prosecute, and recover losses from 
fraud. Analyzing why and how fraud could occur is as important as detecting and 
stopping it. This analysis is used to identify necessary corporate policies to deter 
insider fraud and fraud detection systems when prevention fails. 
Fraud Risk Factors
Factors that increase a company’s exposure to fraud are illustrated in Figure 9.15. 
Information systems are implemented to harden it against these factors. Companies 
make themselves targets because of the interaction of these four factors:
1. A high level of trust in employees without suffi cient oversight to verify that they 
are not stealing from the company
2. Relying on informal processes of control 

9.4     Accounting, Finance, and Regulatory Systems     319  
3. A mindset (belief) that internal controls and fraud prevention systems are too 
expensive to implement
4. Assigning a wide range of duties for each employee, giving them opportunities 
to commit fraud
When a small manufacturer was the victim of theft of intellectual property, the 
computer network logs identified the computer that had been used to commit the 
alleged crime. But there was no way to connect that computer to one specific indi-
vidual. A manager’s conviction that he knew who had perpetrated the crime was 
not sufficient evidence. The lesson learned was that the internal control—separation 
of duties—is not only important to fraud prevention, but also to fraud prosecution 
and recovery of losses. At the company, employees had shared computer accounts, 
so they were not able to link the fraud to the person who committed it. Designing 
effective fraud response and litigation-readiness strategies (post-incident strategies) 
is crucial to be able to: 
• recover financial losses. 
• punish perpetrators through lawsuits, criminal charges, and/or forfeited gains. 
• stop fraudsters from victimizing other organizations. 
History has shown that if the punishment for committing fraud is not severe, 
the fraudster’s next employer will be the next victim, as described in IT at Work 9.5. 
Trying to keep fraud hidden can mean either doing nothing or simply firing the 
employee. These approaches to dealing with fraud are not sustainable because they 
erode the effectiveness of fraud prevention measures and produce moral hazard—
that is, they take the risk out of insider fraud.
One of the most effective fraud prevention techniques is the perception of 
detection and punishment. If a company shows its employees that it can find out 
everything that every employee does and will prosecute to the fullest extent anyone 
who commits fraud, then the feeling that “I can get away with it” drops drastically 
(Johnson et al., 2011). The Catch-22 is that companies may have limited resources 
that hinder a proper fraud diagnosis or forensic accounting investigation, even 
though they cannot afford unrecoverable losses either.
Figure 9.15 Factors that 
make companies targets 
for fraud.
A dental practice with $4 million in annual revenues had fired 
its bookkeeper after a tax audit revealed to the owners that 
she had been stealing over $100,000 per year for at least 
four years. The bookkeeper was responsible for all account-
ing duties and financial reporting for tax purposes. Her work 
was not inspected closely by external auditors or the owners. 
IT at Work 9 .5
Serial Fraudster
Fraud
target
Informal
processes
Too much
trust
Cost
mindset
Range of
duties

320  Chapter 9     Effective and Efficient Business Functions
Financial Meltdowns Triggered by Fraud
In the early 2000s, the U.S. business economy was significantly impacted by fraud 
scandals that involved senior executives at a number of major corporations. 
Lawmakers believed that the scope of the crimes destroyed the public’s confidence 
in the country’s financial systems and markets. A number of laws were passed that 
heightened the legal responsibilities of corporate management to actively guard 
against fraud by employees, established stricter management and reporting require-
ments, and introduced severe penalties for failure to comply. As a result, fraud 
management became a necessary functional process. These frauds played a role in 
the SEC’s rule for XBRL data reporting. 
Internal Controls
In companies with lax accounting systems, it is too easy for employees to misdirect 
purchase orders and payments, bribe a supplier, or manipulate accounting data. 
When senior managers are involved in a fraud, preventing fraud is extremely 
tough. Consider Bernie Madoff, who committed a record-setting fraud scheme for 
many years even after Sarbanes-Oxley was passed in 2002 to help prevent financial 
fraud. 
In a much smaller but still serious fraud case involving a New York–based 
nonprofit, a volunteer was responsible for counting cash receipts at the annual fun-
draiser. The volunteer had performed this task for 30 years. One year, an accoun-
tant was assigned to assist the volunteer with the count. The volunteer offered the 
accountant a “cut” of the cash in exchange for her silence about the theft.
Strong internal controls, which depend on IT for their effectiveness, consist of 
the following:
• Segregation of duties tops the list of best practices in control procedures. 
When handling a company’s assets, the work of managers and employees 
needs to be subject to approval or authorization. For example, any attempt 
to issue a check to a vendor not in the database of approved vendors will be 
prevented by the accounting information system.
• Job rotation. More than one person should be familiar with each transaction 
cycle in the business wherever possible. Rotation of jobs helps prevent over-
reliance on a single individual—and is a way to expose fraudulent activities.
No internal control systems, for example, controls that would 
prevent checks being written to bogus vendors or employ-
ees, were implemented. 
The classic red flags, or fraud indicators—lavish vaca-
tions, jewelry, and cars that she could not afford—were evi-
dent, but ignored by the owners/managers. The bookkeeper 
was a “serial fraudster,” having defrauded at least two prior 
employers: a religious organization and a nonprofit where 
she had worked as a volunteer.
The defrauded medical practice decided to keep the 
incident quiet, so it did not take legal action against the 
bookkeeper. That turned out to be a mistake because the 
bookkeeper used that situation to her advantage. She filed 
a wrongful termination lawsuit. For several reasons, includ-
ing not being able to collect evidence (lax internal controls 
enabled the bookkeeper to destroy evidence), the practice 
settled the lawsuit by paying her over $5,000. In effect, the 
fraudster had turned to extortion, knowing that the prac-
tice was unprepared to fight back. Inarguably, she must be 
defrauding her current employer.
Questions
1. How was the fraud detected? 
2. How long had it been going on? 
3. What were the red flags that suggested the bookkeeper 
was living beyond her means?
4. What mistakes were made in the handling of the fraud? 
5. In your opinion, did the dental practice have an ethical 
responsibility to prosecute the fraudster?

9.4     Accounting, Finance, and Regulatory Systems     321  
• Oversight. Management—whether a single owner or a team of individuals—
must monitor what is actually happening in the business. Auditing informa-
tion systems are part of a strong oversight function. Unannounced periodic 
walk-throughs of a process or review of how things are really being done can 
reveal existing or potential problem areas.
• Safeguarding of assets is essential to a fraud prevention program. Access to 
networks, financial systems, and databases must be controlled with strong 
passwords and other security measures. Similarly, bank checks, petty cash 
funds, and company credit cards need to be locked up when not in use. 
• IT policies. Understand your information system. Heavy reliance on IT 
staff can open up opportunities for fraud. Establish a computer use policy 
and educate employees on the importance of securing information. Strictly 
enforce the use of separate logins and keep passwords confidential. 
AUDITING 
INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS
Fraud can be easy to commit and hard to detect. Just ask any auditor. The problem 
is worse in government and nonprofit entities that have inadequate accounting and 
internal control systems. The problem is so bad at the federal level that auditors 
have been unable to express an opinion on the fairness of the consolidated finan-
cial statements of the United States. For example, space agency NASA had been 
unable to explain $565 billion in year-end adjustments to its books. It could be bad 
accounting, fraud, waste, or abuse. Without adequate records, no one really knows. 
This amount is astounding, especially when one considers that the combined cost 
of fraud at Enron and WorldCom was less than $100 billion in shareholder equity.
Because the physical possession of stolen property is no longer required and it is 
just as easy to program a computer to misdirect $100,000 as it is $1,000, the size and 
number of frauds have increased tremendously. See IT at Work 9.6, which describes 
a real case, but one that occurs nonetheless throughout all types of organizations.
Chris was a compulsive gambler, and she hid it well. Her 
problem began innocently at work when one day a casino 
website popped up on her computer as she surfed the 
Internet during lunch. She placed a few bets using the free 
credits offered by the site to entice first-time players. She 
won, and that gave her a thrilling feeling, she would later 
explain to fraud investigators.
Two years later, as the payroll manager of a medium-
sized manufacturing firm, Chris had defrauded her employer 
of over $750,000. Why did she do it? To pay off her gam-
bling losses that were costing her an average of $7,000 a 
week. How did she do it? She took advantage of the lack of 
controls in her company’s payroll and accounting information 
systems and controls.
Chris’s Employment History and Deception
Chris had worked at the company for a decade. Her perfor-
mance reviews described her as hardworking, reliable, and 
loyal, but did not mention she felt underpaid. Chris was bit-
ter, thinking her employer did not treat her fairly. When her 
gambling began to spiral out of control, she turned to fraud. 
“As far as I was concerned, they owed me,” she told the 
forensic accountants.
The company’s HR manager and comptroller were 
supposed to review Chris’s work. But, the HR manager 
focused on providing her with the correct data for employ-
ees’ wages and benefits. The comptroller appeared not to 
have exercised control over payroll processing, which Chris 
knew. 
Chris created two phony employees on the company’s 
hourly payroll system as a new and separate cost center. As 
she processed and received the records sent to and from an 
external payroll provider (EPP) without effective oversight, 
she was able to control the scheme without detection. The 
phantom employees’ checks were drawn up manually by EPP, 
sent to Chris, and deposited into an account she maintained 
IT at Work 9 .6
Lax Accounting Controls Invite Fraud

322  Chapter 9     Effective and Efficient Business Functions
in a bank near her home. Near year-end, she also had EPP 
make adjustments to the payroll register to eliminate the 
amounts paid to the phony employees. When she went on 
vacation, she deactivated the two phony names from the 
payroll. 
Fraud Scheme Based on Lack of Oversight
Chris started paying herself for unauthorized overtime. This 
plan proved to be a great success—she paid herself for 1,500 
hours overtime over two years as opposed to the actual 
50 she did work. Chris falsified records and increased the 
size of her theft until the HR manager finally noticed. When 
confronted with the evidence, she confessed that she had 
gambled away the money and could not repay it.
Questions
1. What role did trust play in Chris’s ability to commit fraud 
for so long (i.e., the employer’s trust in Chris)? 
2. What role did weak accounting ISs play in her ability to 
commit fraud?
3.  In your opinion, if Chris knew that strong accounting ISs 
were in place would that have deterred her from trying 
to steal from her employer?
FINANCIAL PLANNING 
AND BUDGETING 
The management of financial assets is a major task in financial planning and bud-
geting. Financial planning, like any other functional planning, is tied to the overall 
organizational planning and to other functional areas. It is divided into short-, 
medium-, and long-term horizons, much like activities planning. 
Knowing the availability and cost of money is a key ingredient for successful 
financial planning. Especially important is projecting cash flows, which tells organi-
zations what funds they need and when, and how they will acquire them. In today’s 
tough economic conditions with tight credit and limited availability of funds, this 
function has become critical to most companies’ survival. 
Inaccurate cash flow projection is the #1 reason why many small businesses go 
bankrupt. The inability to access credit led to the bankruptcy of investment bank 
Lehman Brothers in September 2008. 
Budgeting
The best-known part of financial planning is the annual budget, which allocates the 
financial resources of an organization among participants, activities, and projects. 
The budget is the financial expression of the enterprise’s plans. Management allo-
cates resources in the way that best supports the mission. IT enables the introduc-
tion of financial logic and efficiency into the budgeting process. Several software 
packages, many of which are Web-based, are available to support budget prepara-
tion and control. 
Capital budgeting is the process of analyzing and selecting investments with the 
highest ROI for the company. The process may include comparing alternative invest-
ments; for example, evaluating private cloud vs. public cloud computing options. 
The major benefits of using budgeting software are that it can reduce the time 
and effort involved in the budget process, explore and analyze the implications of 
organizational and environmental changes, facilitate the integration of corporate 
strategic objectives with operational plans, make planning an ongoing continuous 
process, and automatically monitor exceptions for patterns and trends.
Forecasting
As you read, a major reason organizations fail is their inability to forecast and/or 
secure sufficient cash flow. Underestimated expenses, overspending, financial 
mismanagement, and fraud can lead to disaster. Good planning is necessary, but 
not sufficient, and must be supplemented by skillful control. Control activities in 
organizations take many forms, including control and auditing of the information 
systems themselves. Information systems play an extremely important role in sup-
porting organizational control, as we show throughout the text. Specific forms of 
financial control are discussed in the next section.

9.5     Human Resource Systems, Compliance, and Ethics     323  
Financial Ratio Analysis
A major task of the accounting/finance department is to watch the financial health 
of the company by monitoring and assessing a set of financial ratios. These ratios 
are also used by external parties when they decide whether to invest in an organiza-
tion, extend credit, or buy it. 
The collection of data for ratio analysis is done by the TPS, and computation of 
the ratios completed through financial analysis models. Interpretation of ratios and 
the ability to forecast their future behavior require expertise, which is supported by 
DSSs (decision support systems).
Profitability Analysis and Cost Control
Companies are concerned with the profitability of individual products or ser-
vices, product lines, divisions, or the financial health of the entire organization. 
Profitability analysis DSS software allows accurate computation of profitability and 
allocation of overhead costs. One way to control cost is by properly estimating it. 
This is done by using special software. For example, Oracle Hyperion Profitability 
and Cost Management software is a performance management app that provides 
insights into costs and profitability. This app helps managers evaluate business 
performance by discovering the drivers of cost and profitability and improving 
resource alignment. Sophisticated business rules are stored in one place, enabling 
analyses and strategies to be shared easily across an enterprise.
Questions
1. What is eXtensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL)? 
2. Why does the SEC mandate data disclosure, whereby data items are 
tagged to make them easily searchable?
3. What is insider fraud? What are some other terms for insider fraud?
4. What is fraud risk management?
5. What four factors increase the risk of fraud? 
6. Explain how accounting ISs can help deter fraud.
7. Defi ne capital budgeting. 
8. What is the purpose of auditing?
Companies cannot simply hire a great workforce. They have to find, recruit, moti-
vate, and train employees to succeed in their workplace. Retaining high-performance 
people requires monitoring how people feel about the workplace, their compensa-
tion, value to the company, and chances for advancement—and maintaining work-
place health and safety.
HR is a field that deals with employment policies, procedures, communications, 
and compliance requirements. Effective HR compliance programs are a necessity 
for all organizations in today’s legal environment. HR needs to monitor workplace 
and employment practices to ensure compliance with the Fair Labor Standards Act 
(FLSA), Occupational Health & Safety Agencies (OSHA), and the antidiscrimina-
tion and sexual harassment laws. Seven other employment laws to protect against 
discrimination are listed in Table 9.3.
9.5  Human Resource Systems, Compliance, and Ethics

324  Chapter 9     Effective and Efficient Business Functions
TABLE 9.3 
 HR Monitors Compliance with Antidiscrimination Employment Laws 
Title VII of the Civil Rights 
Prohibits discrimination on the basis of race,
Act of 1964  
 color, religion, national origin, and sex. It also 
prohibits sex discrimination on the basis of 
pregnancy and sexual harassment.
Civil Rights Act of 1966 
 Prohibits discrimination based on race or 
ethnic origin.
Equal Pay Act of 1963 
 Prohibits employers from paying different 
wages to men and women who perform 
essentially the same work under similar 
working conditions.
Bankruptcy Act 
 Prohibits discrimination against anyone who 
has declared bankruptcy.
Americans with Disabilities Act 
 Prohibits discrimination against persons with 
disabilities.
Equal Employment Opportunity Act 
 Prohibits discrimination against minorities 
based on poor credit ratings.
Age Discrimination in Employment Act 
Prohibits discrimination against individuals 
(ADEA)  
who are age 40 or above.
Compliance Is Good Business
While carrying out day-to-day operations or trying to 
hit targets, managers may lose sight of the big picture. 
A narrow focus can lead to serious compliance and 
regulatory violations, which can do permanent damage 
to the brand and expose managers to criminal charges. 
Crossing the line is a crime. 
According to the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) 
Federal Prosecution of Corporations (1999):
Corporations are “legal persons,” capable of suing 
and being sued, and capable of committing crimes. 
Under the doctrine of respondeat superior, a corpo-
ration may be held criminally liable for the illegal 
acts of its employees, directors, officers, and agents. 
In all cases involving wrongdoing by corporate 
agents, prosecutors should consider the corporation, 
as well as the responsible individuals, as potential 
criminal targets.
Source: justice.gov. 
CAREER INSIGHT 9 . 1
HR INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS
Effective human resource information systems (HRISs) reduce the workload of 
the HR department. PeopleSoft Human Capital Management, which is one of the 
market-leading HRISs, provides a global foundation for HR data and improved 
business processes. 

9.5     Human Resource Systems, Compliance, and Ethics     325  
HRISs have been moved to intranets and clouds—wherein HR apps are leased 
in SaaS arrangements. Using intranets, HR apps have shifted many routine tasks to 
employees who log in to manage their benefits, deductions, direct deposits, health 
care, and the like. When employees manage their own HR services, HR profes-
sionals can focus on legal and compliance responsibilities, employee development, 
talent management, hiring, and succession planning. 
Benefits of SaaS for HR
Three real-world examples illustrate the benefits of tying SaaS to global HR trans-
formation efforts:
• A global medical device manufacturer needed to create an independent HR 
system as it divested from its parent company. Cloud computing was at the 
core of its new global HR delivery model, which reduced the demand on 
internal business and IT resources. The company was able to establish fully 
independent HR operations within 10 months.
• A national nonprofit foundation with a fast-growing employee population 
wanted to improve the effectiveness of HR operations. The organization 
selected a cloud-based solution, which dramatically improved time to value 
without overstretching internal IT resources. Because little front-end invest-
ment was required, the foundation hit its budget target.
• A global entertainment company needed a learning management system that 
could deliver content varying from instructor-based training to 30-second 
video how-to snippets. It chose to deploy a new learning management system 
in the cloud. With this approach, it quickly got the new system up and running.
Figure 9.16 illustrates how IT facilitates the work of the HR department. The 
figure summarizes the role HR plays in acquiring and developing talented people 
in organizations.
Recruitment 
Recruitment is the process of finding potential employees with the skills and talent 
needed by the company, testing them, and deciding which ones to hire. Most com-
panies are flooded with applicants, but might still have difficulty finding the right 
people. LinkedIn is a primary social media site for recruitment and headhunters. 
Figure 9.16 HR management 
activities.
Assessing
Measure performance,
evaluate, assess impact
Recruiting
Attract, select,
match, advertise
Developing Human
Resources
Train, create teams;
improve skills
Deploying
Assign the right people
to jobs, schedule
Retaining
Retain people,
motivate, compensate,
engage, and satisfy
Planning
Labor needs, skills,
sources, strategy
Planning
Labor needs, skills,
sources, strategy

326  Chapter 9     Effective and Efficient Business Functions
MANAGEMENT 
AND EMPLOYEE 
DEVELOPMENT
HR PLANNING, 
CONTROL, AND 
MANAGEMENT 
Once recruited, employees become part of the corporate HR talent pool, which 
needs to be maintained and developed. Several activities supported by IT include 
the following.
Performance Evaluation
Employees are evaluated periodically by their immediate supervisors. Peers or sub-
ordinates may also evaluate others. Evaluations are usually recorded on paper or 
electronic forms. Using such information manually is a tedious and error-prone job. 
Once digitized, evaluations can be used to support many decisions, ranging from 
rewards to transfers to layoffs. For example, Cisco Systems is known for developing 
an IT-based human capital strategy. Many universities evaluate professors online. 
The evaluation form appears on the screen, and the students fill it in. Results can 
be tabulated in minutes. Corporate managers can analyze employees’ performances 
with the help of intelligent systems, which provide systematic interpretation of per-
formance over time. Several vendors provide software for performance evaluation, 
such as HalogenSoftware.com and Capterra.com.
Training and Human Resources Development
Employee training and retraining are mportant activities of the human resources 
department. Major issues are planning of classes and tailoring specific training 
programs to meet the needs of the organization and employees. Sophisticated 
HR departments build a career development plan for each employee. IT can sup-
port the planning, monitoring, and control of these activities by using workflow 
applications.
In some industries, labor negotiation is an important aspect of HR planning and it 
may be facilitated by IT. For most companies, administering employee benefits is 
also a significant part of the human resources function. Here are several examples 
of how IT can help.
Personnel Planning and HR Strategies
The HR department forecasts requirements for people and skills. In some geo-
graphical areas and for overseas assignments, it may be difficult to find particular 
types of employees. In such cases, the HR department plans how to locate sufficient 
human resources or develop them from within.
Benefits Administration
Employees’ contributions to their organizations are rewarded by salary/wage, 
bonuses, and other benefits. Benefits include those for health and dental care as 
well as contributions for pensions. Managing the benefits system can be a com-
plex task, due to its many components and the tendency of organizations to allow 
employees to choose and trade off benefits. In large companies, using computers 
for self-benefits selection can save a tremendous amount of labor and time for 
HR staff.
Providing flexibility in selecting benefits is viewed as a competitive advantage 
in large organizations. It can be successfully implemented when supported by 
computers. Some companies have automated benefits enrollments. Employees can 
self-register for specific benefits using the corporate portal or voice technology. 
Employees self-select desired benefits from a menu. Payroll pay cards are now in 

Key Terms     327  
use in numerous companies, such as Payless Shoes, which has 30,000 employees 
in 5,000 stores. The system specifies the value of each benefit and the available 
benefits balance of each employee. Some companies use intelligent agents to assist 
employees and monitor their actions.
Employee Relationship Management
In their effort to better manage employees, companies are developing human capi-
tal management, facilitated by the Web, to streamline the HR process. These Web 
applications are more commonly referred to as employee relationship management. 
For example, self-services such as tracking personal information and online training 
are very popular in ERM. Improved relationships with employees result in better 
retention and higher productivity.
Ethical Challenges and Considerations
HRIS apps raise ethical and legal challenges. For example, training activities that 
are part of HRM may involve ethical issues in recruiting and selecting employees 
and in evaluating performance. Likewise, TPS data processing and storage deal 
with private information about people, their performance, and so forth. Care 
should be taken to protect this information and the privacy of employees and 
customers.
The federal law related to workplace substance abuse, the Drug-Free Workplace 
Act of 1990, requires employers with federal government contracts or grants to 
ensure a drug-free workplace by documenting and certifying that they have taken 
a number of steps. Dealing with alcoholism and drugs at work entails legal risks 
because employees have sued for invasion of privacy, wrongful discharge, defama-
tion, and illegal searches. Employment laws make securing HR information neces-
sary for the protection of employees and the organization.
Questions
1. What are the key HR functions? 
2. What are the benefi ts of moving HRISs to intranets or the cloud?
3. Why have companies implemented SaaS HR?
4. What concerns have deterred companies from implementing SaaS HR?
5. How can companies reduce the cost of recruiting qualifi ed employees? 
6. Describe IT support for HR planning and control.
7. What are ethical issues related to HRM apps? 
Key Terms
auditing
capital budgeting
computer-integrated 
manufacturing (CIM) 
economic order quantity 
(EOQ)
eXtensible Business 
Reporting Language 
(XBRL)
Financial Accounting 
Standards Board 
(FASB)
fi nancial 
misrepresentation
fraud risk management
inbound logistics
income statement
insider fraud
inventory control systems
just-in-time (JIT) 
manufacturing quality 
control (QC) systems
mission
moral hazard
online transaction 
processing (OLTP) 
outbound logistics
red fl ag
safety stock
standard operating 
procedures (SOPs)
strategic plan
total quality management 
(TQM)
transparency

328  Chapter 9     Effective and Efficient Business Functions
Assuring Your Learning
 1. Discuss the need for sharing data among functional 
areas.
 2. How does waste increase costs? Give three 
examples.
 3. What is the value of lean manufacturing?
 4. What is the objective of EOQ?
 5. What are the risks of JIT?
 6. Explain the value of being able to respond to hot data.
 7. Push-through ads use data about a person to deter-
mine whether the ad should appear. What market-
ing opportunities does this capability create?
 8. Explain why the SEC requires that fi lers use XBRL.
 9. How can internal controls help to prevent fraud?
 10. How do companies allow themselves to become 
targets for insider fraud?
 11. What are the benefi ts of prosecuting an employee 
who has committed fraud against the company?
 12.  Why might a company not want to prosecute a 
fraudster?
 13.  Explain moral hazard. Give a fraud-related 
example.
 14.  Fraudsters typically spend the money they steal 
on luxury items and vacations. Explain why these 
items are red fl ags of fraud.
 15.  What are three examples of strong internal 
controls?
 16. Discuss how IT facilitates the capital budgeting 
process.
 17.  Discuss the role IT plays in auditing.
 18.  Explain the role and benefi ts of SaaS in HR man-
agement.
 19.  How does digital technology improve the recruit-
ment process?
DISCUSS: Critical Thinking Questions
1. Visit the Oracle website at www.oracle.com.
a. Search for “Peoplesoft.” 
b. Select Human Capital Management and review 
the HR applications. Describe three benefi ts of 
PeopleSoft Human Capital Management. 
c. Return to the Peoplesoft site. Select Financial 
Management. Describe how PeopleSoft Financial 
Management reduces costs. 
2. Search for a video or demo that explains EOQ. 
Explain the formula. 
3. Finding a job on the Internet is challenging; there are 
almost too many places to look. Visit two recruiting 
sites, for example, careerbuilder.com and LinkedIn.com. 
What benefi ts do these sites provide to you as a job 
seeker?
4. Examine the capabilities of two fi nancial software 
packages: Prepare a table that clearly compares and 
contrasts their capabilities.
5. Review Salesforce.com. What functional support 
does the software provide?
EXPLORE: Online and Interactive Exercises 
6. Research and analyze a major corporate fraud. 
a.  Identify the company and explain when and 
how the fraud occurred, who was involved, and 
damages.
b. How was the fraud detected?
c. Describe any red fl ags associated with the fraud.
d. Visit SAS.com and search “SAS fraud manage-
ment.” Explain how SAS fraud management 
could have helped prevent the fraud.
ANALYZE & DECIDE: Apply IT Concepts to Business Decisions

CASE 9.2     Business Case     329  
CASE 9.2
Business Case: HSBC Combats Fraud in Split-second Decisions 
With billions of dollars, corporate reputations, customer 
loyalty, and criminal penalties for noncompliance at stake, 
fi nancial fi rms must outsmart fraudsters. Detecting and pre-
venting fraudulent transactions across many lines of business 
(checking, savings, credit cards, loans, etc.) and online chan-
nels require comprehensive real time data analytics to assess 
and score transactions. That is, each transaction has to be 
analyzed within a split second to calculate the probability 
that it is fraudulent or legitimate.
 
A big part of a bank’s relationship with customers is 
giving them confi dence that they are protected against fraud, 
and balancing that protection with their need to have access 
to your services.
HSCB Overview
HSBC is a commercial bank known by many as the “world’s 
local bank.” HSBC is a United Kingdom–based company 
that provides a wide range of banking and related fi nancial 
services. The bank reported a pre-tax profi t of $6.8 billion 
in the fi rst quarter of 2014 (1Q 2014). It has 6,300 offi ces in 
75 countries and over 54 million customers. 
Fighting Fraudulent Transactions 
HSBC was able to reduce the incidence of fraud across tens 
of millions of debit and credit card accounts. The bank imple-
mented the latest Fraud Management software from SAS. The 
software includes an application programming interface (API) 
and a real time transaction scoring system based on advanced 
data analytics. Using the Fraud Management app, HSBC has 
reduced its losses from fraudulent transactions worldwide and 
its exposure to increasingly aggressive threats. The antifraud 
solution is live in the United States, Europe, and Asia, where it 
protects 100 percent of credit card transactions in real time. 
Scenario
Consider this scenario. A credit card transaction request 
comes in for the purchase of $6,000 in home appliances. The 
bank has a moment to decide to approve the transaction, or 
reject it as potentially fraudulent. Two outcomes are possible:
• 
Legitimate purchase rejected: When a legitimate pur-
chase is rejected, the customer might pay with another 
card. The bank loses the fee income from the purchase 
and the interest fee. Risk of account churn increases.
• 
Fraudulent purchase accepted: When a fraudulent pur-
chase is accepted, a legitimate customer becomes a victim 
of a crime. The bank incurs the $6,000 loss, the cost of the 
fraud investigation, potential regulatory scrutiny, and bad 
publicity. Chances of recovering any losses are almost zero. 
With trillions of dollars in assets, HSBC Holdings plc is a prime 
target for fraud. Fighting all forms of fraud—unauthorized 
use of cards for payment and online transactions, and even 
customer fraud—has risen to the top of the corporate 
agenda. Fraud losses are operating costs that damage 
the bottom line. 
 
As required by regulations, HSBC has implemented poli-
cies to segregate duties, create dual controls, and establish 
strong audit trails to detect anomalies. In addition, the bank 
has antifraud technology, which includes SAS Fraud Manage-
ment, to monitor and score the millions of daily transactions. 
It is the cornerstone of these efforts.
Fraud Management
In 2007 HSBC’s fi rst SAS implementation went live in the 
United States, which was their largest portfolio with 30 million 
cards issued there. All transactions were scored in real time. 
Detection rates on debit ATM transactions have been very 
effective. HSBC has updated its Fraud Management solution 
multiple times as newer technology and threats emerged.
 
Of course, fi nancial fraud morphs to avoid new detec-
tion methods so antifraud models have a very short shelf 
life. Once HSBC closes up one loophole, thieves devise new 
threats to exploit other potential vulnerabilities. To counter-
act threats, fraud-monitoring algorithms and scoring models 
require constant refreshing. 
Sources: BusinessWire (2011), SAS.com (2014), Reuters (2014), YouTube 
video “HSBC Relies on SAS for Comprehensive Fraud Detection.” 
Questions
1. Analyze the reasons to invest millions of dollars to detect 
and prevent fraudulent transactions. In your evaluation, 
do a cost–benefi t analysis to show why the investment 
cost is worthwhile.
2. Review the two outcomes of the fraud scenario. Assess 
the business implications of each of the following two 
goals. Explain why these goals are confl icting.
a. To minimize rejecting legitimate purchases by autho-
rized customers
b. To minimize the risk of making customers victims of 
fraud
3. The Fraud Management solution is based on a scoring 
model. For example, assume the scores range from 1 to 
10, with 10 being the highest probability that the transac-
tion is fraudulent. What cutoff score would you use to 
decide to approve a purchase? What cutoff score would 
you use to decide not to approve a purchase? If those 
cutoff scores are not the same, how do you suggest 
those falling between scores be treated? 
4. Why are approval decisions made in a split second? Would 
customers tolerate a brief delay in the approval process if 
it reduced their risk of identity theft? Explain your answer.
5. Research ATM or other banking transaction fraud. How 
has a fi nancial fi rm been defrauded or harmed? 

330  Chapter 9     Effective and Efficient Business Functions
Video Case: United Rentals Optimizes Its Workforce 
with Human Capital Management
Visit Oracle.com and search “United Rentals Optimizes 
Workforce.” Click on the video link to “United Rentals 
Optimizes Its Workforce with Oracle HCM.” Watch the video. 
Describe the key benefi ts of its HR software. Visit Forbes.com 
and search for the article “10 Trends Driving the Mandate for 
Modern HCM” posted on February 7, 2014. 
Questions
1. Typically, the importance of the HR function is over-
looked, or at least overshadowed by accounting and 
fi nance, which manage cash and other fi nancial assets. 
In your opinion, is HCM software as important as 
accounting software? Explain your answer. 
2. Briefl y describe three of the key trends driving HCM and 
how they relate to the HR software benefi ts at United 
Rentals.
CASE 9.3
Accenture.com. “Ducati Motor Holding S.p.A: SAP Dealer 
Communication System.” 2014. 
Apple.com. “Ducati.” 2014. 
BusinessWire. “SAS Fraud Management Speeds Real time 
Processing, Boosts Detection and Prevention.” June 15, 2011. 
Ducati Motor Holding S.p.A. 2014. http://www.ducatiusa.com/
index.do
fasb.org. “US GAAP Financial Reporting Taxonomy.” 2012. 
Johnson, P., L. Volonino, & I. Redpath. “Fraud Response 
and Litigation-Readiness Strategies for Small and Medium 
Businesses: A Handbook on How to Prepare for Litigation, 
Prosecution & Loss Recovery in Response to Insider Fraud.” 
IFP.org, November 2011.
Justice.com, 2014.
Oracle.com. 2014.
Reuters. “HSBC Holdings plc Company Profi le.” 2014. http://
www.reuters.com
Salesforce.com. 2014.
SAP.com. 2014.
SAS.com. “Reduce Losses from Fraudulent Transactions.” 
http://www.sas.com 
sec.gov. 2014
Wilson, D. “Manufacturing Technology: Hard Work.” The Engi-
neer 33, April 25, 2011.
xbrl.sec.gov. 2014.
References

Chapter Snapshot
Many enterprises in business for over 25 years have 
mission-critical information systems that run on main-
frame computers and software implemented in the 
1980s or 1990s. These legacy systems run core business 
processes that may handle tens of millions of transac-
tions. Disadvantages of a legacy core are that they are 
1. Explain the potential executive, managerial, and 
operational support of enterprise systems, their success 
factors, and reasons for failure.
2. Identify the leading enterprise social platforms and their 
capabilities. 
3. Describe the functions of enterprise resource planning 
(ERP) systems, implementation risks, and how ERP 
investments are justified.
4. Explain the planning and forecasting, sourcing and 
purchasing, and distribution support provided by supply 
chain management (SCM) systems. 
5. Describe customer relationship management (CRM) 
systems and their role in customer acquisition, retention, 
and customer lifetime value.
Learning Outcomes
331
Chapter Snapshot
Case 10.1 Opening Case: Strategic Technology 
Trend—3D Printing
10.1 Enterprise Systems
10.2  Enterprise Social Platforms
10.3  Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
10.4  Supply Chain Management Systems
10.5  Customer Relationship Management 
Systems
Key Terms
Assuring Your Learning
• Discuss: Critical Thinking Questions
• Explore: Online and Interactive Exercises
•  Analyze & Decide: Apply IT Concepts 
to Business Decisions
Case 10.2 Business Case: Avon’s Failed SAP 
Implementation: Enterprise System Gone Wrong
Case 10.3 Video Case: Procter & Gamble: 
Creating Conversations in the Cloud with 4.8 Billion 
Consumers
References
Strategic Technology 
and Enterprise 
Systems
10
Chapter

difficult and expensive to maintain, update, and interface 
securely with leading-edge business apps. When compa-
nies decide to update, they invest in enterprise systems.  
Enterprise systems—ERP, SCM, and CSM—are inte-
grated by their connection to central data repositories 
that enable them to synch and share the latest data, as 
illustrated in Figure 10.1. 
 
In Chapter 10, you will learn the benefits, limitations, 
and implementation risks of cross-functional enterprise 
systems and business apps that support business strat-
egy, managers, and employees—and relationships with 
suppliers and customers. 
332
CASE 10.1 OPENING CASE
Strategic Technology Trend—3D Printing
According to global investment
management firm Goldman Sachs:
3D printing is 1 of 8 technologies that
are going to creatively destroy how we
do business.
IT research firm Gartner predicted:
3D printing of nonliving medical devices
such as prosthetic limbs, combined with
fast population growth and insufficient
health care in emerging markets, is likely
to cause an explosion in demand for the
technology.
Global research firm McKinsey
forecasted:
3D printing is 1 of 12 disruptive
technologies that could deliver major
economic impact to the global economy
by 2025.
Figure 10.2 Strong forecasts 
for 3D printing made 
by leading research and 
investment management 
fi rms—Goldman Sachs, 
Gartner, and McKinsey.
Figure 10.1 Integration 
of enterprise systems is 
achieved via access to 
shared data.
3D PRINTING, ADDITIVE 
MANUFACTURING 
With 3D printing, computer-created digital models are used to create real-world 
objects. 3D printing, which is also called additive manufacturing, has produced toys, 
jewelry, food, spare parts, and more. 
© vaeenma/iStockphoto 

CASE 10.1     Opening Case     333  
For several decades, 3D printing has been used by manufacturers to reduce 
research and development (R&D) costs. 3D printing builds products layer by layer, 
a process that has less overhead costs and allows for more complex designs. Using 
this technology, engineers rapidly created a physical prototype of a new design. 
The prototype was used to test the quality of the design and to check for defects. 
Until recently, 3D printers were expensive. Prices dropped significantly from more 
than $100,000 to models that cost a few hundred dollars, as shown in Figure 10.3. 
Figure 10.4 shows Urbee, the first 3D-printed car. Not only is Urbee designed to 
be highly energy-efficient, the manufacturing processes to build it are clean and 
energy-efficient. 
TABLE 10.1 
Overview of 3D Printing 
What is 3D printing?  
3D printing, also known as additive 
How does it work?  
 manufacturing, builds objects layer by layer. 
Traditional manufacturing typically uses a 
subtractive process, whereby materials are cut, 
ground, or molded to create an object.
What enterprise systems are 
The potential for 3D printing to revolutionize 
impacted by 3D printing?  
 ERP (enterprise resource planning) and SCM 
(supply chain management) means business 
and IT professionals must develop a framework 
for evaluating its impact.
Where is 3D print technology  3D technology is being used by consumer-
used?  
 product designers, automotive manufacturing 
engineers, and dental labs for building proto-
types, replacement parts, and customized 
products on demand. Retailers and manufacturers 
are evaluating applications of 3D printing.
What factors are limiting 
3D printing has not yet reached the point 
widespread use?  
 where its cost, speed, and scalability can 
compete with traditional manufacturing.
Figure 10.3 3D printers 
displayed at the Robot and 
Makers Milano Show.
© Stefano Tinti/Shutterstock 

334  Chapter 10     Strategic Technology and Enterprise Systems
Figure 10.4 Urbee is the 
world’s fi rst 3D-printed car. 
The entire car body was 
3D-printed using Stratasys 
printers. Urbee is designed 
to be highly energy-effi cient, 
including manufacturing 
processes.
CREATIVE 
DESTRUCTION: 3D 
PRINTING’S IMPACT ON 
MANUFACTURING AND 
RETAIL
Compared to traditional manufacturing and prototyping methods, 3D printing offers 
high levels of customization, reduced costs for complex designs, and lower overhead 
costs for short-run parts and products. A creative destroyer is how Goldman Sachs 
describes 3D printing technology because its ability to build cheaper, better, and 
more customizable products will, to some extent, destroy traditional manufactur-
ing methods. Capabilities of 3D printing hardware are expanding and costs have 
dropped dramatically. They will be able to build larger components with greater 
precision or resolution at higher speeds and lower costs. Forecasts indicate that 3D 
printing is becoming a viable alternative to traditional manufacturing processes in a 
growing number of applications.
According to McKinsey, 3D printing will have an impact on consumer sectors 
that place a premium on highly customizable products, for example, footwear, toys, 
and jewelry. McKinsey estimates that by 2025 sales of 3D-printed products in these 
three industries alone may reach $550 billion per year.
The following examples show the potential of 3D printing.
Hardware Stores
When customers shop for replacement parts, the store could use a 3D printer with 
all the pattern specifications to print onsite and on-demand. Hardware stores could 
slash their inventory and store sizes, and improve customer service.
Defense
Troops in the field and their equipment require regular maintenance. Having a 3D 
printer at small supply post in the field rather than at a larger base far away alters the 
ability to complete maintenance and repair, and provide a supply chain in combat.
Health Care
Hospitals use expensive equipment, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
scanners. Downtime spent waiting for onsite repair is expensive. A technician 
who was guided remotely by the manufacturer could diagnose and fix the problem 
immediately by 3D-printing the MRI scanner replacement part onsite.
Hip surgery done with a 3D-printed titanium implant and bone stem cell 
graft has been conducted in the U.K. The hip part was designed using the patient’s 
CT scan, thereby matching the patient’s exact specifications and measurements. 
Even more radical is the potential for complex and controversial 3D bioprinting 
Creative destroyer is a 
term coined by Joseph 
Schumpeter in 1942 to warn 
that innovation can disrupt 
industries in capitalistic soci-
eties; and force established 
companies and business 
models to either adapt or 
fail. 
Supply chain starts with the 
acquisition of raw materials 
or the procurement (purchase) 
of products and proceeds 
through manufacture, 
transport, and delivery—and 
the disposal or recycling of 
products.
3D bioprinting is the medical 
application of 3D printing 
to produce living tissue and 
organs.
© Piero Cruciatti/Alamy 

CASE 10.1     Opening Case     335  
of human tissue and organs. Scientists are already 3D-printing tiny strips of organ 
tissue. Although printing whole human organs for surgical transplants is still years 
away, the technology is rapidly developing. The ethical arguments and challenges of 
bioprinting will be discussed in Chapter 14. 
Dental Work 
Stratasys Ltd., a leader in 3D printing and additive manufacturing solutions, intro-
duced the highest-precision wax 3D printers available to the dental industry in mid-
2014. The Stratasys CrownWorx and FrameWorx 3D Printers allow dental labs to 
create wax molds for crowns, bridges, and denture frameworks. 
Reproduction of Vintage Car Components
In 1969 Ferrari introduced one of its most masterful race cars—the 312P, shown in 
Figure 10.5. But parts for that vintage car do not exist. To rebuild an engine, a spe-
cial aluminum alloy was poured into a cast, which was created by 3D printing. The 
new engine block and engine rebuild were completed in record time. 3D printing 
is by far the most efficient method for reproducing components that are no longer 
available. Often, it is the only way to reproduce certain components quickly and at 
reasonable cost. 
Aerospace Manufacturing
GE is using additive manufacturing to make fuel nozzles for its next-generation 
Leap engines that will power the new Boeing 737 and Airbus A320 jets. The fuel 
nozzles will be 25 percent lighter and 5 times more durable. Since there are 20 nozzles 
in each engine, the weight savings for each aircraft are significant. 
Industrial Design
Large industrial group Siemens explains that 3D printing allows its designers to 
imagine shapes that would be impossible to create through older techniques. The use 
of additive manufacturing has radically speeded up prototyping of Siemens’s gas tur-
bine blades, from 20 weeks to 48 hours. Additive manufacturing has also cut the cost 
of tooling and materials. For example, a piece can have all of its holes incorporated 
into it with precision because it is built up from powder rather than being expen-
sively drilled afterward. Siemens hopes to cut the cost of some parts by 30 percent.
Figure 10.5 Parts to rebuild 
the Ferrari 312P have 
vanished, so the engine was 
rebuilt using 3D printing to 
create the engine’s cast form.
© BG Motorsports/Alamy 

336  Chapter 10     Strategic Technology and Enterprise Systems
Manufacturing On-Demand
The ability to manufacture replacement parts on-demand using 3D printers is 
expected to transform after-market services and restructure industries. Smaller 
facilities with 3D printers onsite could replace large regional warehouses. The 
supply of service parts might even be outsourced: Small fabricators located, for 
example, at airports, hospitals, or major manufacturing venues could make these 
parts for much of the equipment used onsite, with data supplied directly by the 
manufacturers.
Makeup 3D Printer
Harvard Business School graduate Grace Choi unveiled her Mink makeup 3D 
printer at the 2014 TechCrunch Disrupt conference. With Mink, users create lip-
stick, blush, eyeshadow, and other makeup in any color and print it. The printer 
uses the same substrates found in factory-made makeup, which means the printed 
cosmetics are the same quality as those sold by retailers. At its 2015 debut, the 
Mink 3D printer cost $200, making it affordable for the target 13 to 21 age demo-
graphic. How this will impact the multibillion dollar makeup industry remains to 
be seen.
3D PRINTING WITHIN 
AN ERP SYSTEM
The process of creating a product in traditional manufacturing is widely different 
from 3D printing. Most parts are built by removing layers of material (cutting, 
drilling, sanding, etc.), which results in the part’s final form. But with 3D printing, 
layers of materials are added to each other by applying heat or chemicals to create 
a finished product.
Manufacturers using 3D printing will need software in their ERP system that 
understands and manages the 3D process. Figure 10.6 presents a simplified view of 
the key role of ERP. For example, in order to combine specific materials or alloys, 
the 3D printing process may involve heat or chemical reactions in order to create 
something new. It will be more important than ever to maintain records of chemical 
components that each stock-keeping unit (SKU) or part is made of. Since the 
Figure 10.6 ERP systems act as the hub for managing inventory, order 
management, HR, manufacturing, and other enterprise systems. Any change to 
these systems impacts ERM.
stock-keeping unit (SKU) is 
a code number, typically a 
machine-readable bar code, 
assigned to a single item of 
inventory.
© designdepot_ltd/Shutterstock 

10.1     Enterprise Systems     337  
inventory of spare parts is much lower, the need for raw materials increases. ERP 
systems will need accurate forecasting models to determine how much raw materi-
als to hold and the availability of 3D printers. 
Just like any new technology that gains traction in business, 3D printers will 
impact more parts of the business. This technology will transform industries—some 
in unexpected ways. 
Sources: Compiled from Fine (2014), Bourne (2014), goldmansachs.com (2014), Gartner.com (2014), 
The Engineer (2014), Cole (2014), and Cohen et al. (2014). 
Questions
1. What do the leading research and investment fi rms forecast for 3D 
printing?
2. Why is 3D printing more appropriately called additive manufacturing?
3. Is 3D printing better suited for high or low volumes of production? 
Explain your answer.
4. In what situations is 3D printing most valuable? 
5. How would you benefi t from 3D printing?
6. How can 3D printing make some types of traditional manufacturing 
obsolete?
7. Do you consider 3D printing an important technology? Explain.
Enterprise systems refer to a category of information systems that run an enterprise’s 
operations and integrate core business processes. Enterprise systems link the enter-
prise with suppliers, business partners, and customers. Primary enterprise systems are: 
• Enterprise resource planning (ERP)
• Supply chain management (SCM)
• Customer relationship management (CRM)
The major enterprise systems are described in Table 10.2. Companies imple-
ment most or all of these systems.
For maximum benefit, these systems are integrated to share data. For 
example, the integration of ERP and SCM improves inventory management and 
supply chain performance; and by integrating CRM and KM, companies can 
capitalize on their data by calculating customer lifetime value (CLV). Another 
advantage of enterprise systems is that processes can be automated for consis-
tency and efficiency. 
10.1  Enterprise Systems
Core business processes 
include accounting, finance, 
sales, marketing, human 
resources, inventory, 
productions, and 
manufacturing. 
Customer lifetime value 
(CLV) is a formula for 
estimating the dollar value, 
or worth, of a long-term 
relationship with a customer.
A Value-added reseller (VAR) 
customizes or adds features 
to a vendor’s software or 
equipment and resells the 
enhanced product.
IMPLEMENTATION 
CHALLENGES OF 
ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS
Implementing an enterprise system is complex, time-consuming, and typically 
requires the help of a consulting firm, vendor, or value-added reseller (VAR). 
Integrating legacy systems with cloud-based applications is complex, as described 
in Tech Note 10.1. Much of the complexity is due to getting new apps or system 
modules to interface with existing or legacy systems that are several generations 
older. 
Interface means to connect 
to and exchange data with 
apps and systems. 

338  Chapter 10     Strategic Technology and Enterprise Systems
TECH NOTE 10.1 Data Transfers to Mainframes 
Enterprise systems require data transfers—often to mainframes. Designing enterprise-
level systems involves a variety of components that had been implemented on 
mainframes, midrange computers, networks, or cloud environments. In most large 
enterprises, mainframes are the workhorse systems that run the majority of business 
transactions. In contrast, customer interfaces through customer service; ERP, CRM, 
and SCM apps; websites; and B2B interactions are usually on distributed systems or 
in the cloud. Many times seemingly well-planned projects fail and require extensive 
reworking because integration issues had not been properly planned. 
 
Some enterprises choose to avoid the challenges of integration by creating a 
new system that replaces the full functionality of the old one. This option is the most 
costly, diffi cult, and risky. An advantage is that this option offers a longer-term solu-
tion that is agile to respond to changing business needs. Despite that potential pay-
off, complete replacement requires a large up-front investment for development, 
poses diffi culties in duplicating behavior of the legacy system, and increases the risk 
of complete software project failure.
TABLE 10.2 
Enterprise Systems and Their Functions 
Name 
Abbreviation 
Description
Enterprise 
ERP 
ERP is the software infrastructure that 
resource  
 
integrates an enterprise’s internal appli-
planning  
 
 cations, supports its external business 
processes, and links to its external business 
partners.
 
 
 ERP systems are commercial software 
packages that integrate business processes, 
including supply chains, manufacturing, 
fi nancial, human resources, budgeting, 
sales, and customer service. 
Supply chain 
SCM 
SCM software supports the steps in the 
management  
 
 supply chain—procurement, sourcing, 
manufacturing, storage, inventory 
control, scheduling, order fulfi llment, and 
distribution. 
 
 
 SCM improves decision making, 
forecasting, optimization, and analysis.
Customer 
CRM 
CRM systems help create a total view of 
relationship  
 
customers to maximize share-of-wallet 
management  
 
 and profi tability. CRM is also a business 
strategy to segment and manage 
customers to optimize customer lifetime 
value (CLV).
Enterprise systems are 
cross-functional and 
interorganizational systems 
that support the business 
strategy.
Legacy systems are older 
information systems that 
have been maintained over 
several decades because 
they fulfill critical needs. 

10.1     Enterprise Systems     339  
WHY COMPANIES 
INVEST IN ENTERPRISE 
SYSTEMS 
Companies tend to migrate to an enterprise solution when they need to consolidate 
their disparate systems, such as when limitations caused by their existing legacy 
systems interfere with performance or the ability to compete. IT at Work 10.1 is 
an example. Here are major reasons why companies replace parts of their legacy 
systems or supplement them with enterprise systems. It is important to realize that 
many companies do not have the resources to replace all their legacy systems.
• High maintenance costs. Maintaining and upgrading legacy systems are 
some of the most difficult challenges facing CIOs (chief information offi-
cers) and IT departments. 
• Inflexibility. Legacy architectures were not designed for flexibility. These 
huge systems cannot be easily redesigned to share data with newer systems, 
unlike modern architectures. 
• Integration obstacles. Legacy systems execute business processes that are 
hardwired by rigid, predefined process flows. Their hardwiring makes inte-
gration with other systems such as CRM and Web-based applications dif-
ficult and sometimes impossible. 
• Lack of staff. IT departments find it increasingly difficult to hire staff who 
are qualified to work on mainframes and applications written in languages 
no longer used by the latest technologies. 
• Cloud. The cloud has lowered up-front costs. Cloud-based enterprise sys-
tems can be a good fit for companies facing upgrades to their legacy ERP 
and other enterprise systems.
Organic Valley Family of Farms is the largest U.S. coopera-
tive (co-op) of organic farmers and one of the nation’s lead-
ing organic brands. The co-op represents over 1,300 family 
farms in 34 states and Canada. Its mission is to keep small 
and mid-sized farmers farming. Organic Valley produces 
over 200 organic foods, including organic milk, soy, cheese, 
butter, eggs, produce, juice, and meats, which are sold in 
supermarkets, natural foods stores, and food co-ops, and as 
ingredients for other organic food manufacturers nationwide. 
One of the biggest challenges for Organic Valley had been 
managing growth in the face of increasing competition from 
larger companies. 
Need to Consolidate Disparate Systems
Organic Valley needed to consolidate its disparate systems 
into one enterprise solution to improve operating efficien-
cies and maintain the high quality of its line of perishable 
food products. The company had been doing planning 
using spreadsheets; separately, it completed its financials, 
order management, and inventory on an enterprise system 
designed for discrete manufacturing. As operations expanded, 
it needed to make a major leap in business systems. 
Organic Valley also needed a solution with enough 
flexibility and versatility to manage the company’s dairy, 
produce, meat, and egg lines of business, all of which have 
different and unique requirements.
Use of a Consultant and Vendor
Organic Valley hired a consultant during the selection 
process to help identify the most important functions and 
features, such as shelf-life management and expiration date 
management. Based on these requirements, three possible 
vendors were identified. Organic Valley and its consultant 
agreed that the solutions offered by the vendor Infor best 
fit its business. 
Doing Business Better
The company now has one integrated system to support all 
business processes across all of its lines of business. With the 
Infor enterprise solution, Organic Valley is much more agile 
on the technical side, and this has given it the ability to sup-
port rapid business growth. The company projects savings of 
$2 million per year through improved supply chain planning 
and other operational efficiencies.
IT at Work 1 0 .1
Organic Valley Does Business Better with Enterprise System

340  Chapter 10     Strategic Technology and Enterprise Systems
Questions
1. Why did Organic Valley need an enterprise system?
2. What factors contributed to the successful implementa-
tion and outcomes? Explain their importance.
3. Enterprise systems are expensive. What factor helped 
justify the investment? 
4. Using spreadsheets for planning is rather common. Why 
do you think companies use stand-alone spreadsheets 
for planning? 
IMPLEMENTATION BEST 
PRACTICES
Implementing best practices involves changes in the management of processes, 
people, and existing systems. Three required changes are as follows:
1. Redesign of business processes. Processes need to be simplifi ed and redesigned 
so that they can be automated, either totally or partially. Tasks that are no longer 
necessary are removed from the processes. 
2. Changes in how people perform their jobs. Jobs and how they are performed 
will change to accommodate the new processes. Enterprise systems require re-
training users whose productivity will drop initially as they adjust to a new way 
of doing their jobs.
3. Integration of many types of information systems. Integrating information sys-
tems is necessary so that data can fl ow seamlessly among departments and busi-
ness partners. Automated data fl ows are essential to productivity improvements. 
A best practice is to examine the inefficiencies in existing processes to find ways to 
improve on or significantly simplify the process. For example, manual document-
intensive processes such as order entry and billing create major headaches for 
workers. These processes require users to manually review documents for approval, 
enter data from those documents into a back-office system, and then make deci-
sions. Automated order entry systems track customer orders from the time of initial 
order placement through the completion of those orders, and perform backorder 
processing, analysis, invoicing, and billing.
Common ways to overcome implementation complexity are to lease or license 
from vendors. The trend toward ERP SaaS (software as a service) continues to 
increase. In fact, the term ERP commonly refers to commercially available software 
systems. 
ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS 
INSIGHTS 
Here are three other insights related to enterprise systems to better understand the 
current state of enterprise systems and their potential.
1. One of the IT department’s most important roles is to provide and support ap-
plications that enable workers to access, use, and understand data. These appli-
cations need to be tightly aligned with well-defi ned and well-designed business 
processes—a standard that few enterprises are able to achieve. 
2. Customer loyalty helps drive profi ts, but only for customers who are profi table 
to the company. Many companies do not know how to recognize or encourage 
the kind of customer loyalty that is worth having. Using data about buying be-
haviors (e.g., amount spent per month; purchase of high-margin products; return 
activity; and demands for customer service) helps a company identify its loyal 
customers and which ones are profi table.
3. Companies worldwide spend billions of dollars in the design and implementa-
tion of enterprise systems. Huge investments are made in ERP systems from 
vendors such as SAP, Oracle JD Edwards, Sage ERP, EVO~ERP, Infor, and 
NetSuite to create an integrated global supply chain. Interorganizational ISs 
play a major role in improving communication and integration among fi rms in a 
global supply chain. 

10.2     Enterprise Social Platforms     341  
Questions
1. Explain the purpose of an enterprise system.
2. Describe three types of enterprise systems.
3. What is customer lifetime value (CLV)?
4. What is a value-added reseller (VAR)?
5. What are two challenges of legacy systems?
6. Why do companies migrate to enterprise systems?
7. Explain the challenges of enterprise system implementation.
8. Explain the three types of changes needed when an enterprise system 
is implemented.
Social media has rewired the way we connect with people, information, breaking 
news, work, entertainment, and things. Enterprise social refers to private (company-
owned) social media, software, platforms, or apps specially designed for use by busi-
ness leaders and employees to fulfill the strategic mission. As of 2014, enterprise 
social technology had made it easier for employees to connect and collaborate with 
others, stay informed, build relationships, and share documents and data. 
10.2  Enterprise Social Platforms 
GROWTH OF 
ENTERPRISE SOCIAL 
INVESTMENTS AND 
MARKETS
In 2011 Forrester conducted its first-ever evaluation of enterprise social platform 
vendors. According to the report The Forrester Wave: Enterprise Social Platforms, 
Q3 2011 (Koplowitz, 2011), there was a noticeable change in IT investments. 
Specifically, 25 percent had planned to invest in enterprise systems, while 37 per-
cent had planned investments in enterprise social platforms and collaboration tools. 
There were three main reasons for greater interest in enterprise social: 
1. Knowledge management: To capture and reuse knowledge within the enterprise
2. Collaboration: Maintain human connections across a disparate workforce
3. Employee pressure: Pressure from workers to use the social technologies they 
preferred to use
The trend is toward more informal communication methods in organizations. 
Companies seek to integrate and embed social into primary enterprise solutions to 
support business-critical decisions and more social workflows as an alternative to 
existing communication channels.
Vendors in the enterprise social market have been responding to growing 
demand. In 2012 Microsoft acquired the four-year-old company Yammer for 
$1.2 billion. The Yammer deal put Microsoft further into the market of developing 
social media services specifically for enterprises, an area in which companies such as 
Oracle, Salesforce, and IBM have actively invested. Microsoft’s General Manager 
Jared Spataro told the audience at the SharePoint Conference that “Microsoft is all 
in on Yammer and SharePoint.” Yammer is the social collaboration tool of choice 
for SharePoint going forward (Ryan, 2014). Employees can interact socially while 
doing work at the same time. Figure 10.7 shows the landing page for Yammer. 
SHAREPOINT
SharePoint was initially released by Microsoft in 2001, and by 2015, 75 percent of 
Fortune 500 firms were using it. SharePoint is difficult to define because it is not 
a single software program, but rather a platform for multiple kinds of programs 
and apps. The platform is a back-end system that links employees’ computers and 
mobile devices to make it easy to communicate and to synchronize their efforts. At 
Yammer is a social network 
geared toward enterprises. 
Employees collaborate 
across departments, locations, 
and business apps. 
SharePoint is a collaborative 
and social platform from 
Microsoft. 

342  Chapter 10     Strategic Technology and Enterprise Systems
companies that have their SharePoint on-premises, they are now considered legacy 
systems. SharePoint in the Microsoft Cloud is the later version. Microsoft continues 
to enhance the Office 365 version of SharePoint and Yammer at a much faster pace 
than SharePoint 2013 on-premises. 
SharePoint has the following social capabilities.
Intranet and Extranet
Intranets are the internal-facing sites everyone in a company logs into to find news, 
announcements, scheduled tasks, and access to files and data. Dashboards are cus-
tomized by department and role to control access. SharePoint also provides tools 
for setting up employee social network platforms and company wikis. SharePoint 
can be used to set up a secure, access-controlled extranet site to share with external 
partners in the supply chain, contractors, and so on.
Documents
SharePoint provides a shared space to store documents, so they are not siloed on 
any one person’s hard drive or device. Documents stored on SharePoint can be 
accessed by anyone in the company—unless the administrator has limited access. 
SharePoint enables coworkers to work simultaneously on a single document, save 
previous versions, and track updates.
Collaboration and Business Intelligence
The platform makes it easy for users to stay up-to-date and to coordinate their 
efforts on projects from any desktop or mobile device; and to discover patterns and 
insights in enterprise data. 
Yammer
Yammer is “Facebook for business.” The platform has features similar to Facebook 
likes, newsfeeds, threaded conversation, and direct messaging. This private social 
channel helps employees, partners, and customers communicate; exchange infor-
mation; and collaborate across departments, locations, and business apps. 
Smart companies connect their employees’ desire to contribute and interact 
with peers with their own need to get timely feedback from the trenches. Red 
Robin, discussed in IT at Work 10.2, learned the benefits of Yammer for entry-level 
employees. Six recommendations for realizing business value from enterprise social 
networking are listed in Table 10.3.
Figure 10.7 Yammer 
enterprise social network 
website. Over 400,000 
companies worldwide have 
integrated enterprise social 
into the way people already 
work. 
Microsoft Cloud provides 
a hybrid infrastructure and 
capabilities to manage 
enterprise apps and data.
© NetPhotos/Alamy 

10.2     Enterprise Social Platforms     343  
At the first ever YamJam Conference in 2012, Yammer’s CEO and founder 
introduced the new platform Enterprise Graph—calling it an enhanced way for 
business to be more social. Enterprise Graph tries to show how users are related 
to one another. It enables developers and customers to seamlessly connect people, 
conversations, and data across all their business services. With Enterprise Graph, 
Yammer solves the social network sprawl problem, which is when businesses end 
up interacting with multiple social networks inside their own company. The objec-
tive is to develop a standard that brings everything together and works off the same 
database. 
Office Graph and Oslo App
Microsoft’s newer project, code-named Oslo, builds on the concept of the Enterprise 
Graph. One of the significant features of Yammer is how it maps the relationships 
between people and information by simply recording likes, posts, replies, shares, 
and uploads. Microsoft applied these capabilities to Office with Office Graph. Office 
Graph uses signals from e-mail, social conversations, documents, sites, instant mes-
sages, meetings, and more to map the relationships between people and concepts. 
By tapping into Office Graph, Oslo provides a natural way for users to navigate, 
discover, and search people, information, and knowledge across the enterprise. 
TABLE 10.3 
Recommendations to Realize Business Value from Enterprise Social
1.  Make sure management is listening. Leaders and decision makers need to monitor 
social chatter to keep informed and respond promptly.
2.  Provide visible feedback and rewards. Employee participation is largely driven by the 
desire to be recognized by peers and managers.
3.  Brand the social network. Employees want to feel the company is behind the initiative. 
At Red Robin, for example, renaming Yammer to Yummer connected employees to 
the brand.
4.  Identify and leverage change agents. Start with those employees most eager to 
participate, especially Millennials who are looking for recognition and purpose.
5. Introduce competitions and games. Experience shows that people are more likely to 
engage when they are having fun.
6. Make the rules of engagement simple. Do not overengineer or control the social 
network. Make it easy to enroll and participate.
Red Robin Gourmet Burgers, Inc. is a casual dining restaurant 
chain serving an innovative selection of high-quality gour-
met burgers in a family-friendly atmosphere. In Q1 2014, 
revenues were $340.5 million, representing an increase of 
11.1 percent over Q1 2013. Revenue at comparable restaurants 
had increased only 5.4 percent. The restaurant’s operating 
profit, as a percent of restaurant revenue, increased to 
22.4 percent in 2014 from 21.5 percent in 2013.
IT at Work 1 0 .2
Red Robin Transforms Its Business with Yammer 

344  Chapter 10     Strategic Technology and Enterprise Systems
FRONT-LINE STAFF 
KNOW CUSTOMERS 
BEST
In retail and restaurants, front-line employees understand the customer experience 
far better than managers in remote corporate offices. Yet companies often do not 
pay close attention to their front-line staff. Corporate culture is part of the reason, 
but a lot has to do with the absence of a channel for employees to be heard. With 
over 20,000 employees working in 355 restaurants in 42 states, Red Robin’s new 
management team decided to give front-line employees a voice. In 2010 the com-
pany invested in enterprise social networking, in part, to reduce the high cost of 
employee turnover that is common in the restaurant business.
ENGAGING EMPLOYEES 
WITH YAMMER
Newly hired Senior VP of Business Transformation and CIO Chris Laping believed 
that the company’s workers—87 percent are Millennials—were searching for mean-
ing. So engaging these workers in a meaningful way would create the atmosphere 
that strengthened employee loyalty. 
Laping selected Yammer as the private social channel for employees, partners, 
and customers. The free version of Yammer was initially rolled out as a social 
experiment, to see if employees would engage. A few employees were invited 
to join Yammer. After they were urged to invite colleagues, membership spread 
quickly. Eventually, two Yammer networks emerged at Red Robin: namely 
Yummer, a network for restaurant managers, regional managers, and corporate 
office members to exchange information and answer questions from field staff, and 
Yummversity, a network for training employees. Yummer gave a voice to the silent 
front-line workers at Red Robin. Prior to Yammer, these employees would pass 
information up the company management chain, but they rarely received feedback 
on the information or what was done in response to it.
Better Burgers Through Yummer and Yummversity 
In 2012 Red Robin introduced a new menu item, the Tavern Double burger. It did 
not receive customer feedback via Facebook, as expected. However, restaurant 
servers and regional managers posted what they heard from customers on Yummer. 
Managers at headquarters monitor Yummer so they immediately knew the burger 
recipe needed to be adjusted.
They were able to respond with an updated menu within four weeks at much 
lower cost. Prior to Yammer, this feedback loop took 6 to 12 months, and involved 
running expensive focus groups and surveys, hiring outside consultants, scheduling 
review sessions, and generating reports. 
Millennials were born 
between the early 1980s 
and the early 2000s.
MINING EMPLOYEES’ 
IDEAS 
“Blueprint Project” was a CEO-led initiative to uncover the best employee idea to 
cut expenses and not negatively impact customer experience. A $1,000 prize was 
announced and thousands of employees contributed ideas. The winning entry was 
submitted by a Seattle location manager who proposed replacing disposable kid 
beverage cups with reusable ones. According to Laping, this minor change was “a 
six figure savings for the organization.” 
Sources: Compiled from Red Robin website (2014) and Lavenda (2014). 
Questions
1. Why are employees a source of valuable information? In your opinion, 
why are employees an untapped resource at many companies?
2. How does Yammer capture BI from employees?
3. Explain Yummer and Yummversity. Why would employees want to use 
them? 

10.2     Enterprise Social Platforms     345  
4. What is the expected benefi t of naming the enterprise social platform, 
as Red Robin had done? 
5. How did Red Robin motivate its employees to contribute to the 
enterprise social net?
6. How did the restaurant reduce employee turnover?
ORACLE’S SOCIAL 
NETWORK
Oracle’s social enterprise network connects processes, professionals, and enterprise 
apps in one place. Users can update CRM leads, communicate in real time, and 
search for key experts on the network. The social net also makes sharing files and 
information easy with sales teams and company members. Employees can work on 
documents together in real time, while having the option to access them anytime. 
Conversations and CRM data on the network can be accessed through Microsoft 
Outlook and mobile devices.
JIVE 
Jive’s enterprise social platform provides tools for communication, sharing, and 
content creation to make social media monitoring and engagement easier. The 
platform features activity streams that keep employees updated and a text editor 
for users to create, review, and edit documents as a team. 
Jive also has an enterprise search engine that offers social graph analytics and 
insight into make searching easier. Users can search across their customer network 
and SharePoint as well. Employees can also create blogs and custom attention 
streams to track specific people, projects, or groups. 
CHATTER 
Chatter is an add-on to Saleforce.com, a CRM tool. As with all other enterprise 
social platforms, Chatter offers companies their own private network while pushing 
updates and news in real time to user feeds. The software offers smart search, which 
places items an employee frequently uses higher in the search list.
Like many enterprises, if someone was trying to solve a problem or get feed-
back on a presentation, he or she would send out a global e-mail. Some people 
would reply to everyone, some would just reply to the sender, the e-mail thread 
gets jumbled—and quickly becomes a mess. With Chatter, the problem-solving pro-
cess becomes a conversation rather than a series of disjointed e-mails. People can 
interact and spark new ideas. There is no confusion over which is the latest version 
of a document. Other employees can be brought into the conversation using the @ 
function. The whole process is just a much smarter way of working.
Chatter customer groups let users work with external customers, vendors, and part-
ners, with the option of limiting what they can see and access. Private groups can also 
be set up when employees need to work on sensitive projects with certain colleagues.
Business processes can be approved from within a Chatter feed along with 
vacation requests or hiring decisions.
The features of enterprise social will continue to evolve and disrupt existing 
applications and the future of work.
Questions
1. What are the basic functions of an enterprise social platform?
2. What are the capabilities of SharePoint? 
3. In what ways can enterprises realize value from Yammer or other enter-
prise social?
4. How do Offi ce Graph and Enterprise Graph support collaboration?
5. How does Chatter enable workers to solve problems?

346  Chapter 10     Strategic Technology and Enterprise Systems
10.3  Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
BRIEF HISTORY 
OF ERP 
ERP originated in the 1990s as a means to integrate accounting, finance, HR, mar-
keting, and other critical business functions. ERPs were devised to help managers 
run a business. Ideally, each business function would access a centralized database 
instead of data silos. In many cases, the ERP was bought, installed, and configured 
by a vendor who supplied the entire suite of applications, or modules, for manu-
facturing, distribution, retail, and service organizations. Early ERPs ran on client–
server architectures and custom-designed apps that accessed the shared database 
servers.
Then, like most modern business software, ERP systems migrated to a Web-
based architecture. Users accessed the ERP via a Web browser from within the 
company or accessed it externally via the Internet using a secured encrypted virtual 
private network (VPN). 
ERP Today
ERP is now a mature technology, whose core components have not changed 
much. What has changed are the way ERPs are deployed—on-premises, in the 
cloud, or as a managed service—and users’ expectations. The latest ERP solutions 
are designed with a focus on social collaboration, deployment flexibility, faster 
response, and accessibility from mobile devices. They have touch-enabled user 
interfaces designed to work with all touch-screen devices. New apps and mobile 
add-ons enable:
• sales associates to process orders, take payments, and collect signatures with 
an iPad app.
• field technicians to provide customer service from anywhere.
• marketing to manage every aspect of ongoing customer relationships using 
a smartphone app.
• production to access to the real time information needed to reduce stock-
outs and excess inventory. 
• customers to access, pay, and view invoices online. 
The worldwide ERP software market grew almost 4 percent in 2013 and 2.2 
percent in 2012 (Cole, 2014). SAP remained the ERP market leader, with ERP 
sales of $6.1 billion in 2013. Next in the market are Oracle with sales of $3.1 billion; 
Sage with $1.5 billion in sales; Infor with $1.5 billion; and Microsoft with $1.2 billion. 
TECHNOLOGY 
PERSPECTIVE
From a technology perspective, ERP is the software infrastructure that links an 
enterprise’s internal applications and supports its external business processes. 
Departments stay informed about what is ongoing in other departments that impact 
its operations or performance. Knowing about problem situations and being able 
to work around them saves time and expense, and preserves good customer rela-
tions. For example, using ERP, a manufacturer shares the database of parts, prod-
ucts, production capacities, schedules, backorders, and trouble spots. Responding 
quickly and correctly to materials shortages, spikes in customer demand, or other 
contingencies means that small initial problems are solved instead of allowing them 
to be amplified down the line. Another example of the value of ERP is described 
in IT at Work 10.3. 
In Figure 10.8, you see how an ERP fits into an enterprise’s IT infrastructure. 
The core ERP functions are integrated with other systems or modules, such as 
SCM and CRM. An enterprise application integration (EAI) layer enables the 
ERP to interface with legacy apps. EAI is middleware that connects and acts as a 
go-between for applications and their business processes. 

10.3     Enterprise Resource Planning Systems     347  
Acquisition
ERPs are not built in-house or built using proprietary software because the costs 
and time to do so would be staggering. Typically, ERP systems are acquired by pur-
chasing or leasing in a SaaS arrangement. (You will read about IS acquisition and 
contracts in Chapter 11.) All ERPs must be customized to the company’s specifica-
tions. Here are two examples: 
• Boers & Co Fine Metalworking in the Netherlands has been manufacturing 
fine mechanical parts, high-precision assembly, and sheet metal products for 
over 100 years. The company implemented Epicor ERP to access real time 
data for everything from the shop floor to finance. All business operations 
from the front office through production, receiving and shipping, to order 
entry and cash receipts are handled by the ERP.
• Peters Ice Cream in Australia had been under the ownership of food giant 
Nestlé and was working under its ERP. That ERP was not tailored for the 
specific needs of an ice cream company and did not interface well with 
Peters’s legacy systems. Peters’s network of freezers extends throughout 
Australia, and to get the ice cream flavors where they were needed when they 
are needed, it was essential that information on stock levels and deliveries 
be accurate and in real time. Peters selected Infor’s M3 QuickStep for Food 
and Beverage ERP solution because 70 percent of the necessary business 
processes were already preconfigured within it. With preconfigured business 
processes, Peters was able to implement its new ERP system in 8 months. 
Figure 10.8 Overview of the complexity of ERP and its interfaces with other 
enterprise systems (U.S. Army Business Transformation Knowledge Center, 2009).
Human
Resources
Authoritative
Data Source
Core ERP
Bolt-ons
ERP in the Enterprise
Supply Chain
Management
Product Life-Cycle
Management
External
Business
Partners
Business
Intelligence
Legacy
Application
Legacy
Application
Legacy
Application
Finance
Operations
Enterprise Application Integration
B2B Gateway
ERP Consultant: One of the Best Jobs in America
CNNMoney and PayScale publish a “Best Jobs in 
America” listing of the top 100 careers with big growth, 
great pay, and satisfying work (CNNMoney, 2013). 
ERP consultant was ranked #30, with a median pay of 
$103,000 and top income of $172,000. It was projected 
that ERP consultants would experience 10-year job 
growth of 22 percent and over 700,000 total jobs. 
What do ERP consultants do all day? They advise 
companies on which systems best meet their current 
and future business needs, help with vendor selection 
and implementation of the system, and support the 
ERP and users after it has been installed.
CAREER INSIGHT 1 0 . 1

348  Chapter 10     Strategic Technology and Enterprise Systems
A large European public-sector agency processes 200 mil-
lion payments every year. Its finance and HR systems were a 
complex combination of 50 legacy systems that had evolved 
over time without a plan. Technical support for the outdated 
legacy systems was no longer available, and the few remain-
ing internal developers were near retirement. The agency 
had to replace this legacy architecture with an ERP system 
that could process the hundreds of millions of payments and 
support more than 70,000 users. 
In the first phase of the ERP implementation project, 
the scope and budget of the ERP were approved, vendor 
proposals were evaluated, and a contract with the selected 
vendor was negotiated. These activities took almost a year 
to complete. Then a roll-out strategy was developed wherein 
the legacy systems were replaced by ERP modules and new 
data stores. Replacing legacy systems with ERP requires 
migrating databases and applications. The roll-out strategy 
was planned to minimize risk by ensuring that the agency 
met its strict legal requirements of having one leading 
accounting system at all times. 
Implementing the ERP system across the agency took 
2.5 years, and was delivered on time and budget, and at the 
desired quality level. Extensive planning, executive support, 
experienced consultants, and ERP-informed vendor selection 
were key success factors.
IT at Work 1 0 .3
Agency Replaced 50 Legacy Systems with an ERP 
MANUFACTURING ERP 
SYSTEMS AND LEAN 
PRINCIPLES
Manufacturers know that their success depends on lower costs, shorter cycle times, 
and maximum production throughput. A key factor in lowering costs is inventory 
management—such as minimizing inventory errors and maintaining the optimal 
inventory level. An optimal level has enough inventory to keep production running 
while minimizing inventory-on-hand to control holding costs. ERP demand fore-
casting modules help manufacturers avoid material shortages, manage production, 
and coordinate distribution channels, which improves on-time delivery. Engineers, 
production floor workers, and those in the purchasing, finance, and delivery depart-
ments can access and share plans, production status, quality control, inventory, and 
other data in real time. 
TECH NOTE 10.2 ERP and Vendor Selection
The website top10erp.org/ provides comparisons of top ERP vendors’ products and 
their monthly costs.
 
To simplify and reduce the cost of the ERP software selection process, an annual 
event called the ERP Vendor Shootout (erpshootout.com) is held and geared to-
ward ERP selection teams and decision makers for companies with manufacturing, 
distribution, or project-oriented requirements.
Four Rules for Selecting an ERP
ERPs are complex, but they are becoming more user-friendly. Other options are 
hosted ERP solutions, such as ERP Software-as-a-Service (SaaS), and cloud-based 
ERP. Still, ERPs are expensive, time-consuming implementations that require a lot 
of planning. Four rules to consider when selecting an ERP solution or software 
package are:

10.3     Enterprise Resource Planning Systems     349  
1. Select an ERP solution that targets the company’s requirements. ERP packages 
are tailored for organizations based on their size and industry. Midmarket solu-
tions have more sophisticated capabilities than packages for small businesses; 
large enterprise packages are the most complex. It is important to choose an 
ERP that can support critical functions of the organization, such as accounting 
or inventory management. 
2. Evaluate potential ERP vendors’ strengths and weaknesses. Check how many 
customers each vendor has, its fi nancial health (you do not want to select a ven-
dor on the brink of bankruptcy), and whether it has experience in the specifi c 
industry, and how the ERP can scale as the company grows. 
3. Meet with each vendor and get a hands-on demo of its ERP solutions. Demos 
allow employees to experience the usability of each ERP module and how well 
the ERP would support business processes.
4. Calculate the ERP’s total cost of ownership (TCO). The cost of the ERP or 
the monthly SaaS fee is only the beginning of the calculation. The TCO also 
includes implementation, customization, management services, training, addi-
tional hardware and networks, additional bandwidth for a Web-based product, 
and IT staff.
ERP IMPLEMENTATIONS 
MAY NOT BE INITIALLY 
SUCCESSFUL 
Managers and other decision makers tend to think that if an enterprise system 
works for leading companies, it will work for them, too. But that is not true. In fact, 
as you read in Table 10.3, several of the best companies have suffered devastating 
consequences that led to multimillion dollar losses, bankruptcy, or lawsuits. Most 
often, the ERP is eventually fixed and remains in use, which gives the false impres-
sion that the ERP was successful from the start. 
The success of an ERP depends on organizational and technological factors 
that occur prior to, during, and after its implementation. Knowing what to do and 
what not to do are important. Both the successes and failures teach valuable lessons, 
too, as you will learn in this section. 
Be aware that reading vendor white papers and viewing webcasts or demos may 
give you a biased view of the benefits of ERP software. You need to conduct your 
own research to learn the full story behind an enterprise system implementation. 
Problems may be skipped over or ignored. While blogs and YouTube posts may be 
good sources of objective data, many vendors have blogs and YouTube videos that 
are designed to appear neutral, when in fact they are not. 
ERP Disasters and Failures
ERP implementations are complex—and risky. Planning, deploying, or fine-
tuning these complex business software systems for your company is such a large 
undertaking that such projects fail more than 50 to 70 percent of the time. Those 
are not encouraging statistics. ERP failures have made it impossible to ship 
products and, at the extreme, have led to bankruptcy. Many ERP projects have 
ended up in litigation, the headlines, and out-of-court settlements. Dell canceled 
an ERP system after spending two years and $200 million on its implementation. 
Hershey Food Corp. filed highly publicized lawsuits against its ERP vendors for 
a failed implementation. Table 10.4 describes recent ERP failures that have led 
to lawsuits against vendors or consulting firms. Of course, lawsuits do not result 
in a working ERP. 

350  Chapter 10     Strategic Technology and Enterprise Systems
TABLE 10.4 
ERP Failures, Lawsuits, and Damages
Companies Filing 
the Lawsuit and 
Companies Sued
Description of ERP Disasters, 
Charges, and Outcomes
Distributor ScanSource 
fi led a lawsuit in 2013 
against Avanade, the 
joint venture between 
Accenture and Microsoft, 
for “bait-and-switch” 
tactics.
A half-million lines of custom code were not 
enough to produce a viable Microsoft Dynamics 
AX ERP system for point-of-sale and RFID prod-
ucts distributor ScanSource, according to a lawsuit 
ScanSource has fi led against Avanade. AX is one of 
four ERP products sold under the Dynamics brand, 
and is aimed at larger companies.
The lawsuit alleges:
•  The project was supposed to cost $17 million 
and take 11 months, but the cost estimate grew to 
$66 million and it had failed to go live after 3 years.
•  Avanade misrepresented the skills of its consul-
tants in order to win the contract; then sent in a 
continually changing cast of consultants without 
the expertise to do the job or familiarity with AX.
ScanSource terminated the contact with Avanade in 
September 2012 and hired another company to fi x 
the problems at an additional cost of $58 to 
$72 million. 
Dillard’s, Inc. fi led a suit 
against JDA Software 
Group.
Dillard’s alleged that i2 failed to meet obligations 
regarding two software-license agreements for 
which the department store had paid $8 million. 
In June 2010 JDA Software Group Inc. reported 
that its i2 Technologies unit lost the case and was 
ordered to pay $246 million in damages.
FoxMeyer Drugs was a 
$5 billion company and 
the nation’s fourth larg-
est distributor of phar-
maceuticals before the 
ERP failure. 
FoxMeyer sued SAP, 
the ERP vendor, and 
Andersen Consulting, 
its SAP integrator, for 
$500 million each in 
1998. 
FoxMeyer’s ERP could not process the transactions 
needed to supply its customers with their orders. 
FoxMeyer had been processing 425,000 invoice 
lines per day on its legacy software. The company’s 
ERP was limited to 10,000 invoice lines per day. 
This quickly decreased order processing capability, 
sent the company into bankruptcy protection, and 
ultimately shut down the business. 
Implementation was troubled almost from the start. 
Despite warnings from Woltz Consulting, during 
the early stages of the project, that a schedule for 
the entire implementation to be completed in 
18 months was totally unrealistic, FoxMeyer went 
ahead with the vendor’s planned implementation.
ERP Success Factors
What factors increase the likelihood of ERP success and minimize the risk of prob-
lems? Many managers assume that success or failure depends on the software and, 
furthermore, that a failure is the fault of the software that is purchased or licensed. 
In reality, 95 percent of a project’s success or failure lies in the hands of the com-
pany implementing the software, not the software vendor.

10.3     Enterprise Resource Planning Systems     351  
The results of a survey to identify what ERP experts had found to be most impor-
tant to successful ERP projects are shown in Figure 10.9. ERP experts were given the 
following six options and asked to select only one of them as “most important”: 
1. Strong program management: 6 percent
2. Executive support and buy-in: 19 percent
3. Organizational change management and training :13 percent
4. Realistic expectations: 8 percent
5. Focus on business processes: 5 percent
6. Interaction of all fi ve factors: 49 percent
Nearly half of the experts indicated that the failure of any one of the five factors 
significantly increases the risk of ERP failure. 
The following recommendations explain why ERP success depends on several 
key factors being met: 
1. Focus on business processes and requirements. Too often, companies get caught 
up in technical capabilities or platforms on which the ERP runs. But compared 
to business processes, none of this really matters. What matters is how managers 
want business operations to run and what the key business requirements are. 
Once management and IT have defi ned them, they can intelligently choose the 
software, modules, and vendor that fi t their unique business needs.
2. Focus on achieving a measurable ROI. Developing a business case to get ap-
proval from upper management or the board of directors is essential, but not suf-
fi cient. Establish key performance measures, set baselines and targets for those 
measures, and then track performance after going live. The performance results 
are proof of how well the ERP meets the expectations that had been listed in the 
business case.
3. Use a strong project management approach and secure commitment of 
resources. An ERP project depends on how it is managed. Responsibility for 
the management of the ERP implementation project cannot be transferred 
to vendors or consulting fi rms. Because of the business disruption and cost 
involved, ERP projects require the full-time attention and support of high-
profi le champions on the key functions for a long period of time, from 6 to 
Figure 10.9 Experts identify 
the combination of factors 
needed for ERP success.
Survey responses to the question:
What is most important to successful ERP projects?
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Strong program
management
Executive support
& buy-in
Organizational change
management & training
Realistic expectations
Focus on business
processes
All 5 factors

352  Chapter 10     Strategic Technology and Enterprise Systems
12 months on average. It is also known that ERP projects cannot be managed 
by people who can be spared. They must be managed by people who are in-
dispensable personnel. Without powerful champions and an adequate budget 
(discussed next), expect the ERP to fail. Project management will be covered 
in Chapter 13.
4. Obtain strong and continuing commitment from senior executives. Any proj-
ect without support from top management will fail. No matter how well run a 
project is, there will be problems such as confl icting business needs or business 
disruptions that can only be resolved by someone with the power and authority 
to cut through the politics and personal agendas.
5. Take suffi cient time to plan and prepare up-front. An ERP vendor’s motive is 
to close the deal as fast as possible. The company needs to make sure it correctly 
defi nes its needs and what it can afford to achieve in order to intelligently evalu-
ate and select the best vendor. Do not be rushed into a decision. Too often, com-
panies jump right into a project without validating the vendor’s understanding 
of business requirements or their project plan. The principle of “measure twice, 
cut once” applies to vendor selection. The more time the company spends ensur-
ing these things are done right at the start, the lower the risk of failure and the 
less time spent fi xing problems later. Filing a lawsuit against a vendor (see 
Table 10.4) is not a fi x. Lawsuits are both expensive and risky, and contribute 
nothing to the company’s performance.
6. Provide thorough training and change management. Another key principle 
to understand is that when you design an ERP, you redesign the organization. 
ERP systems involve dramatic change for workers. ERPs lose value if people 
do not understand how to use them effectively. Investing in training, change 
management, and job design are crucial to the outcome of any large-scale IT 
project.
Questions
1. What are three ways ERP can be deployed?
2. Briefl y describe the latest ERP features and add-ons. 
3. Describe ERP from a technology perspective.
4. Explain manufacturing ERP systems and lean principles.
5. List and briefl y describe three ERP implementation success factors.
6. Describe causes or factors that contribute to ERP failure.
The journey that a product travels, as shown in Figure 10.10, starting with raw 
material suppliers and then to manufacturers or assemblers, distributors and retail 
shelves, and ultimately to customers, is its supply chain. The supply chain is like a 
pipeline composed of multiple suppliers, distributors, manufacturers, retailers, and 
logistics providers.
Supply chains vary significantly depending on the type, complexity, and per-
ishability of the product. For example, in a simplified sense, the food supply chain 
begins with the livestock or farm, moves to the manufacturer, then through the dis-
tribution centers and wholesalers to the retailer and final customer. In IT at Work 
10.4, you read about the benefits of tracking food along the supply chain.
10.4  Supply Chain Management Systems
Supply chain starts with the 
acquisition of raw materials 
or the procurement (purchase) 
of products and proceeds 
through manufacture, 
transport, and delivery—and 
the disposal or recycling of 
products.

10.4     Supply Chain Management Systems     353  
Figure 10.10 Model of the supply chain.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) posts Recalls, 
Market Withdrawals, & Safety Alerts on its website FDA.gov. 
Almost every day, a recall or alert is posted for human or pet 
food, drugs, and life-saving devices. A few food contamina-
tion alerts posted by the FDA were: listeria in shelled walnuts 
from California Grown and hummus dips from Trader Joe’s, 
and salmonella in Dragonfly’s crushed chili powder and Owl 
Canyon’s eggs—both are potentially fatal. When food con-
taminations are detected, being able to trace those foods 
to their sources or track them to retailers or end-consumers 
takes on a sense of urgency.
Track and Trace to Identify the Scope Accurately 
and with Confidence
Track-and-trace technologies follow food products “from 
farm to fork” throughout their supply chain, primarily using 
barcodes and radio frequency identification (RFID). Without 
the capability to identify the scope of the contamination 
and contain it, the food recall is much more extensive than 
necessary as a safety precaution. For example, when E. coli–
tainted spinach was discovered in 2007, using the bar code 
on a bag of bad spinach, investigators traced its origin to 
California’s Salinas Valley. But then they had to do an intense 
and expensive search for the specific grower in that valley. 
Because of the uncertainty during the investigation, all spin-
ach products were pulled from grocery stores, distribution 
and processing plants, and restaurants and then destroyed. 
One growers’ organization estimates that the recall cost the 
spinach industry $74 million. It would have been much faster 
to track the contaminated leaves to the grower if spinach 
bags and containers had carried RFID tags with complete 
histories of the contents’ origins.
Value of Tracking Capability in the Supply Chain
With tracking information, companies can streamline the dis-
tribution chain and lower spoilage and contamination rates. 
Reducing the rates of spoilage and contamination is impor-
tant for reasons related to safety and costs. Consumer prod-
uct and retail industries lose about $40 billion annually, or 
3.5 percent of their sales, due to supply chain inefficiencies. 
Questions
1. Visit the FDA’s website and select “recalls.” What do you 
learn?
2. Select three food recalls. How could those products be 
tracked and traced? 
3. Consider a food that is an ingredient, such as chili pep-
per, and perishable food, such as beef patties. Which 
would be more difficult to track and trace? Explain.
4. What costs are reduced during a contaminated food 
recall if the food has RFID tags? 
IT at Work 1 0 .4
Got Contaminated Food? How Do You Know?
Supply chain management (SCM) is the efficient management of the 
flows of material, data, and payments along the companies in the sup-
ply chain, from suppliers to consumers. SCM systems are configured to 
achieve the following business goals:
• To reduce uncertainty and variability in order to improve the 
accuracy of forecasting.
• To increase control over processes in order to achieve optimal 
inventory levels, cycle time, and customer service.
An example of these goals is discussed in IT at Work 10.5. 
© arka38/Shutterstock 

354  Chapter 10     Strategic Technology and Enterprise Systems
Munitions Supply Chain Management
The Joint Munitions Command (JMC) is a major part of 
the U.S. Army Materiel Command (AMC). Munitions are 
the weaponry hardware, vehicles, and equipment and their 
ammunition. JMC supports U.S. warfighters by managing the 
munitions supply chain to get the right munitions at the right 
place at the right time. JMC manufactures, procures, stores, 
and transports tanks, weaponry, howitzers, and other muni-
tions (see Figure 10.11) as well as bullets, artillery shells, and 
other ammunition to locations worldwide. 
Supply Chain Challenges 
JMC provides bombs and bullets to America’s fighting 
forces—all services, all types of conventional ammunition 
from 500-pound bombs to rifle rounds. JMC manages plants 
that produce more than 1.6 billion rounds of ammunition 
annually and the depots that store the nation’s ammunition 
for training and combat.
Clearly, managing the munitions supply chain is extremely 
complex and critical. Like other supply chains, it depends on 
good relationships among suppliers in the network, the quality 
of supplier information, and communication channels.
JMC Improves Battle Readiness at 
Reduced Cost
JMC’s project began with a focus on efficiency, but has 
resulted in increased warfighting readiness at reduced cost. 
After transforming operations, integrating its supply chain, 
and improving data management, JMC is now better able to 
rapidly supply U.S. forces with the highest-quality munitions 
when they need them and to cut transportation costs up to 
50 percent—a significant savings per year. These improve-
ments were made possible as a result of greater asset 
visibility (tracking and monitoring), better forecasting and 
decision-making capabilities, communication, and collabora-
tion along the supply chain. 
Sources: Compiled from Schwerin (2012), Accenture (2010), and jmc.
army.mil (2012). 
Questions
1. Explain the role of the munitions supply chain. 
2. Discuss how JMC ensures that soldiers receive the highest-
quality ammunition, on time, and where needed.
3. Why would improvements in munitions supply chain 
management also improve warfighting readiness?
4. What factors impact the ability to manage the munitions 
supply chain? 
5. For the JMC, where does the munitions supply chain start 
and where does it end?
6. Is munitions supply chain management unique, and if so, 
why? Or, is it similar to the management of any supply 
chains? Explain your position. 
IT at Work 1 0 .5
Managing the U.S. Munitions Supply Chain
Figure 10.11 JMC manages the supply chain of materials used in war (tanks, howitzers, 
weaponry) and ammunition (bullets, artillery shells).
Photo by Josh Hamilton/DVIDS Media
(a)
Photo by Spc. Latoya Wiggins/DVIDS Media
(b)

10.4     Supply Chain Management Systems     355  
MANAGING THE FLOW 
OF MATERIALS, DATA, 
AND MONEY
Supply chains involve the flow of materials, data, and money. Descriptions of these 
three main flows are as follows:
1. Material or product fl ow: This is the movement of materials and goods from a 
supplier to its consumer. For example, Ford supplies dealerships that, in turn, 
sell to end-users. Products that are returned make up what is called the reverse 
supply chain because goods are moving in the reverse direction. 
2. Information fl ow: This is the movement of detailed data among members of the 
supply chain, for example, order information, customer information, order ful-
fi llment, delivery status, and proof-of-delivery confi rmation. Most information 
fl ows are done electronically, although paper invoices or receipts are still com-
mon for noncommercial customers. 
3. Financial fl ow: This is the transfer of payments and fi nancial arrangements, for 
example, billing payment schedules, credit terms, and payment via electronic 
funds transfer (EFT). EFT provides for electronic payments and collections. 
It is safe, secure, effi cient, and less expensive than paper check payments and 
collections.
Supply chain links are managed. Think of the chain in terms of its links because 
the entire chain is not managed as a single unit. A company can only manage the 
links it actually touches. That is, a company will manage only partners who are one-
back and one-up because that is the extent of what a company can manage. 
Order fulfillment is the 
set of complex processes 
involved in providing cus-
tomers with what they have 
ordered on time and all 
related customer services.
Back-office operations 
support the fulfillment of 
orders.
ORDER FULFILLMENT 
AND LOGISTICS
Order fulfillment depends on the type of product/service and purchase method 
(online, in-store, catalog, etc.). For example, a customer who has ordered a new 
appliance via the Sears.com wesite needs to receive it as scheduled, with assembly 
and operating instructions, and warranty and return information. The customer can 
receive a paper manual with the product or download the instructions from Sears’ 
website.
Order fulfillment is a part of back-office operations, such as accounting, 
inventory management, and shipping, and is closely related to front-office opera-
tions or customer-facing activities. The key aspects of order fulfillment are the 
delivery of materials or products at the right time, to the right place, and at the 
right cost.
Logistics entails all the processes and information needed to move products 
from origin to destination efficiently. The order fulfillment process is part of logistics. 
STEPS IN THE ORDER 
FULFILLMENT PROCESS
The order fulfillment process starts when an order is received, and includes the fol-
lowing nine activities that are supported by SCM software or are automated:
Step 1: Make sure the customer will pay. Depending on the payment method and 
prior arrangements with the customer, verify that the customer can and will pay, 
and agrees to the payment terms. This activity is done by the finance department 
for B2B sales or an external company, such as PayPal or a credit card issuer such 
as Visa for B2C sales. Any holdup in payment may cause a shipment to be delayed, 
resulting in a loss of goodwill or a customer. In B2C, the customers usually pay by 
credit card, but with major credit card data theft at Target and other retailers, the 
buyer may be using a stolen card.
Step 2: Check in-stock availability and reorder as necessary. As soon as an order is 
received, the stock is checked to determine the availability of the product or materi-
als. If there is not enough stock, the ordering system places an order, typically auto-
matically using EDI (electronic data interchange). To perform these operations, the 
ordering system needs to interface with the inventory system. 
Front-office operations such 
as sales and advertising that 
are visible to customers.

356  Chapter 10     Strategic Technology and Enterprise Systems
Step 3: Arrange shipments. When the product is available, shipment to the cus-
tomer is arranged (otherwise, go to Step 5). Products can be digital or physical. If 
the item is physical and available, packaging and shipment arrangements are made. 
Both the packaging/shipping department and internal shippers or outside transport-
ers may be involved. Digital items are usually available because their “inventory” is 
not depleted. However, a digital product, such as software, may be under revision, 
and thus unavailable for delivery at certain times. In either case, information needs 
to flow among several partners.
Step 4: Insurance. The contents of a shipment may need to be insured. Both the 
finance department and an insurance company could be involved, and again, infor-
mation needs to be exchanged with the customer and insurance agent.
Step 5: Replenishment. Customized orders will always trigger a need for some 
manufacturing or assembly operation. Similarly, if standard items are out of stock, 
they need to be produced or procured. Production is done in-house or outsourced. 
Step 6: In-house production. In-house production needs to be planned and actual 
production needs to be scheduled. Production planning involves people, materials, 
components, machines, financial resources, and possibly suppliers and subcontrac-
tors. In the case of assembly and/or manufacturing, several plant services may be 
needed, including collaboration with business partners. Production facilities may 
be located in a different country than the company’s headquarters or retailers. This 
may further complicate the flow of information.
Step 7: Use suppliers. A manufacturer may opt to buy products or subassemblies 
from suppliers. Similarly, if the seller is a retailer, such as in the case of Amazon.
com or Walmart.com, the retailer must purchase products from its manufacturers. 
In this case, appropriate receiving and quality assurance of incoming materials and 
products must take place. 
Once production (Step 6) or purchasing from suppliers (Step 7) is completed, 
shipments to the customers (Step 3) are arranged.
Step 8: Contacts with customers. Sales representatives keep in contact with cus-
tomers, especially in B2B, starting with the notification of orders received and end-
ing with notification of a shipment or change in delivery date. These contacts are 
frequently generated automatically.
Step 9: Returns. In some cases, customers want to exchange or return items. The 
movement of returns from customers back to vendors is reverse logistics. Such 
returns can be a major problem, especially when they occur in large volumes. 
INNOVATIONS DRIVING 
SUPPLY CHAIN 
STRATEGIC PRIORITIES
Supply chain executives are leveraging digital technologies and business innova-
tions to manage the increasing complexity of today’s global supply chains. In the 
past, companies tackled supply chain challenges primarily by focusing on internal 
cost reduction and improved operational efficiency. But traditional approaches are 
less effective as supply chains become longer and more interconnected, and there 
are higher stakeholder expectations and more sources of risk. Companies are exam-
ining their approach to supply chain improvement.
Recently, MHI and Deloitte Consulting released their first joint research report, 
“Innovations That Drive Supply Chains—The 2014 MHI Annual Industry Report.”  
More than 450 respondents from large and small companies across a wide range of 
sectors participated in the survey. Key study findings are:
• The top two strategic priorities of executives are supply chain analytics and 
multichannel fulfillment.
• The two major barriers preventing innovation in the supply chain are a tal-
ent shortage and a continuing focus on cost reduction.
MHI is an international 
trade association that has 
influenced materials handling 
and logistics within the 
supply chain industry.

10.4     Supply Chain Management Systems     357  
• Sustainability, mobility/machine-to-machine (M2) technology and 3D print-
ing are emerging innovations that are not yet top-of-mind for executives, 
but may soon be.
Supply Chain Analytics
As global supply chains become more complex and expansive, companies want to 
leverage analytics that produce insights to improve customer service and reduce 
costs and risk. 
The speed of business is outpacing the level of insight into the supply chain, 
regardless of industry. Algorithms and SCM models based on past demand, supply, and 
business cycles are inadequate to effectively manage the supply chain. Companies 
need updated models to predict the future. 
Multichannel Fulfillment
Today’s consumers are demanding. They expect 24/7 shopping and then to have 
their purchases delivered quickly, the next day or even the same day. Although 
most retailers are good at the front-end handling orders through their multiple 
channels, they tend to struggle to adapt their back-end order fulfillment processes. 
Retailers plan to make significant investments to build their multichannel fulfill-
ment capabilities. 
Talent Shortage Remains the Biggest Barrier to Innovation
Companies need supply chain talent with the appropriate skills, experience, and 
mindset to harness the value of supply chain innovations. The right kind of supply 
chain talent is extremely difficult to find.
Cost Reduction Chokes Off Essential Investments in Innovation
Cost reduction is still the number one priority for many supply chain executives, 
according to the MHI and Deloitte survey. More than 70 percent of respondents 
across industries asserted that controlling costs is a top priority for their companies 
and their customers.
Sustainability
The focus on cost-cutting in the supply chain is squeezing out innovations in sus-
tainability, even though executives believe these investments are important. More 
than 60 percent of respondents indicated that significant capability gaps exist in 
their companies and clients that may prevent them from effectively implementing 
sustainability programs.
Mobility and M2M Technology
Mobility and M2M technologies can improve responsiveness and customer service 
by providing supply chain workers with the information they need—whenever and 
wherever they need it. 
3D Printing
Additive manufacturing could revolutionize production processes and have 
far-reaching future implications for product supply chains. But supply chain 
executives in the MHI and Deloitte study did not see immediate potential for the 
innovation. 

358  Chapter 10     Strategic Technology and Enterprise Systems
Questions
1. What is a supply chain?
2. List four functions carried out by companies in a supply chain.
3. List and describe the three main fl ows being managed in a supply chain. 
4. Describe SCM.
5. What are steps in the order fulfi llment? 
6. Explain logistics.
7. What are the top two strategic priorities of SCM executives? 
8. What are the two major barriers preventing innovation in the supply 
chain? 
9. What are the top innovative digital technologies impacting SCM? 
Like ERP and SCM systems, CRM is a widely used and mature technology that can 
be deployed on-premises or on-demand as a service, or SaaS. The fierce competition 
among the big four CRM vendors—Salesforce.com, SAP, Oracle, and Microsoft—
motivates innovation. Numerous successful CRM implementations have helped 
transform the business, increased profit, and strengthened customer loyalty. CRM 
can provide managers with a 360-degree view of the customer relationship, enable 
real time responses, and improve sales productivity and predictability. However, 
CRM technology cannot transform or improve anything on its own.
As Figure 10.12 shows, CRM and data are necessary, but insufficient. Business 
performance improvement actually depends to a greater extent on people and 
processes. The Avon business case at the end of this chapter is a high-profile 
example of a $125 million enterprise system failure because people and processes 
were ignored. Changes in people’s behavior, their commitment, attitude toward the 
mandatory change as well as process improvements make the difference between 
better bottom lines or a hundred million dollar write-off, as in the case of Avon. 
Buying the most suitable CRM is like buying a Ferrari or Porsche. You will not win 
any races or become a better driver simply because you bought the sports car. Your 
effort and changes in how you drive determine your wins. 
10.5  Customer Relationship Management  Systems
Figure 10.12 Four CRM 
critical success factors and 
their importance. 
Data
15%
CRM
technology
20%
People
40%
Process
change
25%

10.5     Customer Relationship Management Systems     359  
HOW ARE CRM APPS 
DIFFERENT FROM 
ERP? WHY ARE THEY 
DIFFERENT?
ERP and CRM have to interface and share data. They are similar from a technology 
perspective—sold in modules, offered on site or in the cloud, and must share data. 
ERPs often requires tight business rules and user practices—that those in account-
ing, finance, and HR tend to be accustomed to by their professions. For example, 
they must comply with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), the SEC, 
labor laws, or legal requirements. But sales and marketing are the primary users of 
CRM—and they tend not to be accustomed to inflexible rules of conduct. They are 
accustomed to creativity and closing the deal, for instance. If the CRM does not 
support them their way, they can reject it—and cause total system failure. 
Why Does CRM Matter?
CRM systems play the major role in customer experience (CX), and good CX helps 
to retain customers. However, not all customers are worth retaining. Customers can 
be unprofitable. Imagine having 20,000 customers. How would you determine the 
CLV of each customer and continue to recompute their value? The point is that 
data analytics, sophisticated predictive analytics, and BI are needed to determine 
CLV; then business rules need to specify how to treat or manage customers based 
on their value score. 
Intelligently managing relationships with customers can increase revenues and 
net profits significantly. Similar to managing inventory and supplier relationships, 
effective CRM is data-driven, complex, and continuously changing. The growth of 
mobile sales channels and social networking makes recognizing customers across 
multiple touchpoints complex. In addition, many companies have customer data 
in multiple, disparate systems that are not integrated—until they implement CRM 
systems.
TECHNOLOGY 
PERSPECTIVE
From a technology perspective, CRM refers to the methodologies and software 
tools to leverage customer data in order to achieve the following:
• Identify the appropriate CX for customers.
• Predict and prevent attrition (loss) of a customer, unless he or she is not 
worth retaining.
• Acquire new customers who are most likely to become profitable.
• Up-sell (sell more profitable products/services) or cross-sell (sell additional 
products/services) to unprofitable customers to move them to a profit 
position.
• Reduce inefficiencies that waste advertising dollars.
CUSTOMER 
ACQUISITION AND 
RETENTION
CRM technologies help marketing managers run effective campaigns, promo-
tions, commercials, and advertisements to attract new customers, or to increase 
sales to existing customers, or to do both. Attracting and acquiring new customers 
are expensive activities: for example, it costs banks roughly $100 to acquire a new 
customer. Newly acquired customers are unprofitable until they have purchased 
enough products or services to exceed the cost to acquire and service them. 
Therefore, retaining customers that generate revenues in excess of the costs (e.g., 
customer service, returns, promotional items, and the like) is critical. The purpose 
of loyalty or frequent purchase programs offered by online retailers, coffee shops, 
airlines, supermarkets, credit card issuers, casinos, and other companies is to track 
customers for CRM purposes and build customer loyalty to improve financial 
performance. Loyalty programs rely on data warehouses and data analytics to 
recognize and reward customers who repeatedly use services or products. The 
1-800-Flowers loyalty program is described in IT at Work 10.6.

360  Chapter 10     Strategic Technology and Enterprise Systems
1-800-Flowers.com is an Internet pioneer. Online sales are 
a major marketing channel in addition to telephone and fax 
orders. Competition is very strong in this industry. The com-
pany’s success was based on operational efficiency, conve-
nience (24/7 accessibility), and reliability. However, all major 
competitors provide the same features today. To maintain 
its competitive edge, the company transformed itself into a 
customer-centric organization, caring for more than 15 million 
customers.
The company decided to cultivate brand loyalty through 
customer relationships based on detailed knowledge of cus-
tomers. How is this accomplished? SAS software spans the 
entire decision-support process for managing customer rela-
tionships. Collecting data at all customer touchpoints, the 
company turns those data into knowledge for understand-
ing and anticipating customer behavior, meeting customer 
needs, building more profitable customer relationships, and 
gaining a holistic view of a customer’s lifetime value. Using 
SAS Enterprise Miner, 1-800-Flowers.com sifts through 
purchasing data to discover trends, explain outcomes, and 
predict results so that the company can increase response 
rates and identify profitable customers. In addition to selling 
and campaign management, the ultimate goal is to make 
sure that when a customer wants to buy, he or she continues 
to buy from 1-800-Flowers.com  and cannot be captured by 
a competitor’s marketing. Their objective is not just about 
getting customers to buy more. It is about making sure that 
when they decide to purchase a gift online or by phone, they 
do not even think of going to the competition. 
Data mining software helps the company identify the 
many different types of customers and how each would like 
to be treated. Customer retention has increased by over 
15 percent since this approach was adopted.
Questions
1. Why is being number one in operation efficiency not 
enough to keep 1-800-FLOWERS.COM at the top of its 
industry? 
2. What is the role of data mining?
3. How is the one-to-one relationship achieved in such 
systems?
IT at Work 1 0 .6
1-800-Flowers.com Uses Data Mining for CRM
CRM FOR A 
COMPETITIVE EDGE
According to management guru Peter Drucker, “Those companies who know 
their customers, understand their needs, and communicate intelligently with them 
will always have a competitive advantage over those that don’t” (Drucker, 1969). 
For most types of companies, marketing effectiveness depends on how well they 
know their customers: specifically, knowing what their customers want, how best 
to contact them, and what types of offers they are likely to respond to positively. 
According to the loyalty effect, a 5 percent reduction in customer attrition can 
improve profits by as much as 20 percent. Customer-centric business strategies 
strive to provide products and services that customers want to buy. One of the best 
examples is the Apple iPhone and iPod—devices that customers were willing to 
camp out on sidewalks to buy to guarantee getting one on the day of their release. 
In contrast, companies with product-centric strategies need to create demand for 
their products, which is more expensive and may fail.
COMMON CRM 
MISTAKES: HOW TO 
AVOID THEM
According to Gartner, the CRM market reached $24 billion in 2014 after several 
years of strong growth. Given that level of investment, companies obviously want 
to get as much value as possible out of their systems. It is unfortunate, then, that 
so many of them make mistakes in selecting and implementing CRM software. 
The editor of Enterprise Apps Today, Ann All (2014), described common CRM 
mistakes and how to avoid them. Five of these CRM mistakes are explained in 
Table 10.5. 

10.5     Customer Relationship Management Systems     361  
Example of a Failure
Citizen National Bank’s experience is an example of a failure that then replaced 
its CRM vendors and became a success. The lessons learned, at a cost of $500,000, 
were:
•  Be absolutely clear on how the CRM application will add value to the sales 
process.
•  Determine if and why salespeople are avoiding CRM.
•  Provide incentives for the sales team to adopt CRM.
•  Find ways to simplify the use of the CRM application.
•  Adjust the CRM system as business needs change.
TABLE 10.5 
CRM Mistakes and Avoiding Them
CRM Mistakes 
How to Avoid The Mistakes
Putting IT department in  
The hands-on business users need to champion
charge of the CRM project  
and lead the project initiative, with IT playing a
instead of the business users 
supporting role. 
 
 Explanation: CRM is a software project whose 
success relies on users’ input, which helps 
ensure they actually will use it. Unlike other 
apps, salespeople do not have to use CRM. If 
the system is underused, companies will see 
only limited improvements.
Not getting the CRM  
CRM implementations need buy-in from the
requirements right by not  
users and other business stakeholders, who can
involving key business  
spread enthusiasm. Frequent communication
stakeholders from the outset 
 about the project is important to engaging 
them in a meaningful way. 
Making mobile CRM strategy  
Consider mobility a priority in the CRM
an afterthought 
 project from the outset. Putting an existing 
CRM on mobile devices is a bad plan. 
Taking wrong approach to  
Make sure the interface is intuitive enough
CRM training 
 that most users will not need hands-on training. 
When people sit in a classroom for an hour, 
they will only retain 5 minutes of what they 
hear. A learning program during lunch that 
focuses on one or two lessons is a much more 
effective adoption strategy. 
Underestimating users’  
Users will not tolerate poorly designed
resistance to change 
 systems. Frustrating users is a fast track to 
failure, or at a minimum, suboptimal results. 
JUSTIFYING CRM
One of the biggest problems in CRM implementation is the difficulty of defining 
and measuring success. In addition, many companies say that when it comes to 
determining value, intangible benefits are more significant than tangible cost savings. 

362  Chapter 10     Strategic Technology and Enterprise Systems
Yet companies often fail to establish quantitative or even qualitative measures in 
order to judge these intangible benefits.
A formal business plan must be in place before the CRM project begins—one 
that quantifies the expected costs, tangible financial benefits, and intangible stra-
tegic benefits, as well as the risks. The plan should include an assessment of the 
following:
•  Tangible net benefits. The plan must include a clear and precise cost–
benefit analysis that lists all the planned project costs and tangible benefits. 
This portion of the plan should also contain a strategy for assessing key 
financial metrics, such as ROI, net present value (NPV), or other justifica-
tion methods.
•  Intangible benefits. The plan should detail the expected intangible benefits, 
and it should list the measured successes and shortfalls. Often, an improve-
ment in customer satisfaction is the primary goal of the CRM solution, but 
in many cases this key value is not measured.
•  Risk assessment. The risk assessment is a list of all of the potential pitfalls 
related to the people, processes, and technology that are involved in the 
CRM project. Having such a list helps to lessen the probability that prob-
lems will occur. And, if they do happen, a company may find that, by hav-
ing listed and considered the problems in advance, the problems are more 
manageable than they would have been otherwise.
Tangible and Intangible Benefits
Benefits typically include increases in staff productivity (e.g., more deals closed), 
cost avoidance, revenues, and margin increases, as well as reductions in inventory 
costs (e.g., due to the elimination of errors). Other benefits include increased cus-
tomer satisfaction, loyalty, and retention.
Questions
1. Explain the four critical success factors for CRM. 
2. Why does CRM matter?
3. Discuss how CRM impacts customer acquisition and retention. 
4. According to Peter Drucker, what does marketing effectiveness 
depend on?
5. Give three reasons why CRM fails. 
6. How can CRM be justifi ed? 
Key Terms
3D bioprinting
3D printing (additive 
manufacturing)
back-offi ce operations
core business processes
creative destroyer
customer lifetime value 
(CLV)
customer relationship 
management (CRM)
enterprise application 
integration (EAI)
enterprise resource 
planning (ERP) 
enterprise systems
front-offi ce operations
interface
legacy systems
logistics
Microsoft Cloud
millennials
MHI
order fulfi llment 
reverse supply chain
SharePoint
social network sprawl
stock keeping unit 
(SKU) 
supply chain
supply chain management 
(SCM) 
value-added reseller 
(VAR)
Yammer

Assuring Your Learning     363  
Assuring Your Learning
1. Consider the following scenario: In the 1990s, hard 
disk drive (HDD) makers were among the fi rst 
industries to move production to lower-cost coun-
tries. Beginning in Singapore, these companies 
shifted manufacturing operations to China and 
Thailand, in search of ever-lower labor costs. Since 
then, Thailand has become the second-largest maker 
of hard drives and a major supplier of parts to the 
industry worldwide. With the catastrophic Thai fl oods 
in the fall of 2011, the industry faced shortages of 
over 30 million drives per quarter. Some executives 
at HDD companies were forced to explain a glaring 
oversight: Why had they had relied so heavily on 
a supplier in a country located in a high-fl ood risk 
area? 
 
 
Also consider that: By the end of the 1990s, most 
supply chains had become lean by minimizing their 
inventories and reducing waste, and could schedule 
deliveries across the globe with incredible precision. 
Supply chain speed and fl exibility were impressive. 
Products that should take months to procure and 
manufacture were promised within days of customer 
requests. 
a. What supply chain management lessons can be 
learned from the experiences of HDD makers?
b. What are the risks of highly effi cient and lean 
supply chains? 
c. Could one catastrophic supply chain event wipe 
out years of profi ts or market share? Explain 
your answer.
d. In your opinion, when do cost savings outweigh 
the risks?
e. In your opinion, when are cost savings out-
weighed by the risks?
DISCUSS: Critical Thinking Questions
1. According to “New Study on Collaborative Execution 
Finds Supply Chain Collaboration Can Improve 
Operational Metrics by 50 Percent or More” 
(Bloomberg, 2012), 
By a ratio of nearly two to one, supply chain pro-
fessionals agreed that one of the biggest barriers 
to successful collaboration is a slow issue resolu-
tion process. This was identifi ed as a systemic 
problem related to quality of information fl ow, in 
terms of both the granularity (level of detail) and 
timeliness of data shared. 
And 92 percent of respondents agreed that 
rapid problem resolution was part of good col-
laboration. True collaboration can be defi ned in 
terms of speed, both in problem solving and in 
organizational learning. More than half of the 
responses indicated that speed of response in 
truly collaborative relationships was twice as fast 
or faster, with learning curve improvements more 
than 50 percent greater than in non-collaborative 
trading partner relationships.
a. Discuss why supply chain partners may not be 
able to resolve issues quickly. Consider informa-
tion fl ows in your discussion.
b. What impacts might slow problem (issue) resolu-
tion have on the supply chain?
c. Based on your answer to (a), discuss which enter-
prise systems could speed up problem resolution. 
d. What is meant by learning curve improvements?
2. In your opinion, what might limit the growth of 
3D printing? 
3. Distinguish between ERP and SCM software. In 
what ways do they complement each other? Why 
should they be integrated?
4. State the business value of enterprise systems and 
how they can be used to manage the supply chain 
more effectively.
5. What problems are encountered in implementing 
ERP systems?
6. Find examples of how two of the following organiza-
tions improve their supply chains: manufacturing, 
hospitals, retailing, education, construction, agribusi-
ness, and shipping. Discuss the benefi ts to the 
organizations.
7. It is claimed that supply chains are essentially “a 
series of linked suppliers and customers; every cus-
tomer is in turn a supplier to the next downstream 
organization, until the ultimate end-user.” Explain 
this statement. Use a diagram.
8. Discuss why it is diffi cult to justify CRM.
9. A supply chain is much more powerful in the Inter-
net marketplace. Discuss how Internet technologies 
can be used to manage the supply chain.
Questions for Discussion & Review

364  Chapter 10     Strategic Technology and Enterprise Systems
Visit each of the following enterprise vendor websites. 
Write a brief report on the latest features of their enter-
prise systems, platforms, apps, or solutions.
1. SharePoint
2. Yammer
3. Oracle
4. Salesforce.com
5. SAP
EXPLORE: Online and Interactive Exercises 
1. Select an enterprise system vendor. Search and 
read a case study of one of the vendor’s customers. 
Summarize the case and identify the benefi ts of the 
implementation.
2. Assess the costs and benefi ts of a cloud CRM. A large 
food-processing company would like to determine 
the cost–benefi t of installing a CRM app in a private 
cloud. Create a report that contains these analyses:
a. Calculate the tangible costs and benefi ts in a 
spreadsheet using the data provided. 
b. List two intangible benefi ts of moving to the cloud.
c. Estimate the value of those two benefi ts and 
include them in your spreadsheet prepared for 
Question 1. 
d. List two risks associated with the CRM app if it 
were moved to a public cloud.
DATA
Tangible Costs
• CRM in private cloud: $35 per user per month
ANALYZE & DECIDE: Apply IT Concepts to Business Decisions
• Technical support and maintenance: $250 per month
• Total number of users: 100 (90 salespeople and 
10 supervisors)
• Training of 90 salespeople for fi ve days: productivity 
loss $200 per day per person
• Training of fi ve supervisors: productivity loss 
$300 per day per person
• Additional hardware, networks, and bandwidth: 
$15,000 per month
Tangible Benefits 
• Increase in average sales revenues 
 $6,000 per 
month per salesperson 
• Increase in sales revenues from an improvement in 
customer retention 
 $5,000 per month
• Gross profi t from sales revenues 
 20 percent 
Business Case: Avon’s Failed SAP Implementation: 
Enterprise System Gone Wrong
Avon is one of the world’s leading direct-selling companies. It 
uses independent sales representatives (reps) who, in effect, 
run its cosmetic business as entrepreneurs selling directly to 
customers. The career is attractive during slow economic times 
and presents an opportunity for those who need fl exibility. 
 
Avon’s success depends on retaining independent sales 
reps, recruiting new ones, and increasing the size and fre-
quency of orders received from their sales representatives. In 
2009 Avon CEO Andrea Jung launched the company’s most 
massive recruiting campaign. Avon doubled its investment in 
recruiting advertising and doubled the number of countries in 
which recruiting ads were run. 
Legacy Order Management System 
Avon’s selling process is based on a series of campaigns 
that last 2 to 4 weeks. Sales reps solicit orders from cus-
tomers, and compile them into larger orders placed with 
Avon. Order fulfi llment takes place at an Avon distribution 
center, which ships orders to sales reps who then distribute 
the products to customers and collect payment. The order 
management system was based on legacy systems and 
a cumbersome interface, and was so outdated that sales 
reps could not guarantee product availability for 
their customers. 
CASE 10.2

CASE 10.3     Video Case     365  
Big Bang Approach Was the Wrong Approach
Avon tried to correct its IT challenges using a big bang 
approach—lots of changes in too short a time. In 2010 Avon 
launched its Service Model Transformation (SMT) program 
based on SAP. SMT was intended to improve the way reps 
interacted with the company, including orders, product re-
turns, and order fulfi llment. The SMT and big bang approach 
failed. Three years and $125 million later, Avon ended the 
SMT program. 
 
CEO McCoy admitted that a big bang approach to the 
roll-out was too disruptive to the nature of Avon’s business. 
The nature of direct selling where our 6 million representatives 
are independent entrepreneurs is one of personal relation-
ships, and motivating change with incentives. Change needed 
to be introduced slowly and thoughtfully—and not abruptly. 
Why Was SMT Halted?
Avon’s new management order system was piloted in Canada 
and later rolled out globally. From the outset, the system seri-
ously disrupted operations in Canada. Sales reps complained 
the system did not work as promised. They could not log 
on, orders were not always accepted when submitted, and 
inventory that was needed to fulfi ll orders was not regularly 
reserved. As many as 16,000 Canadian sales reps quit. The 
departure of large numbers of Canadian sales representa-
tives, in turn, disrupted Avon’s ability to do business—and 
attract new representatives. 
 
Other factors contributed to the failure. The order man-
agement system did not interface well with other systems, 
such as IBM’s WebSphere. And Avon put the system into pro-
duction before the platform was ready. At the end of 2013, in 
a fi nancial report, Avon indicated that the cost of the project, 
$125 million, would be taken as a write-down. 
SAP’s Public Comment
In response to the massive failure, SAP released this public 
comment—as damage control: 
Traditional enterprise business is failing to offer the easy 
user experience that modern software customers need. 
SAP has done a lot of work in 2013 on the user experi-
ence aspects of software including the introduction of 
Fiori and Screen personas. They have also put together a 
Design and Co-innovation center. (Kepes, 2013). 
SAP points out the crucial importance of the user experience 
in enterprise success—and that it had invested in apps and 
interfaces to help ensure success.
Sources: Compiled from Avon Annual Reports, Kepes (2013), Saran 
(2013), Henschen (2013a, 2013b) and Fitzgerald (2013).
Questions
1. How did the older order fulfi llment system harm an Avon 
rep’s sales and relationships with her customers? 
2. Why do you think the big bang approach was risky at 
Avon? 
3. How would the age of the sales reps impact success or 
failure?
4. What was Avon trying to accomplish with the Service 
Model Transformation (SMT)? 
5. Why do you think so many sales reps left Avon instead of 
waiting for it to correct the problems?
6. This case demonstrates the relationship between 
different functional areas in a company. What do you 
think should have been done to avoid the problems that 
happened in the pilot study?
Video Case: Procter & Gamble: Creating Conversations in the Cloud 
with 4.8 Billion Consumers
The decline of traditional marketing channels forced changes 
in CRM transformation at Procter & Gamble (P&G). P&G’s 
cloud environment allows for all consumer data to be in one 
location for fresh, relevant relationships with 4.8 billion con-
sumers as they transition from one product to the next over 
the course of their lifetimes. 
 
Visit Teradata.com and search for the video entitled 
“Procter & Gamble: Creating Conversations in the Cloud 
with 4.8 Billion Consumers.” Watch the video (time: 5:14). 
Questions
1. How does P&G maintain an ongoing dialogue with a 
customer?
2. What were P&G’s data challenges?
3. What is 1, Consumer Place? Where is it? 
4. In your opinion, how does P&G try to maximize customer 
lifetime value (CLV)?
CASE 10.3

366  Chapter 10     Strategic Technology and Enterprise Systems
Accenture. “Joint Munitions Command Calls on Accenture 
for Integrated Logistics and High Performance Guidance.” 
accenture.com, 2010. 
All, A. “8 Common CRM Mistakes, and How to Avoid Them.” 
Enterprise Apps Today, February 20, 2014. 
Bloomberg. “New Study on Collaborative Execution Finds 
Supply Chain Collaboration Can Improve Operational 
Metrics by 50 Percent or More.” March 27, 2012. http://www.
bloomberg.com
Bourne, A. “What Does 3D Printing Mean for ERP?” Manu-
facturing.net, January 29, 2014. 
Cohen, D., M. Sargeant, & K. Somers. “3-D Printing Takes 
Shape.” McKinsey Quarterly, January 2014. www.mckinsey.
com
CNNMoney. “Best Jobs in America.” CNN.com, November 12, 
2013. 
Cole, B. “Gartner Report Finds Slow Growth in Global ERP 
Market.” SearchManufacturingERP.com, May 16, 2014. 
Drucker, P.F. The Age of Discontinuity. New York: Harper & 
Row. 1969.
Fine, R. “What Role Does 3D Printing Play in an ERP-Managed 
Manufacturing Process?” Toolbox.com, May 21, 2014. 
Fitzgerald, D. “Avon to Halt Rollout of New Order Manage-
ment System.” The Wall Street Journal, December 11, 2013. 
Gartner.com. “Gartner Says Uses of 3D Printing Will Ignite 
Major Debate on Ethics and Regulation.” January 29, 2014. 
Gartner.com. 
goldmansachs.com. “The Search for Creative Destruction.” 
March 24, 2014. goldmansachs.com.
Henschen, D. “Avon Pulls Plug on $125 million SAP Project.” 
InformationWeek, December 12, 2013a. 
Henschen, D. “Inside Avon’s Failed Order-Management Proj-
ect.” InformationWeek, December 16, 2013b.
Kepes, B. “UPDATED—Avon’s Failed SAP Implementation 
a Perfect Example of the Enterprise IT Revolution.” Forbes, 
December 17,  2013. 
Koplowitz, R. “The Forrester Wave: Enterprise Social Plat-
forms, Q3 2011.” August 24, 2011. 
Lavenda, D. “How Red Robin Transformed Its Business with 
Yammer.” Fast Company, February 6, 2014. 
MHI and Deloitte.  “Innovations That Drive Supply Chains—
The 2014 MHI Annual Industry Report.” 2014. https://www.
mhi.org/publications/report 
Ryan, B. “Integrating Yammer with SharePoint 2013: Navigat-
ing the Options.” CMS Wire, May 22, 2014. 
Schwerin, C. “Army Gears Up for Next Network Integration 
Evaluation.” U.S. Army, army.mil, April 2, 2012. 
Saran, C. “Avon Drops SAP Big Bang Transformation.” 
ComputerWeekly,com, December 13, 2013. 
The Engineer. “Patient Receives 3D Printed Titanium Hip.” 
May 19, 2014.
U.S. Army Business Transformation Knowledge Center, 2009 
army.mil/armyBTKC. 
References

Chapter Snapshot
Analytics has historically been done by statisticians, 
programmers, and data scientists (the “big guys”) who 
rarely interacted directly with the business. However, this 
experts-only approach has changed because of easier-to-use 
data visualization, dashboard, and mashup technologies. 
Data analytics are being pushed out into the business by 
advances that make it possible for most employees to use 
analytics themselves. Vendors of enterprise-level analytics 
are also upgrading their visualization and reporting 
platforms that are designed for use by the big guys. 
1. Describe how data visualization applications and interac-
tive reports support learning and business functions.
2. Explain how data mashup applications streamline the 
process of integrating diverse data sources and 
information feeds to support data needs that cannot 
be anticipated.
3. Describe how companies optimize operations with the 
help of dashboards. Explain how enterprise dashboards 
are built and how they leverage real time data and 
people’s natural ability to think visually.
4. Assess the business applications and benefits of 
geospatial data and geographic information systems.
Learning Outcomes
367
Chapter Snapshot
Case 11.1 Opening Case: Safeway and PepsiCo 
Apply Data Visualization to Supply Chain
11.1 Data Visualization and Learning
11.2  Enterprise Data Mashups 
11.3  Digital Dashboards
11.4  Geospatial Data and Geographic 
Information Systems
Key Terms
Assuring Your Learning
• Discuss: Critical Thinking Questions
• Explore: Online and Interactive Exercises
•  Analyze & Decide: Apply IT Concepts 
to Business Decisions
Case 11.2 Visualization Case: Are You Ready 
for Football?
Case 11.3 Video Case: The Beauty of 
Data Visualization—Data Detective 
References
Data Visualization 
and Geographic 
Information Systems
11
Chapter

 
Several tools discussed in this chapter enable 
you to be self-sufficient. Drag-and-drop, automation, 
“show me” wizards, and easy-to-use dashboards enable 
you to develop your own interactive data visualization 
(viz), apps, and dashboards. Reducing dependency on 
IT staff has a long history. For example, at one time, 
managers did not analyze data with spreadsheets, but 
now Excel expertise is expected. Vendors offer aca-
demic alliances to enable universities to teach their 
software in MBA and undergraduate business courses. 
Tableau Desktop, QlikView, TIBCO Spotfire, and 
IBM’s SPSS Analytic Catalyst enable business users to 
conduct the kind of advanced analysis that could only 
Gained 10 or more
Change in population
density for counties
(people per square mile)
5 to 10
2 to 5
1 to 2
Minor change
–1 to –2
–2 to –5
–5 to –10
Lost 10 or more
Figure 11.1 U.S. Census Bureau map shows changes in population density for 
counties using the colors green (gain) and purple (loss) to represent direction 
of change and color intensity to represent magnitude of change. Source: www.
census.gov/
368
have been used by expert users of statistical software a 
few years ago.
 
In Chapter 3, you read about big data analytics, 
data mining, and business intelligence (BI). Chapter 
11 expands on these topics with the latest in data viz, 
visual discovery, dashboards, mashups, and geographic 
information systems (GISs). Companies are incorpo-
rating geospatial data and GISs into their CRM, SCM, 
BI, and other enterprise apps. GM, Verizon, Walmart, 
Starbucks, and Nike use GISs to view their businesses 
spatially. Maps can tell a more compelling story than 
words or numbers, as shown in Figure 11.1, by effective 
use of visual cues. 

Figure 11.2 Deloitte 
Consulting partnered with 
PepsiCo and Safeway to help 
analyze huge amounts of 
point-of-sale (POS) data at its 
state-of-the-art visualization 
center called HIVE.
369
CASE 11.1 OPENING CASE
Safeway and PepsiCo Apply Data Visualization to Supply Chain
PepsiCo worked with major
customers to improve demand
forecasts in order to minimize
inventory on-hand.
Deloitte Consulting partnered with
PepsiCo and Safeway to help them
visually analyze POS data at the
Deloitte Analytics HIVE, short for
Highly Immersive Visual
Environment.
PepsiCo and Safeway
The goal of Safeway’s Data
Visibility program is to improve
supply chain visibility with key
vendors, such as PepsiCo.
TABLE 11.1 
Opening Case Overview 
Companies 
•  Safeway, Inc., a $44.2 billion grocery chain incorpo-
rated in Pleasanton, CA.
 
•  PepsiCo, a major food and beverage company head-
quartered in Purchase, NY, with 274,000 employees 
and 2013 revenue of $66.4 billion.
Locations and 
•  Safeway is a food and drug retailer in North America
Industries  
    with 1,335 stores in California, Hawaii, Oregon, 
Washington, and the Mid-Atlantic region.
 
•  PepsiCo is a food and beverage manufacturer whose 
products are marketed in more than 200 countries 
and territories. 
Deloitte  
HIVE is a physical environment where people can
Consulting’s  
examine the latest analytics approaches themselves
HIVE 
using their own data. 
Business challenges 
 Inventory management is crucial to retail operations—
and a challenge throughout the supply chain.
SUPPLY CHAIN 
VISIBILITY
In an effort to improve supply chain visibility, Safeway implemented data-sharing 
programs with PepsiCo and other key vendors (Figure 11.1 and Table 11.1). 
Benefits of improved visibility are increased sales and millions of dollars in reduced 
costs along the entire supply chain. 
Supply chain visibility is 
the awareness and sharing 
of POS data and data about 
product orders, inventory 
levels, demand forecasts, 
transportation, and logistics 
by trading partners from raw 
material to delivery to end 
customer. 

370  Chapter 11     Data Visualization and Geographic Information Systems
In 2012, Clay Broussard, Director of Customer Supply Chain & Logistics at 
PepsiCo, contacted Safeway’s Kirsten Curtis, Director of Demand Planning & BI. 
Clay explained (Curtis, 2013): 
Safeway’s Data Visibility program is very forward thinking. Paired with 
PepsiCo’s 360¤ Retail execution program, our teams are equipped to improve an 
already lean supply chain. But if we really want to take it to the next level, we 
need a different way to view the data. Deloitte Consulting has offered to part-
ner with us to provide an effective way to interpret massive amounts of data at 
its state-of-the-art visualization center called the HIVE . . . are you interested? 
Kirsten was interested because she believed a data visualization strategy was vital 
to Safeway’s success. 
EXCEL-BASED 
ANALYTICS 
In the past, when Safeway wanted answers about stockouts, managers used spread-
sheets to gather and compile inventory data and see how stocksouts trended across 
the company. With spreadsheets, managers could discover general trends over time, 
but they could not identify trends across a specific brand or universal product code 
(UPC). Trends about each brand required more data than could be represented in 
rows and columns of a spreadsheet. Spreadsheet limitations ultimately led the com-
pany to try data visualization. In August 2012, representatives from Safeway and 
PepsiCo came to Deloitte’s HIVE for a day-long design session to analyze many 
terabytes of data.
HIVE
Deloitte hosts meetings with business leaders who want to understand business 
analytics better. These sessions are tailored to address their business challenges. At 
the HIVE, executives get help with analytics tools using their own data.
The HIVE gathers together a wide range of the latest analytics technologies from 
all over the world. In a very short amount of time, executives can learn what might 
otherwise have taken months of meetings, demonstrations, and business pitches. 
Data Visualization Process at the Hive
PepsiCo and Safeway participants collaborated to understand how to reduce the 
“number of days of supply” from their supply chain while maintaining service levels. 
This project would save PepsiCo and Safeway millions of dollars each year. During 
their session, data visualizations were built to explore questions about stockouts. 
The data included brands, UPC barcodes, costs, districts, store numbers, out-of-
stock scans, and out-of-stock reason codes. After Safeway and PepsiCo decided on 
the visualization technique that best represented their supply chain, they needed to 
design three processes to operationalize it. The three processes to be designed were:
1. How to feed the huge datasets into the visualization software
2. The best ways to display the data visually
3. How to gather feedback
Within 40 days, Pepsico and Safeway implemented their initial data visualization 
with dashboards and drill-down capabilities, then spent another 20 days refining it.
What They Learned From Data Visualization and Dashboards
Safeway identified the stores experiencing the most stockouts and their root causes. 
For example, it learned a disproportionate number of stockouts were occurring at a 

11.1     Data Visualization and Learning     371  
store on Catalina Island. The store is in a resort area where the tourist traffic causes 
uneven demand. Safeway adjusted its supply chain strategy to address uneven 
demand patterns.
Safeway also discovered that they were sending multiple and conflicting fore-
casts to their vendors from various departments. Safeway changed the way the 
company creates and communicates forecasts with its suppliers.
Two significant operational improvements at Safeway from discoveries made 
through data visualization are:
1. Improved forecast accuracy by 35 percent.
2. Reduced on-hand warehouse inventory, which cut inventory carrying costs 
significantly. 
PepsiCo is also benefitting because now it has incredible near real time access to the 
movement of every PepsiCo item, at every Safeway store, every day.
Sources: Compiled from Deloitte CIO Journal (2013), Curtis (2013), and Sommer and Lovelock (2013). 
Questions 
1. What is a potential benefi t of supply chain visibility?
2. What was the limitation of Excel-based data analytics at Safeway?
3. What is Deloitte’s HIVE?
4. What steps did Safeway and PepsiCo undertake to arrive at their data 
visualization solution? 
5. What did Safeway learn from its data visualization dashboards?
6. What were the two operational improvements at Safeway?
Visuals are the single best way our brain processes information. We rely on visual 
cues to grasp and process huge amounts of information. Data visualization har-
nesses the power of analytics and adds a visual display to capitalize on how our 
brains work. Interactive displays, charts with drill-down capability, and geospatial 
data analysis are a few examples of the many ways to work with data. Data visual-
ization software can be extremely powerful and complex, such as Deloitte’s HIVE 
platform. At the other continuum are tools with simple, point-and-click interfaces 
that do not require any particular coding knowledge or significant training. Most 
non-data-scientist-friendly tools have interactive elements and can pull data from 
Google Docs, Excel spreadsheets, Access databases, and other sources that most 
business people work with already.
In the first section of this chapter, the focus is on the technologies that fall into 
the data analytics category, as shown in Figure 11.3. Later sections discuss informa-
tion delivery and data integration. Vendor packages usually offer tools in more than 
11.1  Data Visualization and Learning
Information Delivery
Data Integration
Data Analytics
• Data visualization
• Data discovery
• Geospatial & GIS
• Dashboards
• Interactive reports 
• Data mashups
• GIS
Figure 11.3 Tools and 
technologies in this chapter 
fall into three related 
categories.
Geospatial data identify 
the geographic location and 
characteristics of natural or 
constructed features and 
boundaries on the earth, 
typically represented by 
points, lines, or polygons.

372  Chapter 11     Data Visualization and Geographic Information Systems
one category. In general, reporting tools show what has already happened in a busi-
ness. Analytical tools show what might or could happen in the future. 
LEARNING, EXPLORING, 
AND DISCOVERY
When companies, political parties, sports teams, or fund-raising agencies invest 
in campaigns, promotions, special events, or other projects, they want to learn 
something from them. Learning is the basis for continuous improvement, such as 
improved earnings as you read in the opening case. Visualization is also used as a 
data explorer or for data discovery—discovering hidden relationships. Like Safeway 
and PepsiCo, companies across industries are discovering new relationships and 
learning how to improve performance using data visualization. Enterprise visualiza-
tion apps for Androids, Apple iPads, and Blackberry Playbooks are replacing static 
business reports with real time data, analytics, and interactive reporting tools.
Visuals
Examples of visualizations are dials, charts, graphs, timelines, geospatial maps 
(refer to Figure 11.1), and heat maps. The tricolor heat map in Figure 11.4 instantly 
alerts the viewer to critical areas most in need of attention. Visual displays make 
it easier for individuals to understand data and identify patterns that offer answers 
to business questions like “Which product lines have the highest and lowest profit 
margins in each region?” Interactivity and drill-down capabilities are standard 
features. In Figure 11.5 are two other types of heat maps, both based on the same 
dataset and created with Tableau Desktop. Notice how visual display depends on 
what you want to learn or convey. 
As you read in Chapter 3 and Figure 3.1, human expertise is an essential 
component of data visualization. A common mistake is to invest in the analytics 
foundation—tools, quality data, data integration, touch screens—but overlook the 
most crucial component—namely, users’ ability to interpret the visual reports and 
analyses correctly.
Figure 11.4 This heat map uses three colors to convey information at a glance. 
The heat map is like a spreadsheet whose cells are formatted with colors instead 
of numbers. (Moody’s.)
RISKS
Country
code
NA–1
NA–2
SA–1
SA–2
SA–3
SA–4
SA–5
AA–1
AA–2
AP–1
AP–2
Capital/Financial
Inflation
Economic/Social
Government
DATA DISCOVERY 
MARKET SEPARATES 
FROM THE BI MARKET
According to Gartner’s research, in 2014 the data analytics market split into two 
segments: the traditional BI market and the new data discovery market. Data 
discovery software had been viewed as a supplement to traditional BI platforms. 
Now it is a stand-alone alternative to BI. This split occurred because today’s data 

11.1     Data Visualization and Learning     373  
Figure 11.5 These heat maps represent the same dataset using red and green 
and color intensity to show the profi tability of three product categories and their 
subcategories. In (a), data labels show detailed profi t, while in (b) the area of 
each segment is used to make comparisons.
Region
Product Cate... Product Sub-Category
Bookcases
Chairs & Chairmats
Office Furnishings
Tables
Appliances
Binders and Binder Accessories
Envelopes
Labels
Paper
Pens & Art Supplies
Rubber Bands
Scissors, Rulers and Trimmers
Storage & Organization
Computer Peripherals
Copiers and Fax
Office Machines
Telephones and Communication
Furniture
Office
Supplies
Technology
Central
73
37,920
26,293
–19,777
22,950
73,951
10,825
2,429
11,047
2,781
–174
–1,765
–68
11,971
513
38,876
79,393
–676
44,409
30,941
–16,990
31,276
92,273
11,222
3,740
10,433
518
178
–1,953
–2,018
37,280
35,997
61,377
84,860
–22,417
34,026
25,121
26,172
26,986
69,530
19,182
3,479
10,997
1,397
156
–2,903
11,836
30,475
63,598
129,060
78,985
–10,151
33,583
14,523
–50,677
16,812
71,420
7,482
4,041
13,510
2,856
–238
–1,179
–7,233
14,808
67,254
47,277
73,715
East
South
West
(a)
Technology
Telephones and
Communication
Technology
Copiers and Fax
Furniture
Chairs & Chairmats
Furniture
Office Furnishings
Technology
Computer
Peripherals
Office Supplies
Appliances
Office
Supplies
Paper
Office Supplies
Envelopes
Furniture
Tables
Technology
Office Machines
Office Supplies
Binders and Binder
Accessories
(b)

374  Chapter 11     Data Visualization and Geographic Information Systems
discovery technologies provide greater data exploration and ease of use to help 
users find answers to “why” and “what if” questions through self-service analytic 
apps. The split is another example of pushing analytics onto the computers of busi-
ness workers. IT at Work 11.1 describes the trend at eBay. 
At eBay, the trend is toward everyone doing their own data 
discovery. David Stone, Senior Manager Analytics Platform 
at eBay, described the importance of offering data analytics 
tools to members of the eBay team. Stone explained that 
when limited to Excel and its million-row limit, it caused them: 
“to look at the top three categories instead of the top 
40,000 categories and there’s so much less data. At 
eBay that’s important because there is more action out 
in the long tail accumulated than there is in the top three 
categories.” (Groenfeldt, 2013)
Using data discovery software, employees can dig deep into 
items in the top 40,000 categories because they no longer 
face row limits. Employees can interact and visualize data 
and can do data discovery on their own to better manage 
performance.
Questions
1. In what way is data discovery more critical to online retail-
ers than to retailers with physical stores?
2. How did Excel limit eBay’s data analysis? 
3. Discuss the impacts of self-service data discovery on 
eBay.
4. Why do you think eBay employees were willing to do 
their own data visualizations? 
IT at Work 1 1 .1
Do-Your-Own Data Discovery at eBay
Analytics/Visualization Vendors Responding to Demand 
Smaller data visualization vendors are competing head-on with BI megavendors 
Oracle and SAP BusinessObjects. Vendors QlikView, Birst, Tableau, and TIBCO 
Spotfire are adding enterprise features with each new release. SAS made one of the 
boldest moves of any vendor with its plans to replace its current enterprise BI plat-
form with Visual Analytics, a new data discovery environment. SAS is also adding 
dashboard development to traditional reporting in the same user-friendly platform.
These vendors continue to focus on business users of all levels and back-
grounds. For example, Jeff Strauss, the BI architect at Allstate Insurance Company, 
explained that Allstate invested in Tableau data discovery tools so users throughout 
the organization could do their own analysis rather than rely on the IT department. 
Tableau had built a fan club with easy-to-access dashboards.
Data Discovery Offers Speed and Flexibility
Data discovery is expected to take on a greater role in corporate decision making. 
Companies are investing in the latest data discovery solutions largely because of 
their speed and flexibility. Experts and nonexperts can collect data quickly from 
disparate sources and then explore the dataset with easy-to-use interactive visu-
alizations and search interfaces. Drill-down paths are not predefined, which gives 
users more flexibility in how they view detailed data. 
A powerful feature of data discovery systems is their ability to integrate data 
from multiple data stores and identify data types and roles. See Tech Note 11.1. 
While data are being loaded into the program, the software automatically extracts 
and organizes them by data type. Software may also extract and organize terms 
from unstructured content, such as texts, e-mail, and PDFs and create tag clouds. 
Figure 11.6 is an example. Tag clouds give users a quick way to size up a situation 
and start to make discoveries. 

11.1     Data Visualization and Learning     375  
Figure 11.6 Tag clouds 
represent the relative 
frequency of words and 
terms by their sizes.
TECH NOTE 11.1 Understanding Data Types and Roles
Data types and roles are fundamental components that affect how visualizations 
behave. Each fi eld in any data source has an associated data type. For example, a 
fi eld that contains customer names has a string (text) data type, and a fi eld that con-
tains price information usually has a numeric data type. To visualize data QlikView, 
Tableau—or in any analytics or BI tool, for that matter—you need to understand 
dimensions and measures.
• Dimensions. Dimensions contain discrete or categorical data, such as a region 
(e.g., Northeast, Southwest), product category, product subcategory, prod-
uct name, supplier, size, date, and zip code. Dimensions often become labels 
in the data visualization.
• Measures. A measure is a calculation based on numeric data, such as profit, 
margin, quantity sold, speed, and miles. The calculation always returns one 
single value that summarizes all relevant records. The calculation is called 
an aggregation. As in spreadsheets, there are several aggregation functions: 
Sum(), Count(), Average (), Min(), Max(), and so on. Typically, KPIs are 
measures—revenue, number of orders, quantity, and cost. A measure is 
always based on an aggregation.
REAL-WORLD 
EXAMPLES OF DATA 
VISUALIZATION
The ultimate goal of data analytics is to drive profits, and often that depends on 
learning how to manage assets, such as inventory, or engage customers in a smarter 
way. Collecting data is relatively easy. Making sense of that data is not. Here are 
examples of how companies and/or entire industries are using data visualization and 
interactivity to improve decision speed and performance often with mobile displays. 
Quick Detection and Decisions in Stock Markets 
Wall Street firms, traders, wealth managers, risk analysts, and regulators rely on 
their ability to process and capitalize on market anomalies in real time. Because 
of the demanding pace of their decisions, capital markets professionals use visu-
alization for risk analysis, pre-trade and post-trade checks, compliance monitor-
ing, fraud detection, client profitability analysis, research and sales, and portfolio 
© Equinox Imagery/Alamy

376  Chapter 11     Data Visualization and Geographic Information Systems
performance. Vendor Aqumin provides real time visual interpretation solutions 
for the financial services industry. Aqumin’s OptionVision enables traders, risk 
managers, and market participants to spot opportunities, risk, and market changes. 
AlphaVision for Excel enables visual interpretation capabilities directly within the 
Microsoft Excel platform, and AlphaVision for Bloomberg is developed for profes-
sional portfolio managers, traders, and risk analysts and is connected directly to the 
Bloomberg Terminal to leverage data provided by Bloomberg. 
The Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE), Gain Capital, JP Morgan, 
hedge funds, and other asset management firms not only need data visualization but 
their executives and investors expect the quality and excitement of visuals to make 
sense of dry financial data.
Improving the HR Function 
ADP Corporation is one of the largest payroll service providers in the world, with 
data on 33 million workers. In 2014, payroll processing company ADP rolled out 
data visualizations with predictive analytics to improve its human resource (HR) 
function. After organizing the information and funneling it through an analysis 
program, the HR department found that ADP would soon face a serious retirement 
problem. To mitigate its foreseeable future talent gaps, ADP constructed new train-
ing programs to prepare the next generation of workers.
Prompt Disaster Response by the Insurance Industry
The effectiveness of an insurer’s response to a devastating hurricane or other 
catastrophic event depends on its ability to combine large amounts of data to fully 
understand the impact. Leading insurers are using Web-based data visualization and 
analysis technologies to better manage their responses to major disasters. In the days 
and weeks after a disaster, insurers face analysis and reporting bottlenecks. Analysts 
capable of creating maps and reports work frantically to respond to requests for 
information. Because new data continue being generated even after the event, the 
data have a short life span and reports need to be regenerated and redistributed.
For example, when an earthquake occurs, workers throughout an insurance 
company access a Web-based (cloud) data app to visualize and analyze the impact. 
Users quickly determine which properties were subject to specific shake intensities 
and can visually build analyses on their own, rather than waiting for a report. 
LEADING AND LATEST 
DATA VISUALIZATION 
TOOLS
IBM SPSS Analytic Catalyst has made sophisticated analytics accessible. Analytic 
Catalyst enables business users to conduct the kind of advanced analysis that had 
been designed for experts in statistical software. The software fast tracks analytics by 
identifying key drivers, selecting an appropriate model, testing it, and then explain-
ing the results in plain English. See the YouTube video titled “IBM SPSS Analytic 
Catalyst” for an overview. The tool condenses the analytic process into three steps: 
data upload, selection of the target variable (the dependent variable or outcome 
variable), and data exploration. Once the data are uploaded, the system selects tar-
get variables and automatically correlates and associates the data. Based on charac-
teristics of the data, Analytic Catalyst chooses the appropriate method and returns 
summary data rather than statistical data. On the initial screen, it communicates so-
called top insights in plain text and presents visuals, such as a decision tree in a churn 
analysis. Once the user has absorbed the top-level information, he or she can drill 
down into top key drivers. This enables users to see interactivity between attributes.
Tableau is one of the easier data discovery tools to implement, requiring just 
basic database information to connect it to the target data sources. With a new in-
memory database engine such tools are developing the power to perform big data 
analytics. Despite data viz advancement, data integration between data sources can 
still be very challenging. 

11.2     Enterprise Data Mashups     377  
Roambi Analytics is a leading mobile reporting and data visualization app 
designed for iPads and iPhones. The app can take data from most sources, includ-
ing Box, Google Docs, spreadsheets, BI systems, databases, and Salesforce.com, 
and transform them into interactive data visualizations. Roambi has a worldwide 
customer base of Global 500 companies and small and medium businesses across 
industries, including: telecommunications, biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, consumer 
technology, and packaged goods.
Questions
1. How does data visualization contribute to learning?
2. How do heat maps and tag clouds convey information?
3. Why are data visualization and discovery usage increasing?
4. Give two examples of data visualization for performance management.
Enterprise mashups combine business data and applications from multiple sources—
typically a mix of internal data and applications with externally sourced data, SaaS 
(software as a service) and Web content—to create an integrated experience. 
Mashups, in general, became popular because of social and mobile technology. 
Although most early mashups were consumer focused, the ability of enterprise mash-
ups to quickly and easily consolidate on a single webpage or mobile device screen 
data and functionality that is normally spread across several applications offers real 
business opportunities for companies of all shapes and sizes around the world.
Enterprises use mashups as quick, cost-effective solutions to a range of issues. 
Because mashups use preexisting technology, they do not require a huge investment 
and can be developed in hours rather than days or weeks.
11.2  Enterprise Data Mashups
MASHUP 
ARCHITECTURE
Technically, a mashup is a technique for building applications that combine data 
from multiple sources to create an integrated experience. As techniques for creating 
mashups became easier, companies started using them to build enterprise mashups 
that supported their business models. Tech-savvy managers realize that they can 
use mashup apps with their existing data and external services to provide new and 
interesting views on the data. 
Figure 11.7 shows the general architecture of an enterprise mashup app. Data from 
operational data stores, business systems, external data (economic data, suppliers; 
Enterprise
mashup app
Enterprise mashup
External
data
Data
Data
Business
systems
News
feeds
Figure 11.7 Architecture 
of enterprise mashup 
application. 

378  Chapter 11     Data Visualization and Geographic Information Systems
information, competitors’ activities), and real time news feeds are integrated to 
generate an enterprise mashup.
TECH NOTE 11.2 Adaptive Discovery Dashboard Software
Software vendor Adaptive Insights offers Adaptive Discovery, next-generation dash-
board software. The software is widely used by businesses, nonprofi ts, government, 
and universities. Several users are Coca-Cola, Siemens, Bridgestone, Nikon, AAA, 
Toyota, and NBC News. 
 
Users can create dashboards, drill down to understand root causes, and perform 
what-if scenarios without any programming expertise. In 2014, it was the only cloud-
based data visualization and dashboard software designed for use by executives, 
line-of-business managers, and fi nance without relying on IT. 
 
One of the features of Adaptive Discovery is Visual Designer for Dashboards. 
With minimal training in Visual Designer, business users can:
• Use drag and drop to create and edit personalized dashboards
• Leverage predefined chart formats 
• Create private dashboards or share them with others
The vendor offers free 30-day trials and demos from AdaptiveInsights.com. 
ENTERPRISE DATA 
MASHUPS
Enterprise data mashups are combinations of data from various business systems 
and external sources, often in real time, without necessarily relying on a middle step 
of ETL (extract, transform, and load) from a data warehouse. While combining dis-
parate data sources is common for a data mashup, even if there is only a single data 
source, a mashup can be made by combining data in a way that is not anticipated. 
End users and analysts who rely on dashboards and drill-down capabilities benefit 
from greater access to data, but the mashups remain behind the scene and invisible. 
Interactive dashboards and drillable reports can be rapidly built based on mashed-
up data. Tech Note 11.2 discusses dashboard software. Heat maps and tree maps 
can be created as data visualizations in mashups.
For organizations, mashup apps decrease IT implementation costs over tradi-
tional, custom software development (discussed in Chapter 12) and significantly 
simplify business workflows—both increase the ROI (return on investment) of 
mashup implementations. 
WHY BUSINESS USERS 
NEED DATA MASHUP 
TECHNOLOGY
Business users have a hard enough time identifying their current data needs. It is 
not realistic to expect them also to consider all the new sources of data that might 
be made available to them and the analyses they might do if they had access to 
that data. With traditional BI and data warehousing systems, data sources have 
to be identified and some understanding of data requirements and data models is 
needed. 
Realizing that there will always be data needs that cannot be anticipated, 
the question is whether IT should be in the middle of supporting those requests? 
Providing business users with self-service enables them to meet their needs more 
quickly. They also have the opportunity to explore and experiment. 

11.2     Enterprise Data Mashups     379  
Enterprise mashups improve operational efficiency, optimize the sales pipeline, 
enhance customer satisfaction, and drive profitability. Within government, mashups 
have positively impacted strategic areas such as citizen engagement and satisfac-
tion, financial transparency, project oversight, regulatory compliance, and legislated 
reporting. A summary of enterprise mashup benefits is given in Table 11.2. 
TABLE 11.2 
Enterprise Mashups Benefi ts
Summary of benefi ts of mashup technology to an enterprise:
• Dramatically reduces time and effort needed to combine disparate data sources.
• Users can define their own data mashups by combining fields from different 
data sources that were not previously modeled.
• Users can import external data sources, e.g., spreadsheets and competitor 
data, to create new dashboards.
• Enables the building of complex queries by nonexperts with a drag-and-drop 
query building tool.
• Enables agile BI because new data sources can be added to a BI system 
quickly via direct links to operational data sources, bypassing the need to load 
them to a data warehouse. 
• Provides a mechanism to easily customize and share knowledge throughout 
the company. 
ENTERPRISE MASHUP 
TECHNOLOGY
Mashup technology leverages investments in both BI tools and interactive tech-
nologies. BI systems are very good at filtering and aggregating huge data volumes 
into information. With mashup technology, for example, users can filter down the 
data based on their needs so that only the information needed is provided by the 
available data services. Tech Note 11.3 describes mashup self-service. 
TECH NOTE 11.3 Mashup Self-Service
Many BI systems are designed by the IT department and based on infl exible data 
sources. The result is a bottleneck of end-user change requests as business needs and 
data sources change. The solution is self-service mashup capabilities. 
 
Using data mashup apps, nontechnical users can easily and quickly access, inte-
grate, and display BI data from a variety of operational data sources, including those 
that are not integrated into the existing data warehouse, without having to under-
stand the intricacies of the underlying data infrastructures or schemas.
In an enterprise environment, mashups can be used to solve a wide variety of busi-
ness problems and day-to-day situations. Examples of these types of mashups are:
1. Customer. A customer data mashup that provides a quick view of customer data 
for a sales person in preparation for a customer site visit. Data can be pulled 
from internal data stores and Web sources, such as contact information, links to 
related websites, recent customer orders, lists of critical situations, and more.

380  Chapter 11     Data Visualization and Geographic Information Systems
2. Logistics. A logistics mashup that displays inventory for a group of department 
stores based on specifi c criteria. For example, you can mash current storm infor-
mation onto a map of store locations and then wire the map to inventory data to 
show which stores located in the path of storms are low on generators.
3. Human resource. An HR mashup that provides a quick glance at employee data 
such as profi les, salary, ratings, benefi ts status, and activities. Data can be fi ltered 
to show custom views, for example, products whose average quarterly sales are 
lower than last quarter.
Enterprise Mashup Vendors
Several vendors offer mashup capabilities, but not all of them offer enterprise-grade 
mashup software. Vendors offering enterprise mashups are Magic Software and 
JackBe with Presto. Point-and-click dashboard building is a common feature. These 
mashup technologies provide visually rich and secure enterprise apps created from 
live data. They provide the flexibility to combine data from any enterprise app and 
the cloud regardless of its location. Users can build apps and dashboards that can 
be displayed on the Web and mobile devices.
Questions
1. Sketch or describe the architecture of an enterprise mashup application. 
2. What is an enterprise data mashup?
3. What are the functions and uses of enterprise mashups?
4. Explain why business workers may need data mashup technology.
5. What are three benefi ts of mashup technology to the organization?
Dashboards are a style of reporting that depicts KPIs, operational or strategic 
information with intuitive and interactive displays. Table 11.3 lists typical met-
rics displayed on dashboards by function. An executive dashboard displays a 
company’s performance metrics, which are automatically updated in real time 
(every 15 minutes) based on custom programming and connectivity with exist-
ing business systems. Dashboards improve the information synthesis process 
by bringing in multiple, disparate data feeds and sources, extracting features of 
interest, and manipulating the data so the information is in a more accessible 
format. Users no longer need to log into multiple applications to see how the 
business is performing. 
Components of dashboards are: 
• Design. The visualization techniques and descriptive captions to convey 
information so that they are correctly understood. Infographics are widely 
used because they convey information in interesting and informative designs. 
• Performance metrics. KPIs and other real time content displayed on the dash-
board. All dashboard data should reflect the current value of each metric.
• API. APIs (application programming interfaces) connect disparate data 
sources and feeds to display on the dashboard. The alternative is for users 
or IT to manually enter data to the dashboard. Dashboards created in this 
manner tend to fail because of the risk of incomplete, outdated, or wrong 
data, which users learn not to trust.
• Access. Preferred access is via a secure Web browser from a mobile device. 
11.3  Digital Dashboards 

11.3     Digital Dashboards     381  
TABLE 11.3 
Metrics Displayed on Dashboards by Function 
DASHBOARDS 
METRICS
Financial 
• Net income
performance 
• Cash balance, actual vs. expected
 
• Profi t, current month projection
 
• Changes in A/R and A/P 
E-commerce  
• Daily website visitors by traffi c source
 
• Trend of mobile vs. tablet traffi c
 
• Location where visitors are located
 
• Top referring websites
 
• Top keywords referring traffi c
 
• Revenue per website visitor
Revenue 
• Sales per day per channel
 
• How revenue is trending
 
• Days with strongest sales, weakest sales
 
• Products selling the best, worst
Sales team 
•  Sales by lead source; which leads are most and least 
effective
 
• Number of leads and proposals per salesperson
 
• Proposal close percentage,
 
• Salesperson closing percentages
 
•  Where in the conversion funnel customers are being 
lost. Conversion funnels are paths that prospective 
customers take before they become paying clients
Advertising  
•  Number of leads generated by advertising; which 
advertising is most and least effective
 
• Cost per lead, by advertising source
 
• Advertising expense, as a percent of sales
 
• Which advertising sources directly lead to sales
Order fulfi llment 
• Number of products manufactured, reworked
 
• On-time completion percent
 
• Changes in inventory levels
 
• Percent of on-time delivery per week, month
DASHBOARDS ARE 
REAL TIME
Dashboards are often mistakenly thought of as reports consisting of various gauges, 
charts, and dials, but the purpose of business dashboards is much more specific and 
directed. The purpose of dashboards is to give users a clear view of the current state 
of KPIs, real time alerts, and other metrics about operations. Dashboard design is a 
critical factor because business users need to be able to understand the significance 
of the dashboard information at a glance and have the capability to drill down to 
one or more levels of detail. Having real time, or near real time, data is essential 
to keep users aware of any meaningful changes in the metrics as they occur and to 
provide information for making decisions in real time. Users can take corrective 
actions promptly.

382  Chapter 11     Data Visualization and Geographic Information Systems
By looking at the dashboard in Figure 11.8, you notice how color-coded dis-
plays can quickly inform the user of the status of KPIs. 
Figure 11.8 Dashboards are designed to meet the information needs 
of their users.
Region Name
ANZ
2
23
6
22
28
8
10
18
18
2
12
8
9
11
5
2
Canada
Asia Pacific HQ
Central and Southern Europ
Eastern Europe
France
Germany
Greater China
India
Japan
33.33%
36.36%
Drop Column Fields Here
Subsid
Total Ev Goal Evide Evidence perce
35
125.00%
90.00%
61.11%
16.67%
27.78%
33.33
100
0
Asia Pacific HQ
36.36
100
0
Canada
125
100
0
Central and Southern E
90
100
0
61.11
100
0
27.78
100
0
33.33
100
0
Asia Pacific HQ
36.36
100
0
Canada
90
100
0
France
61.11
100
0
Germany
125
100
0
Central and
Southern Europe
Gauge
Figure 11.9 Dashboards 
pull data from disparate 
data sources and feeds, 
manipulate the data, and 
then display the metrics.
HOW OPERATIONAL 
AND STRATEGIC 
DASHBOARDS WORK
Dashboards are custom programmed to automatically and securely pull, analyze, 
and display data from enterprise systems, cloud apps, data feeds, and external sources 
(Figure 11.9). They work by connecting to business systems, such as accounting 
© Media Mates Oy/iStockphoto

11.3     Digital Dashboards     383  
software, ERP, CRM, SCM, e-mail systems, website analytics programs, and project 
management software via APIs. IT at Work 11.2 describes dashboards in action at 
Hartford Hospital. Tech Note 11.4 lists vendors that offer free trials of dashboard 
software. 
TECH NOTE 11.4 Free Trial Dashboards
A few vendors that offer free trials to build your own dashboards are:
• Dundas.com
• GrowThink.com
• MicroStrategy.com
• SAP Crystal Dashboard Design
• Sisense.com
BENEFITS 
The interrelated benefits of business dashboards are:
1. Visibility. Blind spots are minimized or eliminated. Threats and opportunities 
are detected as soon as possible. 
2. Continuous improvement. A famous warning from Peter Drucker was “if you 
can’t measure it, you can’t improve it.” Executive dashboards are custom de-
signed to display the user’s critical metrics and measures. 
3. Single sign on. Managers can spend a lot of time logging into various business 
systems and running reports. Single-sign-on dashboards save time and effort. 
4. Deviations from what was budgeted or planned. Any metrics, such as those list-
ed in Table 11.3, can be programmed to display deviations from targets, such as 
comparisons of actual and planned or budgeted. 
5. Accountability. When employees know their performance is tracked in near 
real time and can see their results, they tend to be motivated to improve their 
performance. 
Health-care providers at Hartford Hospital, a 700-bed teach-
ing hospital in Connecticut, were challenged by the short-
age of real time data in usable form, according to Michael 
Lindberg M.D., chairman of the Department of Medicine 
(Baldwin, 2011). Hartford Hospital implemented dashboard 
technology from CareFx. 
Dr. Lindberg uses the dashboard to track data in three 
key areas that impact the hospital’s performance:
1. Patient data. Data on patients’ length of stay and per-
centage of early morning discharges. 
2. Bed availability. Data on types of beds open, percentage 
of beds not available for patients such as those being 
cleaned, or beds in a room with a patient in isolation. 
3. Remission rate. Data about patients who return to the 
hospital within 30 days of their discharge date.
The dashboard data helps Dr. Lindberg fulfill Joint 
Commission requirements for ongoing physician evalua-
tions. He can identify trends and compare current to past 
performance. According to Dr. Lindberg, “We need to have 
a handle on what physicians are doing. Having a database to 
IT at Work 1 1 .2
Dashboards in Action at Hartford Hospital

384  Chapter 11     Data Visualization and Geographic Information Systems
drill down to the individual physician goes a long way toward 
satisfying those requirements.” Purely financial data are not 
yet available on the CareFx dashboard, but Lindberg plans 
to add indicators such as cost per hospitalization broken 
down by physician and department to identify doctors who 
are outliers for test ordering.
Questions
1. What KPIs are displayed on Dr. Lindberg’s dashboard?
2. What KPIs will be added to the dashboard?
Questions
1. Describe business dashboards and their functions. 
2. Why do you think dashboards must be in real time and customized for 
the executive or manager?
3. How do business dashboards differ from other types of visual reports?
4. Explain the components of dashboards.
5. What are benefi ts of dashboards?
A geographic information system (GIS) captures, manages, analyzes, and displays 
multidimensional geographic data, also called geospatial data. GIS can connect to 
location-tracking devices and apps. GIS software can link geospatial data—where 
things or people are and where they are going—with descriptive data—what things 
are like or what customers are doing. GIS’s ability to track customers’ movement 
and behavior in real space enables new strategies for marketing, retail, and entre-
preneurship. Their ability to track products along the supply chain also offers 
opportunities in logistics and order fulfillment. 
Collecting home and work addresses only paints a static picture of consumers’ 
locations. Their movements over time are not tracked. Data that are organized by 
zip code only cannot reveal customers’ habits. By integrating geographic informa-
tion systems, businesses can more effectively solve problems like organizing sales 
territories, pinpointing optimal locations, finding customers, managing campaigns, 
and delivering services. Geospatial data can also map competitors’ actions.
11.4  Geospatial Data and Geographic Information Systems 
GEOCODING
In many cases, locations are already in existing data stores, but not in a format suit-
able for analytics. A simple process called geocoding can convert postal addresses 
to geospatial data that can then be measured and analyzed. By tapping into this 
resource, decision makers can use the geographic or spatial context to detect and 
respond to opportunities.
Case in Point: GM
General Motors (GM) spends a staggering $2 billion a year on marketing. In the 
past, it shotgunned its ads at the general public. Now, it maps out which types of 
households will buy new cars, more accurately determines locations where people 
buy certain models, and channels its ads specifically to those areas. As a result, GM 
spends less money to generate higher sales. 
GM managers use ESRI’s ArcGIS software to view local demographics, loca-
tion characteristics, regional differences, and the competitive brand environment to 
determine how a given dealership should be performing compared to actual results. 
The GIS makes it possible for GM to isolate demand, target its marketing efforts to 
local preferences, and position its dealerships to improve sales. With the intelligence 
provided by the GIS, GM has increased sales despite cutting the advertising budget. 

11.4     Geospatial Data and Geographic Information Systems     385  
Figure 11.10 GIS can create maps with multiple layers of data.
GIS IS NOT A MAP
On a map, if you looked at retail store #50, you would see the name of the store and 
a point denoting where it is located. However, if you view a GIS map on your tab-
let, you can click on retail store #50 and see its location, name, weekly or monthly 
revenue, product categories, a photo of the storefront, and a virtual tour.
Unlike a flat map, a GIS-generated map has many layers of information for 
many ways of thinking about a geographic space. Figure 11.10 shows an example. 
By hovering over a state, such as Texas, another layer of data about sales and finan-
cial data appears.
INFRASTRUCTURE AND 
LOCATION-AWARE 
COLLECTION OF 
GEOSPATIAL DATA
The infrastructure needed to collect geospatial data continues to expand. Cellular 
and Internet service providers, sensors, Google Earth, GPS, and RFID systems 
know the location of each connected user or object. Foursquare, Google Maps, and 
other mobile apps rely on GPS locations. With the Shopkick app, Macy’s can track 
a shopper’s every move within one of its stores and send the shopper notifications 
about deals and items of interest. iBeacon is a feature available in iOS 7 devices that 
uses a low-power Bluetooth transmission to broadcast a user’s location. iBeacon 
allows Apple, or app developers leveraging Apple technology, to track users inside 
buildings where satellite transmissions may not reach. 
Like Macy’s, businesses can motivate customers to download a location-
tracking app. Using GIS can help businesses target their customer markets more 
effectively and dynamically by engaging with them in real time. 
INTEGRATING GIS 
INTO BUSINESS 
APPLICATIONS
GIS tools have made significant contributions to decision making in finance, 
accounting, marketing, and BI. Business applications include:
• Analysts can pinpoint the average income in areas where the highest per-
forming stores are established.

386  Chapter 11     Data Visualization and Geographic Information Systems
• Retailers can learn how store sales are impacted by population or the prox-
imity to competitors’ stores. 
• A retail chain with plans to open a hundred new stores can use GIS to iden-
tify relevant demographics, proximity to highways, public transportation, 
and competitors’ stores to select the best location options.
• Food and consumer products companies can chart locations of complaint 
calls, enabling product traceability in the event of a crisis or recall.
• Sales reps might better target their customer visits by analyzing the geogra-
phy of sales targets.
With current GIS, geospatial, and geocoding technologies and platforms, GISs can 
be easily incorporated and managed within data analytics and visualization software. 
With the GIS moving into the cloud, developers of enterprise applications 
based on SAP, Microsoft Office, SharePoint, MicroStrategy, IBM Cognos, and 
Microsoft Dynamics CRM are using it to create a wide range of mobile applications.
Key Terms
analytical tools
data discovery
enterprise data mashup
geocoding
geographic information 
system (GIS)
geospatial data
reporting tools
supply chain visibility
Assuring Your Learning
 1. How people use, access, and discover data in business 
is being actively disrupted by tablets, which had been 
designed for consumers. Users have higher expecta-
tions for data displays and capabilities. Boring, static 
graphs and pie charts are unacceptable. Discuss 
how performance management—the monitoring of 
KPIs, for example—may be improved by providing 
managers with data visualizations. Now consider the 
opposite. In your opinion, would lack of data visual-
ization hurt the ability to manage performance?
 2. Lots of data are available to retailers to make good 
decisions—loyalty programs, Web analytics, and 
point-of-sale data. However, there is a big gap 
between having data and being able to leverage 
them for real time decision making. How can enter-
prise mashups close this gap? 
 3. Visit SAS.com and search for Visual Data Discovery. 
a. Review the screenshots, features, and benefi ts.
b. In your opinion, what are the two most impor-
tant benefi ts of this data discovery tool? 
c. Would you recommend this tool? Explain your 
answer.
 4. Explain how executive dashboards can lead to 
better business insights. What are the limitations of 
dashboards?
DISCUSS: Critical Thinking Questions
 5. Periscopic (http://periscopic.com/) is a socially 
conscious data visualization fi rm that specializes in 
using IT to help companies and organizations facili-
tate information transparency and public awareness. 
From endangered species, to politics, to social jus-
tice, it is the goal of Periscopic to engage the public 
and deliver a message of responsibility and action. 
Its philosophy and tagline are “do good with data.” 
a. Visit http://periscopic.com/ and explore its re-
cent work. 
b. Discuss how data are used to do good. 
c. How effective is Periscopic’s approach to public 
awareness and social justice?
 6. Visit spotfi re.tibco.com and click Demos.
a. Select and watch one of the featured demos.
b. Describe the data visualizations features in the 
demo.
c. Explain the benefi ts of the application or 
analytics. 
EXPLORE: Online and Interactive Exercises

CASE 11.3     Video Case     387  
 7. Visit the Analysis Factory at www.analysisfactory.com.
a. Click Gallery and then select Custom Solutions.
b. View one demo, such as Performance Trends, 
Fusion Charts, Manufacturing Performance, and 
Sales Map Dashboard.
c. Create a table listing all of the customer solu-
tions for which you tried the demo in the fi rst 
column. In the second column, list the depart-
ments or functions each customer solution 
supports. In the third column, list the types of 
visualizations used in each solution.
d. In the team report, discuss how dashboards can 
impact the quality of business decisions. 
 8. Visit www.TableauSoftware.com. Click Learning 
and Visual Gallery from the drop-down menu. 
a. Review three interactive visualizations and 
dashboards. How do they convey information at 
a glance?
b. Click Free Trial. Download the Tableau Public 
and create your own data visualization. Print or 
publish it on a website or blog.
 9. Visit www.itdashboard.gov/data_feeds. Use this tool 
to design your own snapshots of IT dashboard data. 
Follow the steps to create, save, and publish your IT 
dashboard. 
 10. Visit microstrategy.com. 
a. Click Training and Events and select Webcasts 
from the drop-down menu.
b. Select the On-Demand tab. Then select and 
watch a webcast about dashboards or data 
discovery.
c. Write a report describing what you learned.
ANALYZE & DECIDE: Apply IT Concepts to Business Decisions
CASE 11.2
Visualization Case: Are You Ready for Football?
Nothing inspires passionate comments among sports fans 
like preseason predictions. Brett McMurphy’s data visualiza-
tion looks at how teams ranked in different polls.
 
Visit www.tableausoftware.com and search using “ready 
for football.” You will see the Preseason Polls & Returning 
Starters visualization. (a) Interact with the Preseason Polls & 
Returning Starters visualization. (b) Select various fi lters and 
observe the changes. (c) Download the workbook by clicking 
the Download button at the lower right corner of the display. 
View and interact with two other sports-related visualizations, 
for example, CBS Sports Defensive Matchup Tracker, Fantasy 
Closers, and Premier League Points Leaders. Download each. 
Click the Business and Real Estate Gallery. View and interact 
with two data visualizations in the gallery. Download each.
Questions
1. Which visualization was the easiest to understand at a 
glance? Explain.
2. Which visualization was the most diffi cult or complicated 
to understand easily? Explain.
3. What are the benefi ts and potential drawbacks of interac-
tive visualizations? 
CASE 11.3
Video Case: The Beauty of Data Visualization
TED stands for technology, entertainment, and design. Visit 
TED.com and search “data visualization.” Select “David 
McCandless: The beauty of data visualization.” The video and 
transcript are available. In his TED talk, The Beauty of Data 
Visualization, David McCandless says that data visualization 
gives us a second language—the language of the eye.
Questions
1. Explain what he means by language of the eye.
2. What are examples of language of the mind?
3. What happens when language of the eye and language 
of the mind combine?
4. What did David McCandless say about information design? 

388  Chapter 11     Data Visualization and Geographic Information Systems
Baldwin, G. “Dashboards in Action.” Health Data Management. 
October 20, 2011. 
Curtis, K. “Deloitte Hosts PepsiCo and Safeway at the HIVE 
(Highly Immersive Visual Environment).” GMAOnline.Org. 
2013. gmaonline.org
Deloitte CIO Journal. “Data Visualization Helps Safeway 
Keep Shelves Stocked.” The Wall Street Journal. December 3, 
2013. 
Groenfeldt, T., “A Tableau Solution To Those Excel Blues.” 
Forbes. February 22, 2013. forbes.com/sites/tomgroenfeldt
Henschen, D. “Data Visualization for the Masses?” Informa-
tionWeek, March 26, 2012.
Sommer, D. & J. D. Lovelock. “Market Trends: The Collision 
of Data Discovery and Business Intelligence Will Cause 
Destruction.” Gartner Inc., April 16, 2013. 
References

Chapter Snapshot
As you have read throughout this book, what a company 
can do depends on what its IT infrastructure and infor-
mation systems can do. IT strategy shapes the direction 
of IT investments over the next one to five years to 
maximize business value and shareholder wealth. Like all 
strategies, IT strategy defines priorities, a road map, bud-
get, and investment plan—and must align with and sup-
port the business strategy. Deciding on a strategy entails 
IT Strategy and 
Balanced Scorecard
12
Chapter
1. Describe the steps in the IT strategic planning process, 
how to evaluate the IT strategy, and the role of IT 
steering committees.
2. Explain the value of aligning the IT and business 
strategies and how this alignment can be achieved.
3. Describe the balanced scorecard methodology, its four 
performance metrics, and its function as a road map 
for strategy execution and making strategy a continual 
process.
4. Describe how sourcing strategies can improve perfor-
mance and the risk and challenges of sourcing and off-
shore relationships. Explain the IT vendor selection and 
management processes and how to improve successful 
relationships through the use of contracts and service 
level agreements.
Learning Outcomes
389
Managing Business Relationships, Projects,
and Codes of Ethics
Part 4
Chapter Snapshot
Case 12.1 Opening Case: Intel’s IT Strategic 
Planning Process
12.1 IT Strategy and Strategic Planning Process
12.2  Aligning IT with Business Strategy
12.3 Balanced Scorecard 
12.4 IT Sourcing and Cloud Strategy
Key Terms
Assuring Your Learning
• Discuss: Critical Thinking Questions
• Explore: Online and Interactive Exercises
•  Analyze & Decide: Apply IT Concepts 
to Business Decisions
Case 12.2 Business Case: AstraZeneca Terminates 
$1.4B Outsourcing Contract with IBM
Case 12.3 Data Analysis: Third-Party versus 
Company-Owned Offshoring 
References

making decisions about a future that can only be guessed 
at. According to Roger L. Martin’s article in Harvard 
Business Review: “True strategy is about placing bets and 
making hard choices. The objective is not to eliminate 
risk but to increase the odds of success” (Martin, 2014). 
Strategy making is uncomfortable because it is about 
taking risks and facing the unknown. 
 
In the mid-2010s, this process takes into consid-
eration social, mobile, analytics, cloud, software as a 
service (SaaS), and methods to measure how well the IT 
plan is working. IT strategic plans include an operating 
plan for acquiring or providing new technology and ser-
vices. The operating plan defines how to execute the IT 
strategic plan; for example, deciding on in-house devel-
opment or sourcing options such as managed services, 
cloud computing, or SaaS. Strategies are measured and 
evaluated continuously and revised annually during the 
strategic planning process. Balanced scorecard is a meth-
odology for evaluating performance based on financial 
and nonfinancial metrics. 
CASE 12.1 OPENING CASE
Intel’s IT Strategic Planning Process
390
INTEL’S IT 
ENVIRONMENT
Intel operates in 65 countries with almost 100,000 employees in 168 sites, and has 
59 IT sites with 6,300 IT employees. In 2013, 94 percent of all new services were 
deployed to the cloud. IT provides 14,000 Ultrabook touch devices and 43,200 
mobile handheld devices. 
IT STRATEGIC 
PLANNING PROCESS 
Intel designed its strategic planning process to closely align IT investments and 
solutions to strategic planning at the corporate level. Close IT–business alignment 
is achieved by bringing together a variety of perspectives from senior management, 
IT, and business groups in the planning stage—steps 1 through 4 in Figure 12.1. To 
minimize time demands, the strategic planning team engages subject matter experts 
at critical points instead of involving them at every step of the process.
The planning, decision-making, measuring, and evaluation activities flow natu-
rally from one step to the next. The business and IT strategic plans are evaluated 
and adjusted annually to keep pace with rapid changes in the industry. Performance 
is measured and evaluated using the balanced scorecard methodology to ensure that 
limited resources are invested to achieve the highest possible ROI. Characteristics 
of the planning process are summarized in Table 12.1.
BALANCED 
SCORECARD
The balanced scorecard translates mission and vision statements into a compre-
hensive set of objectives and performance measures that can be quantified and 
appraised. Objectives are the building blocks of strategy. Objectives set out what 
the business is trying to achieve. They are action-oriented statements, for instance, 
achieve a ROI of at least 10 percent in 201x, that define the continuous improve-
ment activities that must be done to be successful. Objectives have the following 
“SMART” criteria:
• Specific: Define what is to be achieved.
• Measurable: Are stated in measurable terms.
• Achievable: Are realistic given available resources and conditions.
• Relevant: Are relevant to the people who are responsible for achieving them.
• Time frame: Include a time dimension.
Strategic planning is the 
process of formulating the 
direction of a business in 
terms of how it intends to 
achieve its mission, goals, 
and objectives.
IT–business alignment means 
how closely an organization’s 
IT strategy is interwoven 
with and driving its overall 
business strategy. 
Balanced scorecard is a 
methodology—and a tool—
for measuring performance 
using financial and non-
financial metrics.

CASE 12.1     Opening Case     391  
Strategic
directional
statements
Strategic
plan
gic
egic
2. Technology & Business Outlook. A team of
    senior management, IT, and business unit
    representatives develop the two-to-five-year
    business outlook & technology outlook.
3. Current State Assessment & Gap Analysis.
    Analysis of the current state of IT, enterprise
    systems, & processes, which are compared with
    results of step 2 to identify gaps and necessary
    adjustments to IT investment plans.
4. Strategic Imperatives, Strategies, & Budget for
    Next Year. Develop next year’s priorities, road
    map, budget, & investment plan. Annual budget
    approved.
5. Governance Decisions & IT Road Map. The
    budget guides the governance process, including
    supplier selection and sourcing.
6. Balanced Scorecard Reviews.
    Performance is measured monthly.
1. Enterprise Vision. Senior management &
    leaders develop & communicate the enterprise’s
    two-to-five-year strategic vision & mission and
    identify the direction & focus for upcoming year.
Figure 12.1 Model of Intel’s 
six-step IT strategic planning 
process. Planning phase: 
steps 1 to 4. Decision-making 
phase: step 5. Measuring and 
evaluation phase: step 6.
TABLE 12.1 
Characteristics of Intel’s Corporate and IT Strategic Planning Process
Integrated 
 Intel IT activities are synchronized with the company’s strategic direc-
tion. By tightly linking Intel IT to the corporate planning process, the IT 
function has strengthened its credibility throughout Intel and earned the 
position of a trusted partner.
Holistic 
 The strategic planning process aligns IT investments with Intel’s busi-
ness direction and consolidates expertise and ideas from across Intel IT.
Sustainable 
 As new strategies are implemented, a common practice is to “look up” 
every two or three years and ask, “What’s next?” Instead of replacing the 
plan every two to three years, Intel uses a different approach. To keep 
pace with changes in the environment, the team looks at the plan every 
year to determine if anything shifted in its environment. If a shift has 
occurred and affected its business, the IT plan is updated as needed.

392  Chapter 12     IT Strategy and Balanced Scorecard
Companies use balanced scorecards to:
• Clarify or update a business strategy
• Link strategic objectives to long-term targets and annual budgets
• Integrate strategic objectives into resource allocation processes
• Increase companywide understanding of the corporate vision and strategy 
Balanced scorecard is discussed in greater detail in Section 12.4. 
CHARACTERISTICS 
OF THE STRATEGIC 
PLANNING PROCESS
Characteristics of the planning process are summarized in Table 12.1. Intel’s strategic 
planning approach has improved Intel’s agility. It provides a clear and credible 
direction for the enterprise and supports consistent decision making at all levels of 
the business. 
An effective strategic planning process is critical to an enterprise’s long-term 
success and health. The plan supports consistent decision making at all levels of the 
business. Each enterprise must adapt its strategic planning process and approach to 
fit is own culture and leadership style.
Sources: Compiled from Haydamack (2008), Haydamack & Johnson (2008), and Krishnapura et al (2014) . 
Questions
1. What are the three phases in the IT strategic planning process? Describe 
the steps in each phase.
2. Intel formulates a two-to-fi ve-year strategic plan. Given this time frame, 
why is the plan reviewed and evaluated every year?
3. Given the frequency of the planning process, what is done to minimize 
demands on people’s time?
4. How is Intel’s IT strategic plan measured and evaluated?
5. What makes the process sustainable? 
6. How does the IT strategy support the short-term (one-year) business 
strategy?
7. In your opinion, how does Intel’s IT strategic planning process impact 
the company’s survival? 
Long-term business planning starts with a clear understanding of the factors that 
create significant value and that work together with other factors to drive future 
revenue and profit at or above their current rates. These factors are value drivers. 
12.1  IT Strategy and the Strategic Planning Process
VALUE DRIVERS
In order to create business value, you must identify value drivers and then link them 
to daily activities. For example, it is not enough to identify cost as a key value drive. 
Cost is almost always a value driver, but for this factor to be useful, you need to drill 
down to the activities that impact cost. The general types of business value drivers 
are explained in Table 12.2. 
Drivers can have a limited life span. Their value can diminish due to chances in 
the economy or industry, at which time they are replaced with relevant ones. 
Value drivers are considered in the strategic planning process and the balanced 
scorecard methodology.
Value drivers enhance the 
value of a product or service 
to consumers, creating value 
for the company.  Advanced 
IT, reliability, and brand 
reputation are examples.

12.1     IT Strategy and the Strategic Planning Process     393  
TABLE 12.2 
Three General Types of Business Value Drivers 
Type of Business 
Value Drivers
Defi nitions
Examples
Operational 
Shorter-term factors
Factors that impact cash 
fl ow and the cash gen-
eration ability through 
increased effi ciency or 
growth.
Cost of raw materials, cost 
of providing service, cost 
per mile, sales volume, 
sales revenue
Financial 
Medium-term factors
Factors that minimize the 
cost of capital incurred by 
the company to fi nance 
operations
Debt level, working capi-
tal, capital expenditures, 
day’s receivables, bad debt 
expense
Sustainability 
Long-term factors
Survival factors; factors 
that enable a business to 
continue functioning con-
sistently and optimally for 
a long time
Government regulations, 
industry standards, federal 
and state environmental 
laws, privacy and security 
regulations
IT STRATEGY
IT strategy directs investments in social, mobile, analytics, cloud, and other digital 
technology resources. It focuses on the value drivers in core process areas in order 
to make targeted improvements. 
IT strategic planning is a systematic process for determining what a business 
should become and how it can best achieve that goal, as you read in Opening 
Case 12.1. It evaluates the full potential of a business often using SWOT analysis 
(strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats) and then decides how to allocate 
resources to develop critical capabilities. In practice, competing agendas, tight bud-
gets, poor interdepartmental communication, and politics can turn strategic plan-
ning discussions into bar room brawls—if they are not well managed. 
Reactive Approach to IT Investments Will Fail
Few companies today could realize their full potential business value without 
updated IT infrastructures and services. Yet many companies still struggle to 
make the right IT decisions and investments in order to leverage relatively new IT 
trends—cloud computing and SaaS, big data, analytics, social, and mobile. Making 
IT investments on the basis of an immediate need or threat—rather than accord-
ing to IT strategy—might be necessary at times, but reactive approaches result in 
incompatible, redundant, expensive to maintain, or failed systems. These IT invest-
ments tend to be patches that rarely align with the business strategy. 
Two of the biggest risks and concerns of top management are (1) failing to align 
IT to real business needs and, as a result, (2) failing to deliver value to the business. 
Since IT has a dramatic effect on business performance and competitiveness, the 
failure to manage IT effectively seriously impacts the business. 
IT Strategies Support the Business Strategy
The four objectives of IT strategic plans are to:
1. Improve management’s understanding of IT opportunities and limitations
2. Assess current performance
3. Identify capacity and human resource requirements 
4. Clarify the level of investment required

394  Chapter 12     IT Strategy and Balanced Scorecard
Various functions in the organization—such as manufacturing, R&D (research 
and development), and IT—are most successful when their strategies are forward 
looking. Forward looking means that they do SWOT analysis to create their future 
rather than react to challenges or crises. Additionally, IT implementations that 
require new infrastructure or the merging of disparate information systems can take 
years. Long lead times and lack of expertise have prompted companies to explore 
a variety of IT strategies.
IT Deployment Strategies: In-House and Sourcing
IT strategy guides investment decisions and decisions on how ISs will be developed, 
acquired, and/or implemented. IT strategies fall into two broad categories:
1. In-house development, in which systems are developed or other IT work is done 
in-house, possibly with the help of consulting companies or vendors. Typically, ITs 
that provide competitive advantages or that contain proprietary or confi dential 
data are developed and maintained by the organization’s own in-house IT function. 
2. Sourcing, in which systems are developed or IT work is done by a third party or 
vendor. There are many versions of sourcing, which had been called outsourcing. 
Work or development can be sourced to consulting companies or vendors that 
are within the same country, which is referred to as onshore sourcing. Or the 
work can be sourced offshore to other countries. Sourcing that is done offshore 
is also called offshoring. Other options are to lease or to purchase ITs as services. 
Cloud computing and SaaS have expanded sourcing options signifi cantly. Tech 
Note 12.1 discusses a sourcing challenge and solution. 
TECH NOTE 12.1 Managing Sourcing Arrangements and SLA
Sourcing creates its own set of challenges. Companies that have multiple outsourcers 
face the challenge of managing all of these relationships. As companies increase 
outsourcing activities, a gap is created in their organizational structures, manage-
ment methods, and software tools. At that point, companies turn for help to an 
outsource relationship management (ORM) company. ORMs provide automated 
tools to monitor and manage the outsourcing relationships. ORMs monitor and 
manage service level agreements (SLAs). The SLA must be managed because it 
serves as both the blueprint and warranty for the outsourced arrangement.
 
This example shows the importance of managing SLAs. A U.S. transportation 
company needed to make cuts immediately to its IT operating budget to reverse cost 
overruns. The company had a long-standing outsourcing agreement with a top-tier ser-
vice provider, but it had not implemented effective SLAs to control costs. As a result, 
it had outsourced 750 terabytes of data at an annual cost of more than $20,000 per 
terabyte, an overinvestment that contributed to runaway IT outsourcing expenditures 
of $225 million a year. A companywide budget shortfall forced the IT division to cut 
$36 million from its 2012 budget—without harming quality of service. The chief infor-
mation offi cer (CIO) had to re-examine its data and infrastructure needs and take a 
more informed, proactive role in managing the relationship with its service provider.
In the mid-2010s, the critical question is no longer whether cloud computing 
will be a fundamental deployment model for enterprise systems, such as ERP and 

12.1     IT Strategy and the Strategic Planning Process     395  
SCM. Rather, the question is how companies can profit from the capabilities that 
cloud computing offers.
Organizations use combinations of these IT strategies—in-house, onshore, or 
domestic sourcing, offshoring, cloud computing, and SaaS. 
IT and Business Strategy Disconnects
According to a survey of business leaders by PwC Advisory, 87 percent of business 
leaders believe that IT is critical to their companies’ strategic success, but not all of 
them work with IT to achieve that success. Less than 50 percent of business leaders 
reported that the IT function was very involved in the strategic planning process. 
When the IT strategy was not aligned with the business strategies, there was a 
higher risk that the IT project would be abandoned before completion. About 
75 percent of companies abandoned at least one IT project and 30 percent aban-
doned more than 10 percent of IT projects for this reason. There are several pos-
sible reasons why a high percentage of IT projects are abandoned—the business 
strategy changed, technology changed, the project was not going to be completed 
on time or budget, the project sponsors responsible did not work well together, or 
the IT strategy was changed to cloud or SaaS. 
The fundamental principle to be learned is that when enterprise strategies 
change, the IT strategies need to change with them. Both strategies are dynamic—
to adapt to opportunities and threats.
Governance
Business and IT strategies depend on shared IT ownership and shared IT gover-
nance among all senior managers. When an IT or any type of failure causes harm 
to customers, business partners, employees, or the environment, then regulatory 
agencies will hold the chief executive officer (CEO) accountable—and the public 
will too. A high-profile example is BP CEO Tony Hayward, who was  held account-
able to Congress for “The Role of BP in the Deepwater Horizon Explosion and Oil 
Spill,” the rig explosion that killed 11 workers and caused the subsea oil gusher that 
released 60,000
 barrels per day into the Gulf of Mexico. Hayward’s attempts to 
claim ignorance of the risks and use the SODDI defense (“some other dude did it”) 
does not get him or any CEOs off the hook. A company can outsource the work, but 
not the responsibility for it.
Because of the interrelationship between IT and business strategies, IT and 
other business managers share responsibility in developing IT strategic plans. 
Therefore, a governance structure needs to be in place that crosses organiza-
tional lines and makes senior management responsible for the success of key IT 
initiatives.
IT STRATEGIC 
PLANNING PROCESS
CIOs undertake IT strategic planning on a yearly, quarterly, or monthly basis. A 
good IT planning process helps ensure that IT aligns, and stays aligned, within an 
organization’s business strategy. Because organizational goals change over time, it 
is not sufficient to develop a long-term IT strategy and not reexamine the strategy 
on a regular basis. For this reason, IT planning is an ongoing process. The IT plan-
ning process results in a formal IT strategy or a reassessment each year or each 
quarter of the existing portfolio of IT resources.
Recall that the focus of IT strategy is on how IT creates business value. 
Typically, annual planning cycles are established to identify potentially beneficial 
IT services, to perform cost–benefit analyses, and to subject the list of potential 
projects to resource allocation analysis. Often the entire process is conducted by an 
IT steering committee. 

396  Chapter 12     IT Strategy and Balanced Scorecard
IT Steering Committees
The steering committee is a team of managers and staff representing various busi-
ness units that establish IT priorities and ensure the IT department is meeting the 
needs of the enterprise. The steering committee’s major tasks are: 
•  Set the direction. In linking the corporate strategy with the IT strategy, 
planning is the key activity.
•  Allocate scarce resources. The committee approves the allocation of 
resources for and within the information systems organization. This includes 
outsourcing policy.
•  Make staffing decisions. Key IT personnel decisions involve a consultation-
and-approval process made by the committee, including outsourcing decisions.
•  Communicate and provide feedback. Information regarding IT activities 
should flow freely.
•  Set and evaluate performance metrics. The committee should establish per-
formance measures for the IT department and see that they are met. This 
includes the initiation of SLAs.
The success of steering committees largely depends on the establishment of 
IT governance, formally established statements that direct the policies regarding IT 
alignment with organizational goals and allocation of resources.
Figure 12.2 shows the IT strategic planning process. The planning process 
begins with the creation of a strategic business plan. The long-range IT plan, some-
times referred to as the strategic IT plan, is then based on the strategic business 
plan. The IT strategic plan starts with the IT vision and strategy, which defines the 
future concept of what IT should do to achieve the goals, objectives, and strategic 
position of the firm and how this will be achieved. The overall direction, require-
ments, and sourcing—either outsourcing or insourcing—of resources, such as 
infrastructure, application services, data services, security services, IT governance, 
Strategic Business Plan
Overall direction of the organization
• Goals
• Objectives
• Strategic position
IT vision and strategies
Overall directions for: 
• Resource requirements
   and sourcing
• Budget
• Activities
• Time frames
IT Strategic
(Long-Range) Plan
General project plans
• Resource determination
• Project portfolio
IT Medium-Term 
Plan
Current year project plans
• Detailed budget
• Speciﬁc schedule of activities
IT Tactical 
Plan
Figure 12.2 IT strategic 
planning process.

12.2     Aligning IT with Business Strategy     397  
and management architecture; budget; activities; and time frames are set for three 
to five years into the future. The planning process continues by addressing lower 
level activities with a shorter time frame. 
The next level down is a medium-term IT plan, which identifies general project 
plans in terms of the specific requirements and sourcing of resources as well as 
the project portfolio. The project portfolio lists major resource projects, including 
infrastructure, application services, data services, and security services, that are 
consistent with the long-range plan. Some companies may define their portfolio 
in terms of applications. The applications portfolio is a list of major, approved 
information system projects that are also consistent with the long-range plan. 
Expectations for sourcing of resources in the project or applications portfolio 
should be driven by the business strategy. Since some of these projects will take 
more than a year to complete and others will not start in the current year, this plan 
extends over several years. 
The third level is a tactical plan, which details budgets and schedules for 
current-year projects and activities. In reality, because of the rapid pace of change 
in technology and the environment, short-term plans may include major items not 
anticipated in the other plans.
The planning process just described is currently practiced by many organiza-
tions. Specifics of the IT planning process, of course, vary among organizations. 
For example, not all organizations have a high-level IT steering committee. Project 
priorities may be determined by the IT director, by his or her superior, by company 
politics, or even on a first-come, first-served basis.
The deliverables from the IT planning process should include the following: an 
evaluation of the strategic goals and directions of the organization and how IT is 
aligned; a new or revised IT vision and assessment of the state of the IT division; 
a statement of the strategies, objectives, and policies for the IT division; and the 
overall direction, requirements, and sourcing of resources.
Questions
1. What are value drivers? 
2. What are the three categories of value drivers? 
3. Why do reactive approaches to IT investments fail?
4. What is onshore sourcing?
5. What is the goal of IT–business alignment?
6. Why is IT strategic planning revisited on a regular basis?
7. What are the functions of a steering committee?
8. Describe the IT strategic planning process.
Today, all roads lead to digital. From business strategy to execution, digital tech-
nology has become the foundation for everything enterprises do. Naturally, IT 
strategy needs to keep pace with business strategy. 
Alignment is a complex management activity, and its complexity increases as 
the pace of global competition and technological change increases. IT–business 
alignment can be improved by focusing on the following activities:
1. Commitment to IT planning by senior management. Senior management com-
mitment to IT planning is essential to success. See IT at Work 12.1. 
12.2  Aligning IT with Business Strategy

398  Chapter 12     IT Strategy and Balanced Scorecard
2. CIO is a member of senior management. The key to achieving IT-business 
alignment is for the CIO to attain strategic infl uence. Rather than being narrow 
technologists, CIOs must be both business and technology savvy. The skill set of 
CIOs is outlined in Table 12.3. 
3. Understanding IT and corporate planning. A prerequisite for effective IT–
business alignment for the CIO is to understand business planning and for the 
CEO and business planners to understand their company’s IT planning.
4. Shared culture and good communication. The CIO must understand and buy 
into the corporate culture so that IS planning does not occur in isolation. Fre-
quent, open, and effective communication is essential to ensure a shared culture 
and keep everyone aware of planning activities and business dynamics.
5. Multilevel links. Links between business and IT plans should be made at the 
strategic, tactical, and operational levels.
PwC’s 5th annual Digital IQ global survey included 1,108 
respondents from 12 countries across a variety of industries. 
Respondents were divided evenly between IT and business 
leaders. More than 75 percent of respondents work in cor-
porations with revenues of $1 billion
 (Curran, DeGarmo, & 
Sviokla, 2013). 
Strength of CIO & C-Suite Relationship 
Influences Performance
Companies were categorized based on the strength of the 
relationship between the CIO and other C-suite members—
the CEO, CFO (chief financial officer), CMO (chief marketing 
officer), CRO (chief risk officer), and CISO (chief information 
security officer) and business unit leaders as follows:
• 
Strong collaborators. The CIO has a strong relation-
ship across all relationship pairs with C-suite members. 
Strong collaborators had scores of at least 4.5 out of 5. 
Companies with collaborative C-suites link business 
strategy and IT. 
• 
Less collaborative. Companies with scores of 4.5 or less 
across CIO and C-suite relationships.
Top performers are defined as those in the top quartile 
(25 percent) of revenue growth and innovation and with 
annual growth of at least 5 percent.
What Was Learned from the Global Survey
According to the survey, compared to less collaborative 
companies, strong collaborators:
• 
Achieve better results. They are four times more likely 
to be top performers than those with less collaborative 
teams. IT initiatives are more likely to be on time, on 
budget, and within project scope.
• 
Adapt quickly. They adapt quickly to market changes to 
maintain an advantage over competitors.
• 
Think together. IT and business leaders share the same 
understanding of the corporate strategy and the costs 
needed to implement the strategic road map. They view 
their CEO as a champion of IT and understand IT risks 
that may impact the business.
• 
Act together. They have explicit processes in place 
to link the IT road map to the corporate strategy. They 
invest more aggressively in social, mobile, cloud, and 
analytics and map IT to strategic initiatives like new prod-
uct and service development and market share growth.
• 
More aligned on strategy. In a majority of strong collabo-
rators (82 percent), the CEO is a champion of IT and actively 
involves IT in the strategic and operational plans, compared 
with 54 percent for less collaborative companies. 
In addition, strong relationships support more frequent 
and frank conversations about problems and collaborative 
problem solving. Too many IT projects fail because founda-
tional issues are not dealt with candidly and fast enough. The 
Digital IQ study clearly shows that strong executive leadership 
and collaboration are crucial to building lasting value from IT. 
IT at Work 1 2 .1
PwC’s 5th Annual Digital IQ Survey 

12.2     Aligning IT with Business Strategy     399  
A Perfect IT/Business Alignment Case Study
The Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) launched its Kaching mobile, social, 
and NFC payments apps in October 2011. (Kaching is pronounced ka-ching—the 
sound of a cash register long ago.) The mobile/social banking apps were criticized 
by many who claimed that customers would not be interested in mobile payments 
and banking services; that Facebook and social networks were not good platforms 
for banking and users would not like the bulky case that added NFC capabilities 
to the iPhone. They were wrong. By mid-2013, the Kaching app, iPhone NFC case, 
and Facebook app had been downloaded more than 1 million times across the 
Android and iOS platforms. The apps had handled over AU$9 billion in transac-
tions (Duckett, 2013).
Kaching is an excellent example of what happens when the CIO has the man-
date to drive business change through the use of the latest digital technology. With 
the success of Kaching, CBA’s CIO Michael Harte had not just supported business 
activities, he had introduced a profitable new line of business (LeMay, 2013). What 
is also remarkable is that CBA was considered an old, traditional, slow-moving 
company. By leading with mobile, social, NFC technology, it has become an innova-
tive financial institution. 
TABLE 12.3 
Skill Set of the CIO 
Skills of CIOs needed to improve IT–business alignment and governance 
include: 
• Political savvy. Effectively understand managers, workers, and their 
priorities and use that knowledge to infl uence others to support organi-
zational objectives.
• Infl uence, leadership, and power. Inspire a shared vision and infl uence 
subordinates and superiors. 
• Relationship management. Build and maintain working relationships with 
co-workers and those external to the organization. Negotiate problem 
solutions without alienating those impacted. Understand others and get 
their cooperation in nonauthority relationships.
• Resourcefulness. Think strategically and make good decisions under pres-
sure. Can set up complex work systems and engage in fl exible problem 
resolution. 
• Strategic planning. Capable of developing long-term objectives and strat-
egies and translating vision into realistic business strategies.
• Doing what it takes. Persevering in the face of obstacles.
• Leading employees. Delegating work to employees effectively; broaden-
ing employee opportunities; and interacting fairly with employees.
Questions
1. How can IT–business alignment be improved?
2. How does strong collaboration among the CIO and other chief-level 
offi cers infl uence performance? 
3. What skills are important to a CIO’s success? 
4. How did the CIO of CBA contribute to the bank’s competitiveness?

400  Chapter 12     IT Strategy and Balanced Scorecard
The balanced scorecard (BSC) is a strategic measurement and management 
methodology—and a tool. Robert Kaplan and David Norton introduced it in 
their 1992 Harvard Business Review (HBR) article, “The Balanced Scorecard—
Measures that Drive Performance.” The BSC methodology is widely used in all 
industry sectors for strategic planning and for evaluating how well objectives are 
being achieved. HBR editors consider the BSC as one of the most influential man-
agement ideas of the past 75 years.
The BSC method is “balanced” because it does not rely solely on traditional 
financial measures. Instead, it balances financial measures with three forward-
looking nonfinancial measures, as shown in Figure 12.3. 
12.3  Balanced Scorecard 
Figure 12.3 Balanced 
Scorecard (BSC) uses 
four metrics to measure 
performance—one fi nancial 
metric and three nonfi nancial 
metrics.
Financial
Business
Processes
Innovation,
Learning,
& Growth
Customer
Strategy
PRIOR TO BALANCED 
SCORECARD CONCEPT 
Prior to the BSC concept, the typical business objective could be summed up simply 
as to make a profit. Performance metrics were based on:
• P&L (profit and loss) reports: revenue, expenses, net profit
• Cash flow statements: enough cash to pay its current liabilities 
• Balance sheets that reflected the overall status of finances at a certain date
These financial metrics are lagging indicators because they quantify past per-
formance. As such, they represent historical information and are not ideal tools for 
managing day-to-day operations and planning.
What was novel about BSC in the 1990s was that it measured a company’s 
performance using a multidimensional approach of leading indicators as well as 
lagging indicators.
HOW IS THE BALANCED 
SCORECARD APPLIED?
BSC can be used to translate strategic plans and mission statements into a set 
of objectives and performance metrics that can be quantified and measured. For 
example, answers to these questions are used to define value drivers. 
1. Financial. To succeed fi nancially, how should we appear to our investors and 
shareholders?
2. Customer. To achieve our vision, how should we provide value to our customers?
3. Business processes. To satisfy our shareholders and customers, what business 
processes must we focus on and excel at?
4. Innovation, learning, and growth. To achieve our vision, how will we sustain our 
ability to innovate, learn, change, and improve?
Table 12.4 lists examples of measurement criteria.
Lagging indicators confirm 
what has happened. They 
evaluate outcomes and 
achievements. 
Leading indicators predict 
future events to identify 
opportunities.

12.3     Balanced Scorecard     401  
Application of BSC
BSC converts senior management’s priorities into visible, actionable objectives by 
identifying ways to measure progress against agreed-upon targets. 
Assume that a low-cost airline bases its profitability on the following inter-
related factors: lower costs, increased revenue, percent of flights departing and 
arriving on time, competitive pricing, maximum fly time or minimal time jets are 
on the ground, and the ability of the ground crew to learn to do their jobs faster. 
Objectives, measures, and targets are diagrammed and detailed in Figure 12.4.
Using the results of the BSC methodology, management teams have an agreed-
upon set of objectives and measures that are used to identify and set targets and 
the actions to achieve them that are appropriate for the company’s business model.
Consider JetBlue and Southwest Airlines—both compete to a large extent on 
price. Yet JetBlue allows one free checked bag while Southwest allows two free 
checked bags. Now consider the value drivers—time the jet sits on the ground 
and on-time arrivals. The time it takes to board passengers impacts the ability to 
take off, which in turn impacts on-ground time and arrival time. Since JetBlue has 
assigned seats, the terminal crew can control boarding starting at the back of the 
plane to minimize bottlenecks in the aisle. In contrast, Southwest has open seat-
ing, which typically occurs from the front of the jet and can clog the aisle. Now 
the differing free-baggage policies make sense because the more baggage brought 
on board, the longer boarding tends to take. By allowing two free checked bags, 
Southwest attempts to reduce carry-on bags in order to offset the extra time needed 
for the open-seating boarding process.
By measuring how well targets for on-ground times and arrival times are 
achieved, both airlines can determine if their actions are optimal or need to be 
TABLE 12.4 
Examples of Balanced Scorecard (BSC) Measurement Criteria
Metric or 
Indicator 
Examples of Measurement Criteria
Financial 
• Revenue and revenue growth rates
 
• Earnings and cash fl ow
 
• Asset utilization
Customer 
• Market share
 
• Customer acquisition, retention, loyalty
 
•  Customer relationships, satisfaction, likes, 
recommendations, loyalty
 
• Brand image, reputation
 
• Price–value relationship
Business 
• Cycle times, defect rate
processes 
• Production throughput, productivity rates
 
• Cost per process
 
• Cost per transaction
Innovation,  
• Employee skills, morale, turnover, capacity for change
learning and 
• IT capabilities
growth 
• Employee motivation
 
• R&D
 
• Percentage of revenue from new products/services

402  Chapter 12     IT Strategy and Balanced Scorecard
revised. Based on these examples, it is easier to understand the processes involved 
in the BSC methodology, which start with the business vision and strategy. The 
general steps include:
1. Identify performance metrics (as in Table 12.4) that link vision and strategy to 
results—fi nancial performance, operations, innovation, employee performance.
2. Select meaningful objectives (Figure 12.4). 
3. Select effective measures and targets (Figure 12.4).
4. Determine the actions needed to achieve the targets (Figure 12.4).
5. Implement necessary tracking, analytics, communication, and reporting systems, 
including sensors, data visualization, mashups, and dashboards via social and 
mobile channels.
6. Collect, analyze, and compare performance data with targets.
7. Revise actions to improve performance gaps and take advantage of new 
opportunities.
BSC is used to clarify and update the strategy, align the IT strategy with the 
business strategy, and link strategic objectives to long-term goals and annual 
budgets.
Net Profit
Rapid
ground
turnaround
time
Time on-ground
On-time departure
ratio
55 minutes
85%
Synchronize ground
crew activities
Ensure flight crew 
availability
Low competitive
prices
Reduce costs
Increase revenue
Low competitive
prices
Low competitive
prices
Percent of flights
arriving on time
Financial
Customer
Business
processes
Learning &
growth
Train employees to
board passengers
quickly
Synchronized and
efficient ground crew
Minimize turnaround
time on the ground
Objectives
Measurements
Targets
Action to achieve
targets
Figure 12.4 Overview of 
a low-cost airline’s BSC 
objectives, measures, targets, 
and actions to achieve 
targets.

12.4     IT Sourcing and Cloud Strategy     403  
Questions
1.  How did the BSC approach differ from previous measurement 
approaches?
2. How does the BSC approach “balance” performance measurements?
3. What are the four BSC metrics?
4. Give an example of each BSC metric.
5. How does BSC align IT strategy with business strategy?
When legacy systems could no longer provide the functionality needed to solve the 
businesses’ problems, companies migrated to the cloud or SaaS to connect core 
systems and apps. At most companies today, one or more types of outsourcing 
arrangements are part of their IT strategy. Cloud computing, SaaS, and other types 
of “as services” were discussed in prior chapters. They are discussed in this chapter 
as examples of IT outsourcing strategies. 
12.4  IT Sourcing and Cloud Strategy
CLOUD STRATEGY 
AND SERVICES
As you have read, in its simplest form, cloud computing is a way for companies to 
procure technology as a service (XaaS), including infrastructure (IaaS), applications 
(AaaS), platforms (PaaS), and business processes, via the Internet. IT resources no 
longer depend on capital investments and IT developers to own that resource. IT 
capabilities can be sourced, scaled on, and delivered on demand without physical 
location, labor, or capital restrictions. As a result, an enterprise’s cloud strategy 
plays a role in its strategy and business growth. 
Integrating Cloud With On-Premises Systems
While the concept of cloud is simple, an enterprise’s cloud strategy tends to be 
quite complex. Cloud is being adopted across more of the enterprise, but mostly 
in addition to on-premises systems—not as full replacements for them. Hybrid 
solutions create integration challenges. Cloud services—also referred to as edge 
services—have to integrate back to core internal systems. That is, edge services 
have to connect and share data with enterprise systems such as order and inventory 
management, ERP, CRM, SCM, legacy financial, and HR systems and on mobile 
and social platforms. 
Tactical Adoption Versus Coordinated Cloud Strategy
Deploying cloud services incrementally results in apps and services that are patched 
together to create end-to-end business processes. This is a short-sighted tactical 
adoption approach. While this approach may have been sufficient in the recent 
past, cloud services are increasingly more sophisticated and numerous. Tactical 
approaches will cause difficult integration problems—as occurred with adoption of 
ERP, mobile, social, and big data systems. Cloud adoption needs to occur according 
to a coordinated strategy. Given the ever-changing cloud services, it will be tough to 
know how to design a sustainable cloud strategy. For example, a new class of cloud 
offerings is being built around business outcomes instead of as point solutions. In 
effect, this would be business outcomes as a service. 
Determining cloud strategies and lease agreements that best support busi-
ness needs may require hiring cloud consultants, such as Accenture, Booz Allen, 
Deloitte, Gartner, HP, IBM, or others. 
Cloud strategy is short for 
cloud computing IT strategy.
Edge service is a term that 
refers to a cloud service.

404  Chapter 12     IT Strategy and Balanced Scorecard
Cloud Strategy Challenges 
From the outset, the top challenges about migrating to the cloud revolved around 
cybersecurity, privacy, data availability, and the accessibility of the service. The 
newer challenges relate to cloud strategy, including integration of cloud with on-
premises resources, extensibility, and reliability of the cloud service. Extensibility 
is the ability to get data into and out of the cloud service. These cloud service chal-
lenges need to be addressed before deciding on sourcing solutions.
Cloud Case Examples
Social network LinkedIn has three enterprise lines of business: talent, marketing, 
and sales solutions. When LinkedIn migrated to cloud services to support sales 
and CRM, it began by using noncustomized, out-of-the-box capabilities (Main & 
Peto, 2013). As the company grew rapidly, the standard cloud services could no 
longer support the lines of business. Business processes increasingly needed to be 
integrated with ERP and proprietary systems to generate sales leads. LinkedIn 
switched to a cloud-based integration platform that is able to connect its lead gen-
eration, financial, and CRM systems and its proprietary apps and data warehouse. 
Integrating cloud and on-premises systems gives salespeople a single view of the 
data they need to do their jobs.
Nestlé Nespresso S. A. transitioned from a traditional coffee shop to an online 
distributor in the single-serving coffee machine category. Faced with growing global 
demand, Nespresso needed to replace its complex ERP. By deploying a cloud inte-
gration platform, Nespresso has integrated its ERP, warehouse management systems, 
and ordering tool. Nespresso now leverages its cloud and traditional IT solutions.
Since its 1998 IPO, eBay has gone from an online experiment 
in consumer-to-consumer e-commerce to a Fortune 500 enter-
prise. It supports almost 100 million individual buyers and sellers 
and small businesses. Exploding demand for eBay’s services 
created enviable but staggering challenges. By 2004, eBay’s 
annual revenues had exceeded $3 billion. At that time, its 
accounts payable (AP) function was no longer able to support 
the growing workload. In addition, eBay’s acquisition of several 
companies with incompatible AP processes added to integra-
tion challenges. eBay’s solution was to outsource. In early 2005, 
eBay migrated its AP operations to Genpact, a global leader in 
business process and IT management. 
The Solution Had Challenges
The migration was far from perfect at first and hard lessons 
learned early helped achieve impressive results eventually. 
Six lessons that eBay learned are the following:
1. Manage change by securing the commitment of senior 
leaders in an overt fashion and by recognizing subtle 
cultural differences that can undermine initial transition 
efforts.
2. Assess organizational readiness for a transition from a 
mental and technical standpoint and set realistic expec-
tations and manage them actively.
3. Anticipate risks and formulate a plan for mitigating 
them, beginning with a strategy for dealing with “loss-
of-control” threats, both real and imagined.
4. Build project management infrastructure that recog-
nizes the “process of transition” needs to be managed as 
carefully as processes being transitioned. Mapping how 
the AP process should look posttransition and how it will 
be managed end to end and by whom is important. 
5. Create a governance mechanism that can discreetly 
collect feedback from the transition project manager and 
provide formal executive oversight and guidance. Form 
an executive steering committee that includes two senior 
managers from each organization and representation 
from all business units impacted by the outsourcing.
IT at Work 1 2 .2
eBay’s Outsourcing Lessons Learned

12.4     IT Sourcing and Cloud Strategy     405  
6. Properly define how success will be measured, both 
qualitatively and quantitatively. Identifying the right 
benchmarks for success and vigilantly measuring efforts 
against them over time are critical. eBay continued to 
outsource—transitioning its global vendor/supplier main-
tenance and general ledger activities.
Sources: Compiled from Spears (2010) and Genpact (2014). 
Questions
1. Why is the ability to process AP a critical success factor 
for eBay? 
2. Why do you think eBay selected outsourcing at its IT 
strategy instead of in-house development?
3. What outsourcing challenges did eBay face? In your 
opinion, what were the reasons for these challenges?
FACTORS DRIVING 
SOURCING AS AN IT 
STRATEGY
Enterprises choose outsourcing for several reasons: 
• To generate revenue
• To increase efficiency
• To be agile enough to respond to changes in the marketplace
• To focus on core competency
• To cut operational costs 
• Because offshoring has become a more accepted IT strategy
• Because cloud computing and SaaS have proven to be effective IT strategies
• To move IT investment from a capital expenditure to a recurring opera-
tional expenditure
• To differentiate from competitors—while reducing the burden on the IT 
organization
IT at Work 12.2 describes eBay’s IT sourcing and cloud strategy.
RISK CONCERNS AND 
HIDDEN COSTS
As companies find their business strategy is increasingly tied to IT solutions, the 
concerns about outsourcing risks increase. Risks associated with outsourcing are:
• Shirking. The vendor deliberately underperforms while claiming full payment, 
for example, billing for more hours than were worked and/or providing 
excellent staff at first and later replacing them with less qualified ones.
• Poaching. The vendor develops a strategic application for a client and then 
uses it for other clients. 
• Opportunistic repricing. When a client enters into a long-term contract with 
a vendor, the vendor changes financial terms at some point or overcharges 
for unanticipated enhancements and contract extensions.
Other risks are possible breach of contract by the vendor or its inability to 
deliver, vendor lock-in, loss of control over data, and loss of employee morale. 
Depending on what is outsourced and to whom, an organization might end 
up spending 10 percent above the budgeted amount to set up the relationship and 
manage it over time. The budgeted amount may increase anywhere from 15 to 
65 percent when outsourcing is sent offshore and the costs of travel and cultural 
differences are added in.
OFFSHORING 
Offshoring of software development has become a common practice due to global 
markets, lower costs, and increased access to skilled labor. About one-third of 
Fortune 500 companies outsource software development to software companies in 
India. It is not only the cost and the technical capabilities that matter. Several other 
factors to consider are the business and political climates in the selected country, 
the quality of the infrastructure, and risks such as IT competency, human capital, 
the economy, the legal environment, and cultural differences.

406  Chapter 12     IT Strategy and Balanced Scorecard
Duke University’s Center for International Business Education and Research 
studied actual offshoring results. According to their study, Fortune 500 companies 
reduced costs by offshoring—63 percent of the companies achieved over 30 per-
cent annual savings and 14 percent of them achieved savings over 50 percent. The 
respondents were overwhelmingly satisfied with their offshore operations. Three-
quarters (72 percent) said their offshore implementations met or exceeded their 
expected cost savings. Almost one-third of the respondents (31 percent) achieved 
their service level goals within the first 5 months of their contracts while 75 percent 
did so within 12 months. The study concluded that “offshoring delivers faster results 
than average domestic improvement efforts.” Even though these are very general 
results, offshoring success stories ease the fears about the risks of offshoring.
Based on case studies, the types of work that are not readily offshored include 
the following:
• Work that has not been routinized.
• Work that if offshored would result in the client company losing too much 
control over critical operations.
• Situations in which offshoring would place the client company at too great 
a risk to its data security, data privacy, or intellectual property and propri-
etary information.
• Business activities that rely on an uncommon combination of specific applica-
tion domain knowledge and IT knowledge in order to do the work properly.
OUTSOURCING LIFE 
CYCLE
The International Association of Outsourcing Professionals (IAOP) has defined 
nine critical stages in the outsourcing life cycle that managers need to understand 
prior to outsourcing (IAOP, 2009): 
1. Strategy. Outsourcing is a strategic decision that is typically developed at senior 
levels within a business. It may be part of a larger strategy to move the company 
to a leveraged business model and to focus on core competencies. Or it may be 
to save net costs or due to a lack of internal resources. Outsourcing may act as a 
key differentiator that will give a business a competitive advantage over its com-
petitors. Too few businesses consider taking legal counsel at this stage, but they 
should. For example, diffi culties about licensing, intellectual property rights, or a 
preexisting contractual or leasing arrangement require legal expertise. 
2. Reassessment. This stage is not given enough consideration: Organizations 
should look again at their business processes, IT capabilities, internal supply, or 
other problems to see if they could be reengineered to meet the requirements so 
that outsourcing is not needed. 
3. Selection. This stage involves identifying and defi ning the work to be outsourced 
as well as the selection of the vendors using RFI (request for information) or 
RFP (request for proposal) processes. The best value outsourcer is selected.
4. Negotiation. In this phase, contracts, schedules, and agreements are negotiated 
by someone experienced in these issues. Then the fi nal contract is reviewed 
extensively before signing. This negotiation process must involve adequate re-
sources and senior executives from both sides—the key issues in a long-term 
relationship, such as outsourcing, are too important not to justify executive 
engagement from the supplier and customer.
5. Implementation. This phase involves the start-up activities of planning the tran-
sition and the implementation of the outsourced agreement as well as establish-
ing the detailed budget and administrative functions needed for its management 
and formal launching of the program.
6. Oversight management. This phase encompasses all ongoing activities required 
to manage the program and achieve the contracted results. Specifi cally, this 
includes providing a liaison between the customers and the supplier, performance 
Strategy sets the overall 
direction by defining what 
the business desires to be, 
within a specified timeframe, 
and the path to get there.

12.4     IT Sourcing and Cloud Strategy     407  
monitoring, contract administration, vendor/partnership management, delivery 
integration, and vendor transition. Inevitably stresses will develop in a contract, 
and it is important for both sides to take an adult approach to contract interpreta-
tion. Remember that these are long-term relationships that need to fl ex with time. 
7. 
Build completion. This phase covers all completion activities of the build phase, 
including any development program and then acceptance, and the introduction 
of new services. 
8. Change. All complex outsourcing contracts will be subject to change and 
alteration. These are run as either minor changes to the outsourcing contract or 
major changes, which might involve a retendering process. Your contract will—
or should—have built into it a contract change procedure to deal with changes 
that are in the broad scope of the original procurement. 
9. Exit. All outsourcing relationships end because the contract has expired, by 
mutual agreement, or because the outsourcing relationship has failed. The 
terms of the contract become very important at this time. 
IT VENDOR 
RELATIONSHIPS
The starting point in building a positive and strong vendor relationship is vendor 
selection. If a company makes a bad selection or enters into a vaguely worded 
service contract, most likely the software, app, or implementation will fail and the 
vendor will not be able to resolve the problems fast enough, if at all. Failures are 
usually followed by lawsuits.
Vendor Research and Selection
To minimize interpersonal or technical conflicts with IT vendors, businesses need 
to thoroughly research the vendor. It is very important to ask questions about the 
services and products the vendor will provide and get as many specifics as possible. 
Also take the time to verify the vendor’s claims about its products and check all 
references to make sure that the vendor has a proven track record of success. When 
selecting a vendor, two criteria to assess first are experience and stability:
• Experience with very similar systems of similar size, scope, and require-
ments. Experience with the ITs that are needed, integrating those ITs into 
the existing infrastructure and the customer’s industry. 
• Financial and qualified personnel stability. A vendor’s reputation impacts its 
stability. 
Of course, for innovative IT implementations, vendors will not have experience 
and one major failure—and the lawsuit that follows—can create instability. If those 
criteria are not met, there is no reason to further consider the vendor. 
Research by McKinsey indicates that a majority of technology executives want 
to have stronger relationships with their IT suppliers, but they often act in ways that 
undermine that goal. In fact, many corporate customers lose out on the potential 
benefit of close relationships by an overemphasis on costs instead of value. Ideally, 
a customer/vendor relationship is a mutually beneficial partnership, and both sides 
are best served by treating it as such.
Vendors often buy hardware or software from other vendors. In order to avoid 
problems with the primary IT vendor, check secondary suppliers as well. Ask the 
primary vendor how they will deliver on their promises if the secondary vendors go 
out of business or otherwise end their relationship.
Do A Trial Run
Vendors may offer the option to test their products or services in a pilot study or a 
small portion of the business to verify that it fits the company’s needs. If the vendor 
relationship adds value on a small scale, then the system can be rolled out on a larger 
scale. If the vendor cannot meet the requirements, then the company avoids a failure.

408  Chapter 12     IT Strategy and Balanced Scorecard
CONTRACTS: GET 
EVERYTHING IN 
WRITING
SLAs are designed to protect the service provider, not the customer, unless the 
customer takes an informed and active role in the provisions and parameters. 
By making both parties aware of their responsibilities and when they may be 
held liable for failing to live up to those responsibilities, a strong SLA can help pre-
vent many of the disruptions and dangers that can come with sourcing or migrating 
to the cloud. The provisions and parameters of the contract are the only protections 
a company has when terms are not met or the arrangement is terminated. No con-
tract should be signed without a thorough legal review. 
There is no template SLA and each cloud solution vendor is unique. Certainly, if 
a vendor’s SLA is light on details, that alone may be an indicator that the vendor is 
light on accountability. Additionally, if a sourcing or cloud vendor refuses to improve 
its SLAs or negotiate vital points, then that vendor should not be considered.
Questions
1. What contributes to the complexity of a cloud strategy?
2. How does tactical adoption of cloud services differ from a coordinated 
cloud strategy?
3. What are the major reasons for sourcing?
4. What types of work are not readily outsourced offshore?
5. When selecting a vendor, what two criteria need to be assessed? 
6. What is the risk of an overemphasis on cost when selecting or dealing 
with an IT vendor?
7. What needs to be done before signing a contract with an IT vendor?
Key Terms
applications portfolio 
balanced scorecard
business strategy 
edge service
extensibility
in-house development
IT–business alignment 
IT strategic planning 
IT strategy
lagging indicators
leading indicators
offshoring 
onshore sourcing
operating plan
project portfolio
sourcing 
strategic planning
strategy
tactical adoption approach
value driver
vision statement
Assuring Your Learning
 1. What are three value drivers for a major retail store, 
such as Macy’s or Sears? Do any of them have a 
limited life span? Explain. 
 2. What directs investments in social, mobile, analytics, 
cloud, and other digital technology resources?
 3. What are the four objectives of IT strategic plans?
 4. What might be some reasons why companies use 
sourcing instead of in-house development? 
 5. In your opinion, what are the benefi ts of onshore 
sourcing? 
 6. What are the benefi ts and disadvantages of offshoring 
work/jobs to other countries, for example, to China 
or India?
 7. Describe the IT strategic planning process.
 8. If there are confl icting priorities and disagreements 
among members of the IT steering committee, how 
might they be resolved?
 9. Review IT at Work 12.1. Why do you think strong 
collaborators achieved better results?
 10. Why is the balanced scorecard methodology 
“balanced”?
 11. Why are fi nancial metrics lagging indicators? 
 12. Why has tactical adoption of IT become a risky 
approach compared to a coordinated cloud 
strategy?
 13. Why is an SLA a legal document? 
 14. Who do SLAs typically protect? Explain why.
DISCUSS: Critical Thinking Questions

CASE 12.2     Business Case     409  
1. Visit Accenture.com and search for “outsourcing.” 
Describe the IT outsourcing services offered by Accen-
ture. Do the same for Deloitte at deloitte.com, Ernst & 
Young at ey.com, KPMG at kpmg.com, or Pricewater-
houseCoopers at pwc.com. Create a table that compares 
the outsourcing services of two of these consulting fi rms. 
2. Visit the Government Technology website at govtech.
com. Search for “managing successful vendor relation-
ships.” Prepare a list of recommendations based on 
what you learn.
3. Visit the IBM website and search for “balanced 
scorecard.” Identify and describe its balanced 
scorecard software product.
4. Search for a YouTube video featuring Harvard 
Business School’s Robert Kaplan and the balanced 
scorecard. List three lessons learned from Kaplan, 
the title of the video, and its URL.
EXPLORE: Online and Interactive Exercises
1. Vinay Gupta, President and CEO of Janeeva, which 
sells software to help companies manage outsourcing 
relationships, gave this advice (Bloomberg Business-
week, 2013): 
“I would strongly encourage business owners 
to visit the vendor’s facilities. There are a lot of 
fl y-by-night operators, so you want to make sure 
you have touched and seen the facility before you 
hand them your business—I would do at least a 
30-day free pilot with the provider. You want to 
see if it is a good fi t and fi nd out who you will be 
interacting with on a day-to-day basis.”
Not all companies follow this advice. 
a.  Discuss why companies would take these 
precautions when setting up an outsourcing 
relationship.
b.  Discuss why companies would not take these 
precautions when setting up an outsourcing 
relationship.
2. Research legal websites discussing SLAs. Compile 
a list of recommendations, including what to do and 
what to avoid. 
3. In 2007, AstraZeneca entered a 10-year outsourcing 
agreement with IBM. By 2011, AstraZeneca decided 
to exit the arrangement, resulting in a tough court 
case with IBM. Research the failed outsourcing 
agreement between AstraZeneca and IBM. Explain 
the reasons for the failure. How did AstraZeneca 
change its subsequent outsourcing arrangements? 
4. Netfl ix streams videos on TVs, personal computers, 
and smartphones using cloud services from Amazon 
Web Services (AWS). Its model is a direct challenge 
to traditional content distributors, which are limited 
by physical distribution and network broadcasting. In 
contrast, Netfl ix capitalizes on low cost and virtually 
unlimited cloud capacity to deliver content on demand 
almost anywhere. In 2011, Netfl ix’s subscriber base 
surpassed that of Comcast, the largest cable provider 
in terms of subscribers, to become one of the largest 
video content distributors in the nation. Research 
Netfl ix to learn more about its use of the cloud to 
create business value. Explain its cloud strategy. Then 
research another company in the media and entertain-
ment space—for example, HBO or Apple. Compare 
the cloud strategies of the competitor to Netfl ix. 
ANALYZE & DECIDE: Apply IT Concepts to Business Decisions
CASE 12.2
Business Case: AstraZeneca Terminates $1.4B Outsourcing 
Contract with IBM
AstraZeneca is one of the world’s leading biopharmaceutical 
companies. The company focuses on the discovery, develop-
ment, and commercialization of prescription medicines for six 
health care areas. AstraZeneca has also been one of the most 
prolifi c users of information technology in the pharma world. 
 
In July 2007, AstraZeneca signed a $1.4 billion, seven-
year global strategic outsourcing agreement with IBM. The 
extensive SLA included 90 clauses and 32 schedules govern-
ing the provision of IT infrastructure services to 60 countries. 
Yet it was still imprecise about the exit obligations on IBM if 
the contract was terminated. 
 
On April 8, 2011, AstraZeneca terminated the SLA. In the 
legal battle, the court sided with AstraZeneca. 
 
Here are the details and timeline.

410  Chapter 12     IT Strategy and Balanced Scorecard
2007
AstraZeneca depends on its IT capabilities as much as it de-
pends on its R&D—both are crucial. In 2007, AstraZeneca had 
signed a seven-year global outsourcing agreement with IBM. 
The contract includes server hosting and storage for scien-
tifi c, network and communications, commercial, and supply 
chain operations. 
 
Richard Williams, CIO of AstraZeneca, said the outsourc-
ing deal enabled the company a consistent infrastructure 
across all its global sites. The consistent infrastructure enabled 
it to roll out new technologies, reporting systems, and apps 
more quickly and effi ciently. 
2011 
By 2011, AstraZeneca decided to exit the arrangement 
with IBM, resulting in a tough court case with IBM. One 
reason why the AstraZeneca–IBM deal failed was the use 
of outcome-based specifi cations. These specifi cations in 
the contract were commonly used to encourage innovation 
among vendors. In fact, in 2007, the contract was considered 
a ground-breaking model, but that model failed because 
AstraZeneca’s business was changing very rapidly and the 
contract was not designed for that pace. Although very 
popular in the 2000s, like other IT trends from that decade, 
companies would do things much differently now. 
Problems with Large Outsource Contracts
Very large and long-term IT outsourcing contracts are diffi cult 
to change because of the way the vendor accrues profi t from 
the deal. With huge outsource deals, vendors make major 
investment in the fi rst two years as the service is set up and 
customized. Then the vendor expects to make its profi t mar-
gin in the last two or three years, which is why large deals are 
fi ve or more years.
2012
After the failure of its IT outsourcing contract with IBM, 
AstraZeneca has taken on a new strategy for working with 
IT vendors that stresses rapid action on technical problems 
under a cooperative structure. 
New Outsourcing Model
AstraZeneca created a new IT outsourcing model to replace 
the services provided by IBM. Now the company uses multiple 
contracts with Computacenter, HCL, AT&T, and Wipro. 
Contracts cover the standard provisions of IT service deals, 
namely SLAs and pricing, and also a cooperation policy. That 
policy includes 13 principles that specify the terms of col-
laboration. One principle is “fi x fi rst, pay later.” That means 
when an urgent IT problem occurs, vendors and AstraZeneca 
cooperate to fi x it fast without asking questions about cost. 
Previously, a vendor might have examined the contracts to 
confi rm its responsibilities and, to protect profi t margins, 
delay the fi x. In return for fast solutions, AstraZeneca agreed 
to faster payment to the vendor. In the event of a contract 
confl ict, both parties can appeal to an independent arbiter 
who oversees the cooperation policy.
Lesson Learned
This IT and legal case illustrates the importance of consid-
ering thoroughly what will happen when an outsourcing 
relationship comes to an end. This is often overlooked in the 
dash to close the deal and will be an expensive oversight. 
Sources: Compiled from Barton (2011), Boyle (2010), Clark (2013), 
Lomas (2007), and Pagnamenta (2007).
Questions
1. What mistakes did AstraZeneca make?
2. What mistakes did IBM make?
3. Why are outsourcing contracts for fi ve or more years? 
4. Why do you think two major corporations could make 
such mistakes? 
5. Do you think the 2007 SLA was doomed to fail? Explain 
your answer.
6. What provisions in the 2001 SLAs protect AstraZeneca 
and the vendors?
7. Why would parties prefer to use an arbitrator instead of 
fi ling a lawsuit in court?
CASE 12.3
Data Analysis: Third-Party versus Company-Owned Offshoring 
Major companies, such as Citigroup, had wholly owned 
offshore service centers. Those types of company-owned 
offshore centers are called captive models. Captive offshoring 
models reduce the risk of offshoring. A recent study from the 
Everest Research Institute estimated the costs of third-party 
offshoring and captive offshoring. The estimates are below.
 
Create a spreadsheet that totals the average cost of each 
model for each cost item. For example, average the annual 
salary based on the range for third parties and also the 
captives. Then calculate the total cost of  ownership (TCO) of 
each model. The difference is the cost of risk. 
 
Full-time equivalents (FTEs) are used to standardize labor 
costs since workers may be part time or full ime. For example, 
two part-time workers equal 1 FTE. The estimates are given in 
terms of FTEs so the conversion is already done. 
Question
1. Based on your results, how much does the captive off-
shoring model allow for risk? The answer is the difference 
between the TCOs of the two models.

References     411  
Barton, P. “Exit Management: IBM v AstraZeneca.” FieldFisher.
com, December 14, 2011. 
Bloomberg Businessweek. “Outsourcing Advice from the Pros.” 
September 2, 2013. images.businessweek.com/ss/09/02/0213_
outsourcing/10.htm
Boyle, C. “AstraZeneca to Axe 8,000 Jobs in Global Cull.” 
Times Online, January 28, 2010.
Clark, L. “AstraZeneca Opts for Co-operation After IBM Falls 
Out.” ComputerWeekly.com, March 11, 2013. 
Curran, C., T. DeGarmo,  & J. Sviokla. “PwC’s 5th Annual 
Digital IQ Survey Digital Conversations and the C-suite.” 
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, 2013. 
Duckett, C. “Mobile Banking Is Kaching for CBA as App 
Handled over AU$9 Billion.” ZDNet.com, August 14, 2013. 
Genpact. “Sourcing—Procurement.” 2014. genpact.com/home/
solutions/procurement-supply-chain/sourcing-procurement
Haydamack, C. D. “Strategic Planning Processes for Informa-
tion Technology.” BPTrends.com, September 2008. 
Haydamack, C. & S. Johnson. “Aligning IT with Business Goals 
through Strategic Planning.” Intel White Paper, December 2008. 
Insights. “Balanced Scorecard.” Bain & Company Guide. 
May 8, 2013. 
International Association of Outsourcing Professionas (IAOP). 
“The Outsourcing Life-Cycle—9 Stages.” outsourcingprofes-
sional.org, 2009. 
Kaplan, R. S. & D. P. Norton, “Mastering the Management 
System.” Harvard Business Review 86, no. 1, January 2008. 
Krishnapura, S., S Achuthan, B. Barnard, L. Vipul, R. Nallapa, 
S. Rungta, and  T. Tang.  “Intel’s Data Center Strategy for 
Business Transformation.” Intel White Paper. January 2014.
LeMay, R. “CommBank’s Kaching App: A Perfect IT/Business 
Alignment Case Study.” Delimiter.com, August 16, 2013. 
Lomas, N. “AstraZeneca Signs IBM Outsourcing Deal.” ZDNet 
UK, July 18, 2007.
Main, A. & J. Peto. “Cloud Orchestration.” Tech Trends 2014. 
Deloitte University Press (http://dupress.com/). 2013. 
Martin, R. L. “The Big Lie of Strategic Planning.” Harvard 
Business Review, January–February 2014.
Pagnamenta, R. “AstraZeneca to Outsource Manufacturing.” 
Times Online, September 17, 2007.
Spears, J. “Six Keys to a Successful BPO Transition.” Genpact 
White Paper. 2010.
References
Third-Party 
Offshoring Model
Captive 
Offshoring Model
Offi ce space: annual rental cost per 
square foot (assume 10,000 square 
feet of offi ce space)
$11 to $13
$14 to $16
Base salary costs of workers (assume 
1,000 FTEs)
$7,770 to $8,200
$9,500 to $10,300
General management staff for every 
1,000 FTEs
12 to 14
16 to 18
General management salary
$55,000 to $65,000
$70,000 to $90,000
Travel and housing costs per FTE
$280 to $320
$900 to $1,060

412
Chapter Snapshot
When most companies develop or build new products, 
services, markets, enterprise systems, or apps, they use 
a project management approach. Project management is 
a structured methodology to plan, manage, and control 
the completion of a project throughout its life cycle. The 
Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) 
Guide outlines five project management process groups, 
shown in Figure 13.1. Each process moves the project 
from idea to implementation in such a way as to help 
ensure its successful completion. The life cycle starts 
with an idea or concept and project plan. If the project 
is approved, then the project team proceeds to perform 
Project Management 
and SDLC
13
Chapter
1. Explain the importance of the project management life 
cycle, project portfolio management (PPM), and the use 
of the triple constraint to minimize scope creep and 
other project management fatal mistakes.
2. Identify the components of a project business case, 
statement of work (SOW), work breakdown structure 
(WBS), milestone schedule, Gantt chart, and project 
baseline. 
3. Apply project monitoring and control processes to man-
age the triple constraint and critical path and to identify 
the conditions when an ongoing project should be ter-
minated. Explain the legal need to document project 
changes and the business value of a project postmortem. 
4. Describe the system development lifecycle (SDLC) 
processes, feasibility analyses, and their impact on the 
acceptance and success of IT implementations.
Chapter Snapshot
Case 13.1 Opening Case: Keeping Your Project 
on Track, Knowing When It Is Doomed, and DIA 
Baggage System Failure
13.1 Project Management Concepts
13.2 Project Planning, Execution, and Budget 
13.3  Project Monitoring, Control, and Closing
13.4 System Development Life Cycle 
Key Terms
Assuring Your Learning
• Discuss: Critical Thinking Questions 
• Explore: Online and Interactive Exercises 
•  Analyze & Decide: Apply IT Concepts 
to Business Decisions 
Case 13.2 Business Case: Steve Jobs’ Shared 
Vision Project Management Style
Case 13.3 Demo Case: Mavenlink Project 
Management and Planning Software
References
Learning Outcomes

413
CASE 13.1 OPENING CASE
Keeping Your Project on Track, Knowing When It Is Doomed, 
and DIA Baggage System Failure
the tasks and deliver the project. As part of closing the project, participants do a 
postmortem to document lessons learned in order to improve their next projects.
 
Projects are risky. Project management and an appropriate system develop-
ment process help to get the IT project delivered on time, within budget, and 
according to specifications. To minimize risk of failure, the project is rigorously 
planned, evaluated, and monitored. Weekly status meetings, communication, and 
reporting are critical to find out about potential problems as far in advance as 
possible and fix them to avert a crisis. Project management is gaining in importance 
for all types of projects because of technology complexity, tighter budgets, tougher 
competition, and shorter time-to-delivery requirements. In short, companies cannot 
afford project failures or delays. 
A majority of IT projects fail on at least one measure of success, wasting billions of 
dollars each year. Projects can suffer one or more of the following outcomes: 
• Over budget
• Delivered late 
• Rolled out with fewer features or functions than planned
• Terminated before completion
• Completed, but a failure 
Except in extreme cases, the evaluation of success or failure is subjective 
because time and cost to complete the project are estimates. For example, exceeding 
the planned budget or schedule can be judged to be within an acceptable range—or 
Initiating
concept or idea
Executing
Monitoring &
controlling
Closing &
postmortem
Planning
Figure 13.1 Overview of the 
project process architecture 
and project management 
life cycle. All projects, IT or 
otherwise, move through 
fi ve phases in the project 
management life cycle.
Postmortem is a method 
for evaluating project 
performance, identifying 
lessons learned, and making 
recommendations for future 
projects.
A project is a well-planned 
sequential series of tasks 
to achieve a result. Projects 
have a defined beginning 
and end, a scope, 
resources, and a budget. 
Projects are approved 
before they are funded and 
allocated resources.

414  Chapter 13     Project Management and SDLC
not. Everyone should realize that complex projects experience some successes and 
some failures. 
Reducing failure rates depends on what is arguably the most important IT com-
petency area: project management. Too often the final stage—the postmortem—is 
skipped to save time and effort. However, it is during the postmortem that people 
learn what contributed to success or what did not. Not learning from past projects 
and repeating avoidable mistakes have consistently been major hurdles to improv-
ing IT project management. 
KEEPING PROJECTS 
ON TRACK
Over a period of two months, a Fortune 500 company learned that six of its major 
projects were in trouble. In each case, it seemed as though the project failed over-
night without warning. The CIO felt blindsided and executive management wanted 
to know who and what was to blame. The company’s project management office 
(PMO) was asked to explain. 
During the investigation, the PMO learned that the project staff felt strong 
but subtle pressure to keep problems to themselves. The six failing projects had 
executive sponsors who were politically powerful and known to attack people who 
delivered bad news. So, rather than report their project was in trouble, staff worked 
harder, hoping to recover from missed deadlines, but deadlines were still missed. 
Here are three lessons learned to keep projects on track. 
Set Realistic and Detailed Project Plans With Adequate 
Time and Resources
Projects are subject to unanticipated and uncontrollable events, so they need to 
have slack time built into the schedule and budget. However, project teams can be 
pressured to cut project costs. In response, they might reduce the time and budget 
allocated to training, testing, and change management. These cuts result in poor 
quality and low user acceptance. 
Encourage Timely Feedback and Be Willing to Listen 
All projects encounter difficulties. Make sure employees know they will not be 
punished for raising concerns, even if other project members deny problems exist. 
Fear blocks the flow of useful information. 
Manage Risk with Regular Project Status Reviews 
For the most part, no one likes formal project reviews, but they are necessary to 
identify and address current and potential problems. 
RED FLAGS OF DOOM 
Here is a list of red flags that indicate IT project problems. These red flags relate to 
bad planning—and do not depend on feedback from team members. 
Project Has Launched Without Senior Buy-In
Failure is guaranteed without the support and buy-in of senior management. This 
situation can happen if a strong personality in the company has a terrific idea and 
begins to plan meetings and allocate resources without waiting for senior manage-
ment buy-in. No one else on the team knows the project has not been approved or 
budgeted. Many of these projects proceed until the point where real money must 
be spent; then they collapse completely. 

CASE 13.1     Opening Case     415  
No Detailed Project Plan Exists
Any project with an estimated duration longer than two or three weeks needs a 
detailed rational project plan.
Meetings Are Scheduled Ignoring Team Members’ Availability
Meetings that conflict with important standing meetings means that vital team 
members will be absent, undercutting their effectiveness. People are generally more 
productive and more likely to show up earlier in the day. It is better to schedule 
meetings before lunch, if possible. 
Users Have Had Little or No Early Involvement
Large and complex projects benefit from the advice and insight of users who are famil-
iar with how processes are done and why they are done that way. The more involve-
ment you have from users, the greater your chance of success. If your project covers 
multiple departments, make sure to have a user representative from each department. 
No Detailed Testing Plan Exists 
Testing is essential to project success. Unit testing tests one facet of the system; inte-
grated testing tests all components and the user interface. 
No Training Budget
When faced with a budget overrun, the training budget is often sacrificed. Relying on 
users and help desk staff to figure out the new system for themselves means the proj-
ect is in for failure. Be ready to delay the project if appropriate training is not given.
BAGGAGE HANDLING 
SYSTEM PROJECT 
AT DENVER 
INTERNATIONAL 
AIRPORT 
A classic case used to illustrate a project disaster is the baggage-handling system 
project (Figure 13.2) for the new Denver International Airport (DIA). The project 
was to create the most advanced automated handling of baggage, integrating all 
three concourses into a single system. The terms “most advanced, automated, and 
integrated” clearly indicate that the system was going to be extremely complex, 
risky, and subject to delays. An unrealistic schedule was planned and approved 
even though any delay would also force the delay of the opening of the DIA. In fact, 
the newly completed DIA remained idle for 16 months while engineers dealt with 
the complexities of the baggage system. The delay added $560 million to the cost of 
DIA. Cost to maintain the empty airport and interest charges on construction loans 
cost the city of Denver $1.1 million per day throughout the delay.
Project Scaled Down; Scrapped a Decade Later
The project was scaled down from the original plan. Only baggage handling on out-
bound flights for one concourse was automated. Baggage to/from other concourses 
Figure 13.2 The city of 
Denver wanted its Denver 
International Airport to have 
a competitive advantage with 
the world’s most high-tech 
baggage-handling system. 
The system was a failure.
© Visions of America/
Shutterstock 

416  Chapter 13     Project Management and SDLC
were handled using a manual tug-and-trolley system that was quickly built when 
key players finally acknowledged that the automated system would never meet its 
goals. Ten years later, in August 2005, the automated system was scrapped because 
it still did not work correctly and its maintenance costs were $1 million per month. 
Project Management Mistakes
DIA’s baggage-handling system was a critical component in the city of Denver’s 
plan to construct a new state-of-the-art airport that would position Denver as an air 
transportation hub. By automating baggage handling, aircraft turnaround time was 
to be cut to as little as 30 minutes. Faster turnaround meant airlines could minimize 
on-ground time, which would be DIA’s competitive advantage. 
Below is the timeline of the major events and project management mistakes:
• November 1989: DIA construction work starts. 
• Ignored experts. In 1990, the City of Denver hired Breier Neidle Patrone 
Associates to do a feasibility analysis of building an integrated baggage 
system. Reports advised that complexity made the project unfeasible. 
Experts from Munich airport advised that the much simpler Munich system 
had taken two full years to build and that it had run 24/7 for six months prior 
to opening to allow bugs to be ironed out. 
• Summer 1991: DIA project management team asked for bids for the auto-
mated baggage-handling system.
• Underestimated complexity. Fall 1991: Of the 16 companies included in the 
bidding process, only 3 responded. None could complete the project in time 
for the October 1993 opening. All three bids were rejected and the urgent 
search for a company that would meet the deadline continued.
• Poor planning and impossible expectations. In April 1992, DIA went to 
contract with BAE Systems to complete the project in time for the October 
1993 opening—ignoring expert evidence that the timeline was impossible to 
achieve. 
• Lack of due diligence. Contract terms between DIA and BAE and project 
specifications were hammered out in only three meetings. The rush to con-
tract ignored the feasibility analysis. The pressure to move quickly drove 
them to skip critical due-diligence steps. 
• Excluded key stakeholders. BAE and the airport project management team 
excluded key stakeholders—the airlines that had contracted with DIA—
during the negotiations. Excluding stakeholders from discussions in which 
key project decisions are made is always a losing strategy.
• Scope creep. 1992–1993: Numerous changes in the scope of the project are 
made. For instance, Continental Airlines requested ski equipment handling 
facilities be added to its concourse. 
• Ignored interface design. The baggage-handling system had to interface 
with the airport. That is, because the design of the building was started 
before the baggage system design was known, the designers of the physical 
building only made general allowances for where they thought the baggage 
system would go. The allowance of spaces in which the baggage system 
would operate represented the interface between the design of DIA and 
the baggage system. To make effective decisions about how to design DIA, 
the DIA designers should have worked with experts in designing the bag-
gage system. DIA had sharp corners that required turns that baggage carts 

13.1     Project Management Concepts     417  
cannot navigate. To keep carts from falling off the rails, the speed of the 
system was cut from 60 cars per minute to 30 cars. This change eliminated 
DIA’s competitive advantage of fast turnaround time for jets. 
These and many other mistakes too numerous to mention doomed the DIA 
baggage-handling project. This case represents practically every possible project 
management mistake. From the outset, the decision to proceed with a single inte-
grated system at DIA knowing that the deadline could not be met and the irrational 
decisions that followed made by people who lacked the necessary project manage-
ment and engineering expertise contributed to project failure.
Sources: Calleam Consulting (2008), Grimes (2013), Nelson (2005), and Perkins (2014).
Questions
1. In what ways can a project fail? 
2. Why is the evaluation of a project’s success or failure somewhat 
subjective? 
3. What are the benefi ts of a project postmortem? Why would a project 
not have a postmortem? 
4. Assume you are a member of a project team working on a project with 
a six-month timeline. The materials your team needs to complete their 
fi rst set of tasks will arrive three days later than their promised delivery 
date. The delay has a 10 percent chance of delaying completion of 
the project. You know that no one will tell the project manager of the 
delayed delivery because it is the fi rst month of the project so it does 
not seem important enough to report. Would you inform the project 
manager of the delay? Explain your decision. Now assume you did not 
report the delay and such delays happened in each month afterward. 
What would you do and when? In your opinion, should the entire team 
present these problems? Explain your decisions.
5. What are three best practices to keep projects on track?
6. What are red fl ags indicating the project is likely to be a failure?
7. Referring to your answers in Questions 5 and 6, which of those best 
practices and red fl ags were ignored in the DIA automated luggage-
handling project?
8. Referring to your answer in Question 7, why do you think each best 
practice and red fl ag were ignored?
9. In your opinion, who are the ones responsible for the failure? 
Enterprises face the challenge of deciding which investments to make and how 
to allocate scarce resources to competing projects. Typically a senior manager 
composes a business case that identifies an opportunity, problem, or need and the 
desired business outcomes of the project. Since not all projects are viable and not 
all viable projects can be funded, the business cases are reviewed. In the review 
process, projects compete for approval and funding.
13.1  Project Management Concepts
PROJECT PORTFOLIO 
MANAGEMENT
Project analysis methods are used to prioritize proposed projects and allocate the 
budget for maximum return. Budgeting decisions apply to all business investments, 
such as construction to increase manufacturing capacity, entering new markets, 
modernizing retail stores, R&D, and acquiring IT, apps, and enterprise systems. 
Business case is a 
presentation or document 
that outlines the justification 
for the start-up and funding 
of a project. 

418  Chapter 13     Project Management and SDLC
Investments in IT for marketing or manufacturing innovations compete head-on 
with investments needed to comply with new laws and regulations in finance, 
accounting, HR, and cybersecurity.
During project analysis, IT projects should be examined holistically—that is, 
in combination to identify investment synergies. This approach is known as project 
portfolio management (PPM). PPM is a set of business practices to manage projects 
as a strategic portfolio. PPM ensures the alignment of programs and projects with 
organizational objectives. Executive management needs to review portfolios and 
programs, determine why projects are or are not necessary, see where money is 
spent, prioritize projects, stage the start of new projects, spread resources appropri-
ately, and then keep tabs on progress. 
PPM establishes a path from the concept through successful project comple-
tion. Without the necessary data, management is incapable of making informed 
decisions to approve the “right” new projects and to shut down projects with no 
hope for success:
• Map proposed projects to organizational strategies
• Assess the value that a proposed project brings to the company
• Assess the complexity of proposed projects
• Prioritize project proposals for project selection
COMPETING IT 
INVESTMENT PROJECTS 
MAY HAVE SYNERGY
The financial services sector has been compelled by strict international anti-money-
laundering (AML) guidelines that require firms to know your customer (KYC). 
Master data management (MDM, Chapter 3) is needed to create a single view of 
the customer and AML/KYC analytics are needed for banks to manage rising com-
pliance cost and the risk of noncompliance. To effectively motivate firms to invest 
in necessary defenses, regulators impose harsh sanctions when they identify failings 
in a firm’s AML/KYC compliance systems. Several high-profile sanctions are a 
$1.9 billion fine for HSBC in 2012, Wachovia’s $160 million settlement in 2010, 
and a $327 million settlement from Standard Chartered in 2012 (Gupta & Jain, 
2014). It is not a surprise that AML and KYC compliance budgets have increased 
significantly over the past few years and get priority rankings. However, compliance 
projects may align well with other data-intense projects. 
For example, AML laws require banks to demonstrate knowledge of where their 
customers live, what forms of identification they used to validate their identities, 
reconciliation of their demographics across products, validation that they are not on 
any government watch list, and understanding of their normal transaction behaviors 
in order to detect suspicious activity. Since much of these data are also used for mar-
keting and credit risk analysis, maintaining the data in a common repository makes 
sense from business and IT perspectives of cost, consistency, and accuracy.
BASIC CHARACTER-
ISTICS OF PROJECTS 
A project is a series of tasks to produce one or more deliverables. Deliverables are 
items that you hand off to the client or management for their review and approval 
and that must be produced to complete a project or part of a project. Projects have 
a defined start date and finish date that determine the project duration, scope, 
resources, and budget. Projects differ from operations or business as usual based on 
characteristics listed in Table 13.1. 
The Triple Constraint
The triple constraint (Figure 13.3) refers to the three attributes that must be man-
aged effectively for successful completion and closure of any project:
1. Scope. The project scope is the defi nition of what the project is supposed to 
accomplish—its outcomes or deliverables. Scope is measured in terms of the 
project size, goals, and requirements. 

13.1     Project Management Concepts     419  
2. Time. A project is made up of tasks.  Each task has a start date and an end date. 
The duration of a project extends from the start date of the fi rst task to the fi nish 
date of the last task. Time needed to produce the deliverables is naturally related 
to the scope and availability of resources allocated to the project. 
3. Cost. This is the estimation of the amount of money that will be required to com-
plete the project. Cost itself encompasses various things, such as resources, labor 
rates for contractors, risk estimates, and bills of materials, et cetera. All aspects 
of the project that have a monetary component are made part of the overall cost 
structure. Projects are approved subject to their costs. 
These constraints are interrelated so they must be managed together for the 
project to be completed on time, within budget, and to specification. The major 
take-away from the triple constraint represented as a triangle is that you cannot 
change one side without changing the other sides. Ignoring the potential repercus-
sions of adjustments to the scope, time, or cost of a project will lead to issues and 
may cause the project to fail. 
Scope Creep
During the project, it is almost guaranteed that requests will be made that change 
the scope. Scope creep refers to the growth of the project, which might seem 
inconsequential—at least to the person who is requesting that change. Scope creep 
is the piling up of small changes that by themselves are manageable but in aggre-
gate are significant. It is absolutely imperative that any change to the scope of the 
project explicitly include compensating changes in the budget, the deadline, and/
or resources. Consider this scenario. The project scope is to build a new online 
accounting application capable of processing at least one thousand expense reports 
(in multiple currencies) per day, that has a budget of $200,000, and is expected to 
last three months. After the project is started, the scope expands to include pro-
cessing of thousands of sales commissions per day. The project manager needs to 
renegotiate the project’s duration and budget for the added functionality, testing, 
and user training, making sure that  any requested change, no matter how small, is 
documented and accompanied by approval.
A standard approach for managing projects provides the following benefits:
• It establishes ground rules and expectations for the project team.
• It provides project managers, functional managers, and the operational staff 
with a common language that eases communication and helps ensure that 
everyone is on the same page.
• Managers can quickly determine which ones are proceeding smoothly and 
which are not when all projects follow the same processes and approaches 
and use the same metrics for measuring project performance.
TABLE 13.1 
Distinguishing Characteristics of Projects 
A project has these characteristics.
• Clearly defi ned scope, deliverables, and results
• An estimated time frame or schedule that is subject to a high degree of 
uncertainty
•  An estimated budget that is subject to a high degree of uncertainty
•  The requirement of extensive interaction among participants
• Tasks that may compete or confl ict with other business activities, which 
makes planning and scheduling diffi cult
• Risky but with a high profi t potential or benefi ts
Figure 13.3 Triple constraint.
Scope
Time
Cost

420  Chapter 13     Project Management and SDLC
Not using a best practices project management approach is the biggest IT 
project mistake a business can make. Tech Note 13.1 provides good advice on 
this topic. Project management helps keep projects on schedule and on budget. A 
good project management plan identifies anticipated costs early on to develop a 
realistic budget. Using resource conflict solutions, project managers can minimize 
the effect of funding a new project on operating capital by optimizing the alloca-
tion of workers. Coordinating tasks and clearly identifying goals or deliverables 
within phases reduce inefficiencies in time management that can result in being 
over budget.
TECH NOTE 13.1  Seven Deadly Sins of Project Management and IT Project 
Management—Two Views
Project Management Mistakes
Michelle Symonds (Symonds, 2014) suggested a set of seven deadly sins of project 
management, that is, the common mistakes that companies commit that contribute 
to project failure. As an IT project manager, these mistakes refer to project manage-
ment in general rather than to IT project management, and will doom your project 
to failure:
1. No project plan. You need a list of deliverables, the tasks and resources 
needed to produce each deliverable, time scales, and an estimated budget. 
2. No collaboration. If you are not collaborating with your team, you are miss-
ing opportunities to solve problems and build support.
3. No budget tracking. You need to track actual expenses and compare them to 
estimated costs throughout the project.
4. No risk management process. You need to monitor and keep risks under 
control. Maintain a risk log to record all the potential risks as well as what 
you are doing about them.
5. No stakeholder management. You need to identify each group of stakehold-
ers relating to your project and put a plan in place for communicating and 
managing each group.
6. No fi le organization system. IT project managers have to handle a lot of 
information. From project documents to copies of e-mails, from contracts 
to invoices, a well-defi ned and workable fi le organization system is critical if 
you want to be able to fi nd these things again.
7. No change management process. IT projects change. When the scope, bud-
get, or requirements of the project change, you need to have a framework 
to ensure you can cope with these changes. Even minor changes can affect 
multiple areas of the project. 
IT Project Management Mistakes
The Center for Project Management helps IT organizations implement effective proj-
ect management. Over 20 years ago, the fi rm came up with seven most common IT 
project management mistakes that cause the project to fail and that are still being made: 
1. Failing to stick to a project process architecture (see Figure 13.1)
2. Treating half-baked ideas as projects
3. Missing or ineffective leadership

13.2     Project Planning, Execution, and Budget     421  
Questions
1. What is a deliverable?
2. What is the purpose of PPM? 
3. What distinguishes a project from operations?
4. What are the triple constraints?
5. How can scope creep contribute to project failure?
The progression of key documents and decisions through the project management 
life cycle is outlined in Figure 13.4. Projects start with an idea that is explained in a 
business case. If the business case is accepted, a statement of work (SOW) is pre-
pared. The SOW is written as a definitive statement, which means that it defines the 
project plan but does not offer any options or alternatives in the scope. The project 
plan in the SOW is reviewed; a go or no-go decision is made; if a go decision is 
made, the project is initiated.
13.2  Project Planning, Execution, and Budget 
Figure 13.4 Project 
management key stages and 
activities.
Business case
& SOW
Project initiation &
risk management
planning
Project execution,
tracking & control
Project closure
& lessons
learned
Project plan review
using PPM; then
go/no-go decision
PROJECT BUSINESS 
CASE
The project manager, senior executive, or sponsor prepares a convincing business 
case for consideration. Here is an example of the components of a business case. 
4. Employing underskilled project managers
5. Inadequately tracking the project’s tasks, milestones, and resource usage 
6. Failing to fi x problems as soon as they are detected
7. Failing to engage in PPM

422  Chapter 13     Project Management and SDLC
Business Case Template
Project Overview Statement
Executive Summary
Project Name:  
Department: 
Date: 
Author(s): 
Project Manager(s): 
Executive Sponsor(s): 
Describe the pertinent facts of the project in a clear and concise way.
Project Overview
Describe what is involved in executing the project. 
Business Issue/Opportunity
Clearly identify the opportunity, need, or problem facing the company and 
why the project is necessary. Discuss the drivers that have triggered the project 
proposal and link them to the business need. 
Project Business Goal
Describe expected benefi ts and how the project fi ts within the company’s 
business strategy and contributes toward its goals and objectives.
Primary Project Objectives
List and describe the objectives of the project. 
1. Objective 1
2. Objective 2 . . .
3. Objective n . . .
Project Benefi ts and Cost–Benefi t Analysis
Describe the key benefi ts from implementing this project.
1. Benefi t 1
2. Benefi t 2 . . .
3. Benefi t n . . .
Based on the costs established for each option, describe how those costs are 
weighed against the benefi ts. Conduct the cost–benefi t analysis for each option 
taking into account costs, benefi ts, and risks.
PRIMARY PROJECT DELIVERABLES
Milestone 1
1. Deliverable: Description of the deliverable
2. Deliverable: Description of the deliverable
3. . . . 
PROJECT BUSINESS CASE

13.2     Project Planning, Execution, and Budget     423  
Milestone 2
1. Deliverable: Description of the deliverable
2. Deliverable: Description of the deliverable
3. . . . 
Milestone n
1. Deliverable: Description of the deliverable
2. Deliverable: Description of the deliverable
3. . . . 
Project Interdependencies and Inputs
Explain other projects in process or planned that have a relationship to this 
proposed project. List inputs that other projects may have to this project 
development.
• [input]
• [input]
• [input]
Project Assumptions and Constraints
List and describe all underlying technical, environmental, and resource 
availability assumptions upon which the project and benefi ts are based. List 
and describe constraints that can come from external or internal factors.
Project Risks
Describe known risks that apply to this project.
PROJECT KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
Project Critical Success Factors or KPIs
List and describe KPIs or critical success factors that apply to this project.
PROJECT DURATION ESTIMATES AND DELIVERABLES
Project Milestone 
Date Estimate 
Confi dence Level
Project Start Date 
 
[High/Medium/Low]
Milestone 1 
 
[High/Medium/Low]
Milestone 2 
 
[High/Medium/Low]
Milestone n 
 
[High/Medium/Low]
Project Completion Date  
 
[High/Medium/Low]
APPROVALS
Prepared by 
______________________________________
 
Project Manager

424  Chapter 13     Project Management and SDLC
Approved by 
______________________________________
 
Project Sponsor
 
______________________________________
 
Executive Sponsor
 
______________________________________
 
Client Sponsor
STATEMENT OF WORK 
An outline of a SOW is shown in Table 13.2. The SOW is a legal contract used 
to document the agreement between parties after the business terms have been 
TABLE 13.2  Template for a Statement of Work 
Date 
[Insert date]
Client 
[Insert client’s name]
Job Name 
[Insert project name]
Requested by 
[Insert client sponsor’s name]
From 
[Insert project manager’s name]
Summary and 
A high-level description of the project and 
Objectives  
objectives
Project Scope  
 Description of the project scope, deliverables, and 
the process for how it will be performed 
Schedule and Work 
List of tasks in sequential order, resources allocated 
Breakdown Structure  
to each task, and schedule
(WBS)
Cost or Pricing 
 Description of the cost (pricing) for all types of 
resources—labor costs, materials, equipment, 
overhead expenses; discussion of payment terms, 
including a payment schedule and if payments are 
based on a milestone/deliverable or a schedule, if 
appropriate
Key Assumptions 
 A crucial part of an SOW—any assumptions made 
when scoping and estimating the project need to be 
documented 
Acceptance
The client named below verifi es that the terms of this statement of work are 
acceptable. The parties hereto are each acting with proper authority of their 
respective companies.
________________________________ 
________________________________
Company name 
Company name
________________________________ 
________________________________
Full name 
Full name
________________________________ 
________________________________
Title 
Title
________________________________ 
________________________________
Signature 
Signature
________________________________ 
________________________________
Date 
Date

13.2     Project Planning, Execution, and Budget     425  
accepted and a go decision is made. The go/no-go decision is a formal decision made 
by the project manager, sponsor, and appropriate executives and stakeholders.
WORK BREAKDOWN 
STRUCTURE 
After the project objectives and scope have been defined, the next step is to iden-
tify all work or activities that need to be performed, the schedule of work, and 
who will perform the work. This is done by creating a work breakdown structure 
(WBS) as shown in Figure 13.5. Figure 13.6 shows a screen shot of a WBS (left 
side) developed using Microsoft Project. Project resources are managed according 
to the WBS.
Milestones
The WBS breaks a project down into the tasks or activities that must be performed, 
and in what order, to produce the deliverables at each milestone. Project milestones 
are very important scheduling and status devices because they enable the project 
manager to measure progress as the project proceeds through its planned life cycle. 
Lack of milestones has been a contributing factor in many project failures. Each 
milestone typically represents a deliverable (100 percent complete), but it may also 
signify the percent complete, such as 50 percent complete.
Milestone Example
Assume you are the project manager of a project for a client who wants to post a 
creative project on Kickstarter.com to raise funds using crowdfunding. You visit 
Kickstarter.com and do requirements analysis. You determine that you need to 
produce five deliverables: (1) a video, (2) a set of photos and illustrations, (3) a 
script that explains why the creative project deserves funding, (4) a set of pledge 
categories and rewards to backers, and (5) the final site with all deliverables 
uploaded to Kickstarter.com and tested. Each deliverable represents a milestone 
1.2 Implementation
1.2.1 Develop the
Architecture
1.2.2 Develop
Site
1.2.2.1 Develop
Product Database
1.2.2.2 Develop
Web Site
1.2.2.3 Test the 
Site
1.3 Monitoring and
Control
1.3.1 Perform Risk
Management
1.3.2 Perform
Quality Assurance
1.3.3 Perform Issue
Management
1.4 Deployment
1.4.1 Perform
Deployment
1.1.1 Develop
Requirements
1.1.2 Research
Hosting Options
1.1.3 Design Site
User Interface
1.1 Planning
1.0
Develop Mobile Commerce Site
Figure 13.5 One segment 
of the WBS for a mobile 
commerce site project.
Milestones are used to 
manage the project work 
effort, monitor results, and 
report meaningful status to 
project stakeholders.
Crowdfunding is raising 
funds for a project from the 
public, or crowd, via the 
Web. 

426  Chapter 13     Project Management and SDLC
in your project plan. You then rely on your milestone schedule to verify that 
the project is on track or to warn of the need for corrective action. Milestones 
should be natural, important control points in the project and easy for everyone 
to recognize.
Cost Estimations
While costs are not part of the WBS, the projects’ estimated cost can be calculated 
from the WBS. Each task or activity has a start date and duration, which determines 
its finish date. For example, if a task starts on Monday, November 2, and takes eight 
work days (excluding weekend days) to complete, the finish date is Wednesday, 
November 11. Assume the resources—people, equipment, and materials—needed 
to complete the task and their costs are known. Project management software com-
putes the cost of the project based on labor time (duration) of each task in the WBS 
and the cost of labor or other resource. 
Responsibility Matrix
A responsibility matrix shows who has primary responsibility and who has support 
responsibility for the activities listed in the WBS. Table 13.3 is an example of a 
responsibility matrix.
Gantt Chart
A Gantt chart is a bar chart that shows the timeline of the project schedule, as 
shown on the right side of Figure 13.6. On a Gantt chart, the start and finish dates 
of all tasks and milestones appear as bars whose length represent its duration. Gantt 
charts are multipurpose visualization tools that are used for planning, scheduling, 
and at-a-glance status reports. 
Figure 13.6 Microsoft Project screen shot of WBS (left side) and Gantt chart 
(right side). 
Responsibility matrix lets 
everyone know who is 
responsible for completion 
of tasks.
Gantt chart is a horizontal 
bar chart that graphically 
displays the project schedule. 

13.2     Project Planning, Execution, and Budget     427  
Project Baseline
When the project plan is finalized and accepted, the accepted plan becomes the 
baseline, or master plan. The baseline is used for monitoring and controlling. Any 
change to the baseline is a deviation, or variance, to the plan—and it needs to be 
documented. Using project management software, you can save the WBS as the 
baseline. From then on, deviations will automatically be documented as variances 
from the baseline, as shown in Figure 13.7.
TABLE 13.3   Sample Format for a Responsibility Matrix Showing Who 
Has Primary and Support Responsibility for WBS Tasks
 WBS ID 
Activity 
Anna 
Bart 
Beth 
Chas 
Don
1.1  
Storyboard video 
 
S 
 
P
1.2  
Recruit volunteers to act 
 
 
in video 
 
S 
P
1.3  
Record video segments 
 
 
 
P 
S
2.1  
Select fi ve photographs 
 
 
and images  
P 
 
 
 
S
2.2  
Crop and edit photos 
S 
 
 
 
P
P 
 primary responsibility, S 
 support responsibility
Figure 13.7 Work and cost variances from the agreed-upon project baseline are 
documented by project management software.
Work
Scheduled: 
 
680 hrs
Baseline:  
 
528 hrs
Variance:  
 
152 hrs
Scheduled:
Baseline:
Variance:
Tasks not yet started:
Tasks in progress:
Tasks completed:
Total tasks:
$14,104.00
$10,624.00
$3,480.00
7
9
0
16
Work resources:
Overallocated work resources:
Material resources:
Total resources:
4
4
0
8
Remaining:
Actual: 
$11,751.60
$2,352.40
Remaining: 
 
581.2 hrs
Actual: 
 
 
 98.8 hrs
Percent complete: 
 
       15%
Costs
Task Status
Resource status
Baseline is a specification 
of the project plan that has 
been formally reviewed and 
agreed upon. It should be 
changed only through a 
formal change control 
process.

428  Chapter 13     Project Management and SDLC
Questions
 1. What identifi es an opportunity, problem, or need and the desired 
business outcomes of the project?
 2. What is the approach that examines projects holistically and manages 
them as a strategic portfolio?
 3. What are the items that you hand off to the client or management for 
their review and approval? 
 4. What are the three attributes that must be managed effectively for 
successful completion and closure of any project?
 5. What is the term for the piling up of small changes that by themselves 
are manageable but in aggregate are signifi cant? 
 6. If the business case is accepted, what document is prepared?
 7. What events are used to manage the project work effort, monitor 
results, and report a meaningful status to project stakeholders?
 8. What is the longest path of tasks through a project?
 9. What shows who has primary responsibility and who has support 
responsibility for the tasks listed in the WBS?
10. What is the type of bar chart that shows the timeline of the project 
schedule?
11. When the project plan is fi nalized and agreed to, what is any change to 
the baseline?
Monitoring and control processes are intended to occur continuously while the 
project work is being executed. These processes, described in Figure 13.8, depend 
on the baseline, milestones, responsibility matrix, and other elements from the plan-
ning stage. They keep the project team informed of project status and help them 
cope with challenges they encounter. Except for short, simple projects, there are 
going to be risks and changes that need to be kept under control and documented. 
Monitoring depends on prompt and candid feedback from the project team, as 
you read in the opening case. In-person visits, reports, and records are also monitor-
ing methods. Project control depends on systems and decision rules for managing 
variances between the project’s scope, cost, schedule, and quality and the realities 
of project implementation.
13.3  Project Monitoring, Control, and Closing
INTEGRATED CHANGE 
CONTROL
Changes tend to have a trickle-down effect because of task dependencies and shared 
resources. For example, consider the following three activities from Table 13.3:
1.1 Storyboard a video.
1.2  Recruit volunteers to act in the video.
1.3  Record video segments.
Activity 1.3 is dependent on the completion of activities 1.1 and 1.2. Video record-
ing cannot start until after the video has been storyboarded and actors are available.
Integrated change control processes help to manage the disruption result-
ing from requested changes and corrective actions across the project life cycle. 
Integrated change control processes are always documented and saved in the event 
of project failure or lawsuits related to the failure. These documents are needed to 
defend decisions—what did and did not happen, such as: 

13.3     Project Monitoring, Control, and Closing     429  
• Approved change requests
• Rejected change requests
• Updates to the project plan
• Updates to the scope 
• Approved corrective and preventive actions
• Approved defect repair
• Validated defect repair
Figure 13.8 Project controls.
Managing and negotiating
changes in response
to scope creep
Scope Control
Recommending corrective
actions
Monitoring project
deliverables to verify that
quality standards and
specifications are not
being compromised
Quality Control
Managing factors that can
cause changes to the cost
baseline
Cost Control
Managing factors that can
cause time delays or
schedule changes
Schedule Control
CRITICAL PATH
All projects have a critical path that extends the length of the project. Project manage-
ment software shows the critical path on the Gantt chart, as in Figure 13.9. Each task 
or activity on the critical path is called a critical task or activity. Critical tasks must 
finish on schedule because delays will delay the project unless something is done to 
compensate. While it may seem that adding new people to a project is an obvious solu-
tion, in fact, it may initially slow it down. If any noncritical tasks get delayed enough, 
they could go critical, so both critical and noncritical paths need to be monitored.
Critical path is the longest 
path of tasks through a 
project, as shown on a Gantt 
chart. A delay of any task on 
the critical path will delay the 
project. 
Figure 13.9 The critical path is shown as red bars. The critical path consists of 
the tasks from project start to fi nish that must be completed on time in order for 
the project to fi nish on time.
WHEN TO KILL A 
PROJECT THAT IS 
OUT OF CONTROL
Project control is also used to identify when to declare the ongoing project a failure 
and kill it. Here is a common scenario: 
The project is behind schedule. The scope changes almost daily. There were too 
few milestones identified during the planning stage to be able to monitor prog-
ress. Resources were overallocated. Because of the lack of regularly scheduled 
meetings, the project manager has no information on what the team members 

430  Chapter 13     Project Management and SDLC
are working on at any given time. The team members are not communicating 
because they know that the project is on its deathbed and are afraid to say so. 
Many people in the company also know that the project is in trouble, except 
for senior management.
Sometimes, the only right way to fix a project is to cancel it. If a project suffers 
from one or more of conditions listed in the scenario, it has reached a point where 
its feasibility must be critically reexamined. It is very difficult to kill any project 
when millions of dollars have been spent to date—even when it is clearly the right 
decision. IT at Work 13.1 describes a real-world case. 
The money already spent on the project, or sunk costs, should not be con-
sidered in the decision. The only relevant cost, from a financial point of view, is 
whether the total value from continuing is greater than the total cost of doing so.
U.S. Secretary of Commerce Carlos M. Gutierrez issued the 
following official statement explaining (in an obscure way) 
why the Census Bureau was scrapping its $600 million proj-
ect. The project plan was to develop a system for collecting 
census data using 500,000 handheld devices. The Census 
Bureau had contracted to use handheld devices from Harris 
Corp., but mismanagement, cost overruns, and poor plan-
ning caused the project to fail. 
According to a U.S. Census Press Release: 
Multiple internal and external reviews have identified 
continuing Census challenges across a number of 
areas, including adequate planning over key systems 
requirements, key technology requirements, speci-
fication of operational control system characteristics 
and functions and regional center technology infra-
structure. . . . Gutierrez said that the Census Bureau 
will need an additional $2.2 to $3.0 billion in funding 
over the next five years to meet the replan needs. . . . 
The lifecycle cost for the Reengineered 2010 Census 
was estimated at $11.8 billion in the FY 2009 Budget 
Request, including $1.8 billion for the American 
Community Survey which replaced the long-form. The 
new estimated lifecycle cost for the 2010 Census is 
$13.7 to $14.5 billion.
In summary, the Census Bureau had planned to issue more 
than 500,000 handhelds to temporary employees to collect 
personal data on Americans who do not return census forms 
in the mail. The handhelds were being developed under 
a $600 million contract awarded to Harris Corp. in 2006. 
Stumbling over this multibillion-dollar plan for a high-tech 
census, the government reverted to counting the nation’s 300 
million people the old-fashioned way: with paper and pencil. 
Poor management—not poor technology—caused the gov-
ernment to spend an additional $3 billion for the next census.
Was the Failure a Surprise?
Senator Susan Collins, ranking member of the Committee 
on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, was not 
surprised by the failure. “This committee is unfortunately no 
stranger to tales of federal projects and contracts that have 
gone awry, often at a heavy cost in taxpayer funds,” she said. 
Collins listed the usual failure reasons: 
• 
poorly defined initial requirements and 
• 
inability or unwillingness of management to control 
“requirements creep” and cost overruns.
Something larger than poor project management was at 
work. It was the failure of top management in the Bureau to 
assess and mitigate the risks inherent in such a major proj-
ect. “It should be noted that the problems with this contract 
seemed apparent to everyone except the Census Bureau,” 
said Senator Tom Coburn (D-Oklahoma).
Analysis of the Handheld Project Failure
The 2010 census was to have been the first true high-tech 
count in the nation’s history. The Census Bureau had awarded 
a contract to purchase 500,000 of the computers, plus the 
computer operating system, at a cost of more than $600 mil-
lion. The contract ballooned to $1.3 billion, even though the 
Bureau scaled back its purchase to only 151,000 handheld 
computers. The higher expenditure was due to cost overruns 
IT at Work 1 3 .1
U.S Census Project Out of Control

13.3     Project Monitoring, Control, and Closing     431  
and new features ordered by the Census Bureau on the com-
puters and the operating system. Gutierrez blamed many of 
the problems on “a lack of effective communication with one 
of our key contractors.”
Census officials were being blamed for doing a poor 
job of spelling out technical requirements to the contrac-
tor, Harris. In addition, the handhelds proved too complex 
for some temporary workers who tried to use them in a test 
in North Carolina, and the devices were not initially pro-
grammed to transmit the large amounts of data necessary.
Harris spokesman Marc Raimondi said the cost of the 
contract increased as the project requirements increased: 
“The increased funding is required to cover additional sites, 
equipment, software and functions added by the bureau to 
the program.”
Representative Alan Mollohan, chairman of the appro-
priations subcommittee, said the Census Bureau and Harris 
“contributed to today’s crisis.” The Census Bureau’s failure 
to address problems with the computers early on has “turned 
the crisis into the emergency that we now face.”
Sources: Compiled from Holmes (2008) and U.S. Census (census.
gov, 2008).
Questions
1. What went wrong?
2. What should have been done that was not done? 
3. Where any problems unforeseeable? 
4. Consider the statement: “hope is not a plan.” Does the 
statement apply to this project failure? Explain why or why 
not. 
5. What are the similarities between the U.S .Census project 
failure and the DIA automated baggage-handling project 
failure?
PROJECT CLOSING AND 
POSTMORTEM
Closing out a project does not benefit the completed project (which is the first to be 
cut when costs overrun); rather, it benefits the enterprise and people who worked 
on the project. They gain a better understanding of what did and did not work. These 
lessons learned guide future projects.
Postproject reviews, or postmortems, identify the reasons the project was suc-
cessful or not, strengths and weaknesses of the project plan, how problems were 
detected and resolved, and how the project was successful in spite of them. 
 IT Project Management Jobs
Project management is a high-level skill and a demand-
ing career choice. The most successful upper-level proj-
ect managers typically have an MBA or other business 
degree and financial background to plan and manage 
the project budget. 
A sample job description for an IT project manager 
is as follows: 
Responsible for the coordination and completion of 
projects within the information technology depart-
ment. Oversees all aspects of projects and project 
budgets. Sets deadlines, assigns responsibilities, 
and monitors and summarizes progress of project. 
Builds and maintains working relationships with 
team members, vendors, and other departments 
involved in the projects. Prepares reports for upper 
management regarding status of project. Requires a 
bachelor’s degree, two to four years of experience, 
and knowledge of project management software. 
MBA is preferred. Leads and directs the work of 
others. A wide degree of creativity and latitude is 
expected. Typically reports to a senior manager or 
head of a unit/department.
CAREER INSIGHT 1 3 . 1

432  Chapter 13     Project Management and SDLC
Questions
1. What processes help to ensure that the impacts resulting from requested 
changes and corrective actions are managed across the project life 
cycle?
2. What is the length of a project?
3. Assuming no changes are made, what happens when a task on the criti-
cal path is delayed?
4. What costs should not be considered when deciding whether to kill a 
project?
5. When are lessons learned from a completed project identifi ed?
The system development life cycle (SDLC) is the traditional system development 
method for large IT projects, such as IT infrastructure or an enterprise system. The 
SDLC is a structured framework that consists of a sequential set of processes, as 
shown in Figure 13.10. Starting with an initial idea, the SDLC processes are require-
ments analysis, systems analysis and design, development and testing, implementa-
tion, and maintenance. Each process consists of well-defined tasks that depend on 
the scope of the project. The processes are iterative, which means that they are 
revised when new information or conditions make a revision the smart thing to do. 
Iteration does not mean that system development should be subject to infinite revi-
sions or scope creep. 
IS design is highly susceptible to scope creep for many reasons. Intended users 
ask for additional features. People who were not intended users ask to be included. 
Technology changed from the time the business case was written and system devel-
opment began. The actions of a competitor, supplier, or regulatory agency triggered 
additional requests for functionality. Because scope creep is expensive, project 
managers impose controls on changes requested by users. These controls help to 
prevent runaway projects—system development projects that are so far over budget 
and past deadline that they must be abandoned, typically with large monetary loss.
13.4  System Development Life Cycle 
Figure 13.10 System 
development life cycle.
SDLC STEPS
In general, an SDLC methodology follows the following steps.
Requirements Analysis 
Deficiencies in the existing system are identified and used to specify functional 
and data requirements of the new system. Requirements analysis is critical to the 
success of the project. System development practitioners agree that the more time 
invested in analyzing the current system, business problem, or opportunity and 
© arka38/Shutterstock 

13.4     System Development Life Cycle     433  
understanding problems that are likely to occur during development, the greater 
the probability that the IS will be a success. 
System Analysis and Feasibility Studies
The proposed system is designed. Plans are laid out concerning the physical con-
struction, hardware, software, media, dashboards, operating systems, program-
ming, connectivity, and security issues. The feasibility of the design is tested. The 
feasibility study determines the probability of success of the proposed project and 
provides a rough assessment of the project‘s technical, economic, organizational, 
and behavioral feasibility. The feasibility study is critically important to the system 
development process because, done properly, the study can prevent companies 
from making expensive mistakes, such as creating systems that will not work, that 
will not work efficiently, or that people cannot or will not use. The Census Bureau 
case in IT at Work 13.1 is an example. The various feasibility analyses also give the 
stakeholders an opportunity to decide what metrics to use to measure how a pro-
posed system meets their objectives.
• Technical feasibility. Technical feasibility determines if the required tech-
nology, IT infrastructure, data structures, analytics, and resources can be 
developed and/or acquired to solve the business problem. Technical feasibil-
ity also determines if the organization‘s existing technology can be used to 
achieve the project’s performance objectives.
• Economic feasibility. Economic feasibility determines if the project is an 
acceptable financial risk and if the company can afford the expense and time 
needed to complete the project. Economic feasibility addresses two primary 
questions: Do the benefits outweigh the costs of the project? Can the project 
be completed as scheduled?
 
 
Management can assess economic feasibility by using cost–benefit analysis 
and financial techniques such as time value of money, return on investment 
(ROI), net present value (NPV), and breakeven analysis. Return on invest-
ment is the ratio of the net income attributable to a project divided by the aver-
age cost of resources invested in the project. NPV is the net amount by which 
project benefits exceed project costs, after allowing for the cost of capital and 
the time value of money. Breakeven analysis calculates the point at which the 
cumulative cash flow from a project equals the investment made in the project.
 
 
Calculating economic feasibility in IT projects is rarely straightforward. 
Part of the difficulty is that some benefits are intangible. For a proposed 
system that involves big data, real time analytics, or 3D printing, there may 
be no previous evidence of what sort of financial payback can be expected.
• Legal and organizational feasibility. Are there legal, regulatory, or environ-
mental reasons why the project cannot or should not be implemented? This 
analysis looks at the company’s policies and politics, including impacts on 
power distribution and business relationships.
• Behavioral feasibility. Behavioral feasibility considers human issues. All 
system development projects introduce change, and people generally resist 
change. Overt resistance from employees may take the form of sabotaging 
the new system (e.g., entering data incorrectly) or deriding the new system 
to anyone who will listen. Covert resistance typically occurs when employ-
ees simply do their jobs using their old methods.
 
 
Behavioral feasibility is concerned with assessing the skills and the 
training needed to use the new IS. In some organizations, a proposed system 
may require mathematical or linguistic skills beyond what the workforce 
currently possesses. In others, a workforce may simply need to improve 
their skills. Behavioral feasibility is as much about “can they use it” as it is 
about “will they use it.”

434  Chapter 13     Project Management and SDLC
After the feasibility analysis, a go/no-go decision is reached. The project spon-
sor and project manager sign off on the decision. If it is a no-go decision, the project 
is put on the shelf until conditions are more favorable, or the project is discarded. If 
the decision is “go,” then the system development project proceeds.
SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT 
AND TESTING
System developers utilize the design specifications to acquire the software needed 
for the system to meet its functional objectives and solve the business problem. 
Sourcing, as discussed in Chapter 12, and in-house coding are options. 
Testing verifies that apps, interfaces, data transfers, and so on, work correctly 
under all possible conditions. Testing requires a lot of time, effort, and expense to 
do properly. However, the costs and consequences of improper testing, which could 
possibly lead to a system that does not meet its objectives, are enormous. The risk 
of costly lawsuits needs to be considered. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
Implementation, or deployment, is the process of converting from the old system to 
the new system. Four conversion strategies are parallel, direct cut over, pilot, and 
phased.
In a parallel conversion, the old system and the new system operate simultane-
ously for a period of time. That is, both systems process the same data at the same 
time, and the outputs are compared. This type of conversion is the most expensive 
but least risky. 
In a direct conversion, the old system is cut off and the new system is turned on 
at a certain point in time. This type of conversion is the least expensive, but it is the 
most risky if the new system does not work as planned. 
A pilot conversion introduces the new system in one location to test it out. After 
the new system works properly, it is rolled out. 
A phased conversion introduces components of the new system, such as indi-
vidual modules, in stages. Each module is assessed, and, when it works properly, 
other modules are introduced until the entire new system is operational.
MAINTENANCE 
Once the new system’s operations are stabilized, audits are performed during oper-
ation to assess the system’s capabilities and determine if it is being used correctly. 
Maintenance must be kept up rigorously at all times. Users of the system should be 
kept up to date concerning the latest modifications and procedures.
Questions
1. What are the stages of the SDLC?
2. Why is information system design highly susceptible to scope creep?
3. What can be done to prevent runaway projects?
4. Explain the feasibility tests and their importance.
5. What are four conversion methods? 
Key Terms
baseline
business case
critical path
critical task
crowdfunding
deliverable
Gantt chart
go/no-go decision
integrated change control
milestone
postmortem
project
project management
project portfolio 
management (PPM)
prototyping
responsibility matrix
scope creep
statement of work (SOW)
sunk cost
system development life 
cycle (SDLC)
triple constraint
variance
work breakdown structure 
(WBS)

Assuring Your Learning     435  
Assuring Your Learning
 1. Business cases take a long time to research and 
write. As a result, they are also time consuming to 
review. Explain why business cases require so much 
effort and detail. 
 2. What risks might the use of project portfolio man-
agement (PPM) minimize? Do you think PPM can 
guarantee honest and unbiased project approvals or 
not? Explain your position.
 3. Do you think that projects that are needed to 
comply with regulations, such as the international 
anti-money-laundering (AML) laws that require 
fi rms to know your customer (KYC), should 
undergo the same approval requirements as 
discretionary projects, such as in manufacturing or 
marketing? Explain your reasons. 
 4. Why should each deliverable be made a milestone?
 5. Why is the critical path an important monitoring tool?
 6. How does diagramming the triple constraint as a 
triangle clearly demonstrate how time, scope, and 
cost are interrelated?
 7. Refer to the Center for Project Management’s list 
of seven IT project management mistakes. Select 
two of these mistakes and explain how they 
contribute to project failure.
 8. Why should the go/no-go decision be made more 
than once in a project’s life cycle? 
 9. If a project is started without a documented base-
line, what risks might the project and project team 
face?
 10. Explain how control activities are, in effect, risk 
management activities.
 11. Why is it tough to ignore sunk costs when 
evaluating a failing project?
 12. Why are IT projects so susceptible to scope creep?
 13. What leads to a runaway project? 
 14. What feasibilities are needed prior to IT project 
approval?
 15. Explain the stages of the SDLC.
DISCUSS: Critical Thinking Questions
1. ProjectLibre is the open-source replacement of 
Microsoft Project. Visit the ProjectLibre website at 
ProjectLibre.org. 
a. Download the free software.
b. Assume you are the project manager on a project 
of your choice that you are able to manage. Several 
project examples are delivering a tailgate party 
for 50 people, remodeling a kitchen, creating a 
YouTube video for advertising a new product, 
or implementing a new cloud accounting 
information system.
c.  Use the software to plan a project of your choice. 
Create a WBS and Gantt chart. 
2. Research and compare the current top three open-
source project management tools. What are their 
limitations? 
3. Research the three project management vendors’ 
software packages and fi nd a review of each one. 
Write a report that compares the features of the 
packages, including prices, and that summarizes the 
reviews. 
EXPLORE: Online and Interactive Exercises
1.  You are the project manager and need to compose 
a SOW for clients who want you to develop a 
Kickstarter.com site for their project, as discussed 
in the chapter.
a. Start off by composing a SOW using a standard 
SOW template that you found and downloaded 
from the Internet.
b. Use www.tomsplanner.com or other free Gantt 
chart software to create a Gantt chart for your 
project. 
c. Assume that after your clients review your SOW 
and Gantt chart, they request that you discount 
the price 20 percent. Based on the triple con-
straints, how would you respond?
2.  Explore project management software on vendors’ 
websites. Select a single project management pack-
age, download the demo, and try it. Make a list of the 
important features of the package. Be sure to investi-
gate its cloud and collaboration features. Report your 
fi ndings. 
ANALYZE & DECIDE: Apply IT Concepts to Business Decisions

436  Chapter 13     Project Management and SDLC
3.  Managing a project with Microsoft Project is often 
the approach to IT project management, but many 
users prefer to use Microsoft Excel instead. The main 
reasons are that MS Project is too expensive, wastes 
too much time to set up and keep updated, and is 
tough to use. The debate between Excel and Project 
has valid arguments for either approach. Research 
the reviews of Excel and MS Project as project 
management tools. When is each software appropriate 
for use?
CASE 13.2
Business Case: Steve Jobs’ Shared Vision Project Management Style
Steve Jobs (1955–2011) co-founded Apple Inc. and reinvented 
the PC, music players, phones, tablets, and digital publish-
ing (Figure 13.11). He is regarded as technology industry’s 
most notable luminary. He continuously managed remark-
ably innovative projects—extremely successful ones as well 
as many failures. Although widely recognized as a marketing 
and technology guru, Jobs was largely successful because of 
his project-based approach for managing his business and pro-
ducing new products. His approach to executing projects ulti-
mately changed the business world. Jobs’ shared vision project 
management style offers lessons to help managers focus and 
motivate their team to get projects completed on schedule. 
Shared Vision and Accountability
A signifi cant part of what made Jobs successful was his per-
sistent push to keep projects moving while communicating 
with his team to ensure they were working toward the shared 
vision. He stressed accountability and did not let anyone slide 
on that principle. He got to know everyone on the team and 
actively inspired them.
 
Guy Kawasaki, Apple’s chief evangelist and liaison to the 
Mac developer community, said Jobs appreciated great work. 
He was well known for giving employees feedback—publicly 
telling them if they were great or lousy. His bluntness infuriated 
some people but also motivated them to either do their best 
or leave. 
Communication
Structure, understanding, and inspiration depend on the 
one irreplaceable management skill: communication. Part of 
what made Jobs so successful was his constant push to keep 
projects moving while communicating with his team to ensure 
they were working toward a shared vision. He held regular 
meetings to avoid wasting time with long e-mail chains and 
having to address the same concerns multiple times. 
Do Not Just Listen—Understand
There is a big difference between listening and understand-
ing. Jobs made sure he understood everyone on his team 
and that they understood him. This is done by making people 
demonstrate that they understand and not simply asking 
them if they understand. When everyone confi rms they are on 
the same page, they will keep moving forward. 
Sources: Darton Group (2012), Isaacson (2012), and Kimbrell (2014).
Questions
1. Steve Jobs shows the importance of people skills. Explain 
Jobs’ way of motivating people. For example, did he try 
to get everyone to like him? Did he try to get everyone to 
get along with each other?
2. Why did Jobs’ approach to project management work so 
well for him? 
3. What lessons can project managers learn from Jobs? 
4. Research Steve Jobs’ management style from reputable 
sources. What did you learn about how people reacted to 
Jobs’ style?
5. Create a checklist of effective project management 
practices.
Figure 13.11 Steve Jobs, CEO and founder of Apple 
Computers and Pixar boss, was one of the greatest 
project managers. 
© EdStock/iStockphoto 

References     437  
CASE 13.3
Demo Case: Mavenlink Project Management and Planning Software
Project management software and apps continue to be 
improved with advanced features and integration with other 
technology. The decision on which project management 
software to use depends on the company’s needs, size of 
business, and industry. Cloud-based or online project man-
agement applications are popular choices. Mavenlink is a 
vendor that provides easy-to-follow video tutorials through 
their online resources. With Mavenlink, you can track project 
timelines, collaborate on tasks, manage team activities, and 
integrate with Google Apps, QuickBooks, and Salesforce 
from a single workplace environment.
 
Visit Mavenlink’s website at Mavenlink.com. Scroll to the 
bottom of the landing page and click TUTORIALS. A YouTube 
video will launch. Watch the video. Also search for the 
Mavenlink: Online Project Management on YouTube, which 
was posted by a client, CloudBase3.com. 
Questions
1. What features support project planning?
2. What features support project monitoring and control?
3. How is change management supported? 
4. What did CloudBase3 identify as shortcomings or cons of 
Mavenlink?
Calleam Consulting Ltd. “Case Study—Denver International 
Airport Baggage Handling System—An Illustration of Inef-
fectual Decision Making.” www.Calleam.com. 2008.
Darton Group. “Steve Jobs and Lessons for Project Managers.” 
DartonGroup.com, January 2, 2012. 
Grimes, R. A. “11 Signs Your IT Project Is Doomed.” 
Computerworld.com, May 6, 2013. 
Gupta, S. & A. Jain. “AML and KYC Analytics—The Risk 
of Non-Compliance and the Cost of Compliance.” Everest 
Group Research, 2014. genpact.com/docs/resource-/-aml-and-
kyc-analytics—the-risk-of-non-compliance-and-the-cost-of-
compliance
Holmes, A. “Census Program to Use Handheld Computers 
Said to Be in ‘Serious Trouble.’” GovernmentExecutive.com, 
January 2, 2008. 
Isaacson, W. Steve Jobs. New York: Simon & Schuster, September 
2012. 
Kimbrell, G. “Four Project Management Lessons You Can 
Learn from Software Engineers.” Forbes, January 31, 2014. 
Krigsman, M. “Who’s Accountable for IT failure?” ZDNet, 
April 16, 2012. 
Nelson, R. R. “Project Retrospectives: Evaluating Project 
Success, Failure, and Everything in Between.” MIS Quarterly 
Executive 4, no. 3, September 2005. 
Perkins, B. “Bart Perkins: How to Keep Projects on Track.” 
Computerworld.com, April 21, 2014. 
Stackpole, B. “Why Project Management in IT Is More Impor-
tant Than Ever.” State Tech Magazine, September 25, 2013. 
Symonds, M. “The Seven Deadly Sins of Project Management.” 
The Project Management Hut, January 17, 2014. 
U.S. Census, 2008. census.gov
References

438
Chapter Snapshot
Several of today’s toughest ethical and social challenges 
did not even exist at the start of this decade. The latest 
social, mobile, cloud, and information management tech-
nologies are powerful forces. While businesses, govern-
ments, and users greatly benefit from their use, they may 
have harmful effects—not all of which are obvious yet. 
For example, what is the effect of people spending their 
personal and professional lives in a state of continuous 
disruption or partial (distracted) attention? 
 
Are you prepared to deal effectively with ethical 
challenges and corporate responsibilities that social, 
mobile, big data, and analytics technology create in busi-
ness? Anecdotal research suggests that individuals often 
do not even recognize when ethical issues are present. If 
people cannot recognize them, then it is hard to imagine 
how they could act responsibly. 
 
This chapter intends to make you aware of ethi-
cal risks, legal responsibilities, what we trade off, and 
Ethical Risks and 
Responsibilities 
of IT Innovations
14
Chapter
1. Analyze the privacy paradox and the effects of IT 
innovations on civil rights, privacy, piracy, copyright 
infringement, and other social risks. 
2. Distinguish and debate the complex issues of respon-
sible conduct and irresponsible conduct, such as social 
media discrimination. 
3. Describe the impacts of constant connectivity and 
distractions on quality of life, business, safety, and 
interpersonal relationships.
4. Describe the disruptive technology trends for the next 
three years.
Chapter Snapshot
Case 14.1 Opening Case: Google Glass and 
Risk, Privacy, and Piracy Challenges
14.1 Privacy Paradox, Privacy, and Civil Rights
14.2 Responsible Conduct 
14.3  Technology Addictions and the Emerging 
Trend of Focus Management
14.4  Six Technology Trends Transforming 
Business
Key Terms
Assuring Your Learning
• Discuss: Critical Thinking Questions 
• Explore: Online and Interactive Exercises 
•  Analyze & Decide: Apply IT Concepts 
to Business Decisions 
Case 14.2 Business Case: Apple’s CarPlay 
Gets Intelligent
Case 14.3 Video Case: Vehicle-to-Vehicle 
Technology to Prevent Collisions 
References
Learning Outcomes

439
CASE 14.1 OPENING CASE
Google Glass and Risk, Privacy, and Piracy Challenges
unresolvable controversies. These issues are examined 
within the context of civil rights, employment laws, 
regulations, research findings, and case examples. Of 
course, even those guidelines cannot provide easy 
answers to social discrimination, the demise of privacy, 
distractions, piracy and theft of intellectual property, 
and what the latest digital devices are doing to quality 
of life. There are no easy fixes, clear-cut judgments, 
answers, or solutions. As managers, you need to be able 
to recognize ethical issues and tip the balance toward 
better responsible conduct.
In October 2013, California Highway Patrol (CHP) officer Keith Odle pulled 
over Cecilia Abadie for speeding along Interstate 15 in San Diego. Odle noticed 
that Abadie, a software developer, was wearing Google Glass (see Figure 14.1). 
He ticketed her for speeding and for being in violation of the distracted-driving 
law. California Vehicle Code Section 27602 bans people from driving while video 
screens are operating in the front of the vehicle, except for mapping displays such 
as GPS and other built-in screens. Abadie was one of the explorers who were pilot 
testing Google Glass, which was then not yet on the market.
While the case against Abadie was the first known instance of a Glass-related 
ticket, it will not be the last. At least seven states—Delaware, Illinois, Missouri, New 
Jersey, New York, West Virginia, and Wyoming—are considering laws prohibiting 
driving while using Google Glass. As stated on the CNET website (www.cnet.com), 
Abadie’s alleged violation “does pose a thorny legal question that police, judges 
and drivers will have to face as these wearable devices become more prevalent” 
(Whitney, 2013). 
Figure 14.1 Diverse views 
and arguments about the 
consequences of wearing 
Google Glass.
If Glass distracts drivers
and causes traffic
accidents, then Google
has a responsibility to
address this issue.
A Glass wearer in a movie
theater was detained by a
U.S. Immigration and
Homeland Security
Investigations unit, which
targets piracy.
The DriveSafe app detects
when drivers are falling
asleep and wakes them
up—making driving safer.
Technology is inherently
neutral. Misuse by users
creates social risk so users
bear the responsibility.
Violation of distracted
driving traffic codes
Glass violates the right to
be left alone. The facial
recognition app, NameTag,
allows Glass wearers
to scan faces of strangers
against known face
databases.

440  Chapter 14     Ethical Risks and Responsibilities of IT Innovations
DISTRACTED DRIVERS 
VERSUS INFORMED 
DRIVERS
Wearing computer-in-eyewear could be a distracted-driving violation according to 
the traffic code, but police must prove that the eyewear was on. The CHP officer had 
seen the light from Abadie’s Glass screen. However, her defense attorney claimed 
that the Glass activated when she looked up at the officer during the stop but was not 
on when she was driving. The California judge dismissed her ticket saying that the 
CHP officer failed to prove the Glass was in operation when the driver was stopped. 
One side argues that driving with a wearable computer is as risky as texting or 
watching TV while driving. The opposing side claims that the advantages of Glass 
outweigh any risks. They cite the DriveSafe app that detects when drivers are fall-
ing asleep and wakes them up—making driving safer. At present, traffic laws aim to 
eliminate distracted driving.
PRODUCT LIABILITY, 
RISK, AND 
RESPONSIBILITY 
CONTROVERSY
This case triggered many debates over the responsibility and business risk of digital 
technology products hitting the market. Here are several debated issues:
• Google Glass may redefine the boundaries of companies’ product liability. 
Certainly, individuals have the responsibility to drive safely at all times. Does 
Google also bear responsibility for potential harm caused by Glass users?
• The United Nations (U.N.) Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights 
was unanimously endorsed by the Human Rights Council in 2011. It states 
that companies must “avoid causing or contributing to adverse human rights 
impacts through their own activities, and address such impacts when they 
occur.” Glass constitutes Google’s “own activities;” therefore, according to 
the U.N., if Glass distracts drivers and causes traffic accidents, then Google 
has a responsibility to address this issue. The possible legal and ethical ques-
tion is whether or not technology companies are obligated to inform users 
that there may be social risks (risks to others) from using their products in 
plain language—similar to warnings of side effects of medications. 
• Do technology companies bear any responsibility for the social risks of how 
consumers or buyers use their products? Lawmakers are worried about what 
drivers will do with the Internet at their eyeballs. 
• A common argument is that technology is inherently neutral. Misuse by users 
creates social risk so users bear the responsibility. Opponents argue that tech-
nology companies must manage the social risks that they contribute to or cause. 
Driving violations are only one example of the effects of Glass on the legal system. 
Additionally, Glass is only one example of intersection of new devices and ethical, 
legal, and social responsibility. Like other new digital technologies, the device is 
influencing a wide range of legal issues, including copyright infringement, privacy, 
and piracy. The legal system is reactive and slower moving that IT—and may not 
be prepared for upcoming challenges. 
COPYRIGHT, PIRACY, 
AND PRIVACY 
INFRINGEMENT 
Since it is worn instead of held, Glass can record events less obtrusively than smart-
phones do. Wearers who want to take photos simply wink with their right eye. 
Google Glass also can be outfitted to prescription lenses, which introduces another 
issue since then the Glass is needed for correct vision.
Example 1: Piracy and Theft of Intellectual Property
In January 2014, a man in Columbus, Ohio, who was wearing prescription Google 
Glass was pulled out of an AMC theater about an hour into watching the movie 
Jack Ryan: Shadow Recruit. He was detained by agents from the U.S. Immigration 

CASE 14.1     Opening Case     441  
and Customs Enforcement’s Homeland Security Investigations unit, which targets 
piracy. After the interrogation, the agents hooked the Glass up to a computer and 
saw that all it was storing were personal family photos. Why and how did agents 
show up so quickly? AMC issued the following statement to address why it called 
the agency (Taylor, 2014):
[M]ovie theft is something we take very seriously, and our theater managers 
contact the Motion Picture Association of America anytime it’s suspected. . . .  
At AMC Easton 30 last weekend, a guest was questioned for possible movie 
theft after he was identified wearing a recording device during a film. The 
presence of this recording device prompted an investigation by the MPAA, 
which was on site. The MPAA then contacted Homeland Security, which 
oversees movie theft. The investigation determined the guest was not record-
ing content.
An AMC representative explained that wearing a device that was capable of 
recording video, which could then be used to pirate movies, was not allowed at 
movies. Certainly the motion picture industry has the right to protect its products 
against piracy via wearable devices that can record movies in stealth. Do owners of 
wearables have comparable rights? Which of these conflicting rights should over-
ride the other? Now consider a similar example. 
Example 2: Privacy Invasions 
Privacy invasions by people wearing Google Glass who take photos or shoot video 
instantaneously are another violation. Some entertainment and dining places, 
including a restaurant in Seattle, have banned people who wear the devices. In some 
states, wearers who give Glass the command to record could potentially violate 
wiretapping laws. Should people who are out relaxing and enjoying themselves be 
subject to being recorded without their consent or knowledge? Whose rights should 
override in these cases?
PURPOSE OF GOOGLE 
GLASS CONFLICTS 
WITH PRIVACY OF 
OTHERS
In Google’s view, the whole purpose of Glass is to have it on all the time. That is 
the Glass business model. The more the devices are worn, the more profitable they 
are. Google’s response to privacy and piracy violations is that Glass is designed with 
explicit signals, such as the screen lighting up, to alert others when someone is tak-
ing a picture or recording video. In your opinion, is a lit screen sufficient protection?
The devices make it harder for nonwearers to remain anonymous. A facial recog-
nition app, NameTag, allows Glass wearers to scan faces of strangers against known 
databases of faces. Google officially bans facial recognition apps on Google Glass. 
Does that ban have any meaning? Will people figure out how to get around it? 
This opening case introduces current ethical challenges and competing rights 
decisions. Your answers to questions within the case may change once you start to 
wear technology—or suffer because of others who do.
Sources: Compiled from Bader (2014), Perry (2014), Davis (2014), Dobuzinskis (2013), and Taylor (2014).
Questions
1. Answer the questions within the case. Explain the basis for your answers 
and opinions.
2. An estimated 500 million people are expected to be wearing a Web-
connected watch, camera, eyepiece, or other device by 2018. Consider 
how your answers to the questions within the case are different when 
answered from the perspective of half a billion wearers instead of just a 
few thousand. How have your answers and opinions changed?

442  Chapter 14     Ethical Risks and Responsibilities of IT Innovations
3. Imagine you had a Google Glass app that monitors your surroundings 
and tells you when you are about to crash into something. In your 
opinion, should use of Glass and that app while driving be legal or 
illegal? Explain your reasoning.
4. Glass wearers who become accustomed to capturing their lives with 
wearable devices could end up violating privacy, copyright, or piracy 
laws without realizing it. Research each of these laws and give a 
description of each. 
5. Use what you learned in Question #4 to give three examples of how 
such a violation could occur. Why might these violations be practically 
impossible to prevent or prove?
6. Do you think that Glass and similar wearables should be illegal? Explain 
your answer.
7. Do you agree with the U.N.’s position on corporate responsibility? 
Explain your answer.
8. Visit the SearchEngineWatch.com site. Search for “6 Funny Google 
Project Glass Parody Videos.” Watch the original video named “Project 
Glass: One day…” Imagine how human interaction might change if a 
majority of people spent the day wearing Glass. Describe how you see 
interaction changing.
We do not live in a world without consequences and boundaries. Yet many people 
act as though they do, as the privacy paradox points out.
14.1  Privacy Paradox, Privacy, and Civil Rights
PRIVACY AND THE NEW 
PRIVACY PARADOX
Privacy is the right to self-determine what information about you is made acces-
sible, to whom, when, and for what use or purpose. Privacy means we have freedom 
of choice and control over our personal information, including what we do not want 
shared with or used by others. Unauthorized disclosure of personal information is 
normally considered a breach of privacy, although what is unauthorized and what is 
personal information are matters of dispute, particularly when it is online. 
While privacy is still the social norm, a person’s privacy is based to a large 
extent on what choices that person has made. The amount of shared personal 
information is a decision that individuals make over their lifetime. This is a critical 
concept because online content can persist for an entire lifetime. Private content 
that uninhibited teenagers with bad judgment posted or sent cannot be made to dis-
appear when they apply for jobs requiring security clearance or intense background 
checks—or run for public office. 
Users of social sites often claim that they are concerned about their privacy. 
At the same time, they disclose their highly personal lives, even content that is 
incriminating or illegal, in their profiles or posts. The privacy paradox refers to this 
phenomenon where social users are concerned about privacy but their behav-
iors contradict these concerns to an extreme degree. Facebook membership has 
increased despite Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg’s frequent changes to default 
privacy settings to allow everyone to see and search for names, gender, city, and 
other information. Zuckerberg’s position is that people “have really gotten com-
fortable not only sharing more information and different kinds, but more openly 
and with more people. That social norm is just something that has evolved over 

14.1     Privacy Paradox, Privacy, and Civil Rights     443  
time” (Cavoukian, 2012). It is well known that Zuckerberg has a multibillion-dollar 
commercial interest in the elimination of online privacy, so trusting Facebook’s 
privacy policies exemplifies the privacy paradox.
A 2013 Pew study found that 50 percent of Internet users were worried 
about the information available about them online, compared to 30 percent in 
2009 (Rainie, Kiesler, Kang, & Madden, 2013). The results mean that 50 percent 
of Internet users are not worried about their online privacy. Following the news 
that the U.S. National Security Agency was collecting the telephone and Internet 
metadata of its citizens, a Washington Post–ABC poll found that only 40 percent of 
U.S. respondents said that it was more important to protect citizens’ privacy even 
if it limited the ability of the government to investigate terrorist threats (Cohen & 
Balz, 2013).
The Global Cyber Security Capacity Centre and Oxford Internet Institute 
have together released a draft working paper examining the attitudes of younger 
people toward privacy online. The 2014 report, A New Privacy Paradox: Young 
People and Privacy on Social Network Sites, shows that, contrary to conventional 
wisdom, people under age 35 are actually more likely to have taken action to pro-
tect their privacy than older people (Blank, Bolsover, and Dubois, 2014). However, 
according to the report, the new privacy paradox is that social sites have become 
so embedded in the social lives of users that they must disclose information about 
themselves even though these sites do not provide adequate privacy controls. The 
consequences of the privacy paradox are far reaching.
SOCIAL RECRUITMENT
The use of social media is so pervasive in today’s workplace that it is even having an 
impact on the enforcement of federal laws that protect civil rights. Jonathan Segal, 
speaking on behalf of the Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM), 
explained that employers use social media for multiple reasons: to engage employ-
ees, to share knowledge among employees, and for recruitment and hiring of new 
employees (EEOC, 2014). The SHRM surveyed its members for several years and 
found that 77 percent of the surveyed companies had used social sites to recruit 
candidates in 2013, more than double the 34 percent rate in 2008. 
Social Tools for Recruiting and Background Checks
In order to cast a wide net for potential candidates, social media are used in social 
recruitment. However, improper use of information scraped from these sites may 
be discriminatory and illegal. The problem starts with members who post age, race, 
gender, and ethnicity information—or enable it to be learned from content on their 
sites. To the extent that employers conduct a social media background check on job 
candidates, these are three best practices:
1. Have either a third party or a designated person within the company who does 
not make hiring decisions do the background check. 
2. Use only publicly available information. Do not friend someone to get access to 
private information.
3. Do not request username or passwords for social media accounts. 
By mid-2014, four states had enacted laws prohibiting employers from request-
ing passwords and usernames from applicants/employees. Other states have such 
laws pending, and there are several proposals before Congress to do the same on a 
federal level.
Social Recruiting and Discrimination
Recruiters see LinkedIn as the world’s largest resume database. Depending on how 
job candidates control their privacy and how much they reveal through check-ins 
Social recruitment refers 
to use of social media to 
find, screen, and select job 
candidates. Often it involves 
searching information the 
job candidate did not want 
considered or that is illegal 
to use in the hiring process.

444  Chapter 14     Ethical Risks and Responsibilities of IT Innovations
and posts (Figure 14.2), recruiters learn a great deal of information that should 
not be used in their decision to interview, recommend, or hire someone. In a 2009 
study conducted for CareerBuilder, more than half of employers reported that the 
biggest factor influencing their decision not to hire an applicant was the presence of 
provocative photos on the candidate’s social media profile, an issue more likely to 
affect women than men (CareerBuilder.com, 2009). 
Protected Classes and Information 
According to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), dis-
criminatory practices are prohibited. Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the 
Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), the Americans with 
Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), and Genetic Information Nondiscrimination 
Act of 2008 (GINA) make it illegal to discriminate in any aspect of employment, 
including recruitment, hiring, and firing. GINA, the latest of these laws, was passed 
when results from the Human Genome Project started raising ethical dilemmas. 
Protected classes is a term used in these laws to describe characteristics that cannot 
be targeted for discrimination and harassment. Protected classes include age, dis-
ability, gender, religion, genetic information, race, national origin, and pregnancy. 
If information about protected classes is used to weed out candidates, it can 
lead to corporate social media discrimination. Discrimination is not always black 
and white because it is prejudicial treatment (Figure 14.3) that may be tough to 
prove. Although job applicants might not know whether or not their social media 
profiles had been screened, they have several ways of finding out. For instance, an 
applicant might be tipped off after receiving a suspicious friend request or by talk-
ing with current employees and hiring managers who disclose the information—
either purposely or accidentally—during the interview. 
Figure 14.2 Members expose too much information about themselves through 
social posts and check-ins. Employers and recruiters use social content. Laws 
forbid use of some types of that information in hiring practices, but what can 
prevent their use?
(a)
(b)
© Screenshot/Alamy
© Richard Levine/Alamy
EEOC (Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission) 
enforces federal laws 
prohibiting discrimination in 
employment.
Protected classes are 
characteristics identified by 
law that cannot be used in 
the hiring process.
Discrimination is biased 
or prejudicial treatment 
in recruitment, hiring, or 
employment based on 
certain characteristics, such 
as age, gender, and genetic 
information, and is illegal in 
the United States.
Figure 14.3 Discrimination 
is the result of prejudicial 
treatment based on 
protected information rather 
than a person’s qualifi cations.
© Ivelin Radkov/Alamy

14.1     Privacy Paradox, Privacy, and Civil Rights     445  
Enterprises that have not implemented formal processes for the use of social 
media in recruiting and selection may put themselves at risk of legal complaints 
because of inconsistent practices.
LEGAL NOTE: CIVIL 
RIGHTS 
Civil rights are protected by federal law. If a person’s civil rights are interfered with 
by another, the person can seek legal action for the injury. Examples of civil rights 
are freedom of speech, press, and assembly; the right to vote; and the right to equal-
ity in public places. Discrimination occurs when the civil rights of an individual are 
denied or interfered with because of their membership in a particular group or class. 
Various jurisdictions have enacted statutes to prevent discrimination based on a 
person’s race, sex, religion, age, previous condition of servitude, physical limitation, 
national origin, and in some instances sexual orientation.
COMPETING LEGAL 
CONCERNS
Two competing legal concerns are discrimination and negligent hiring. 
• Discrimination. Most employers have stringent employment policies that 
prevent their recruiters and hiring managers from learning potentially dis-
criminatory information about candidates. Visiting a person’s social media 
sites, however, clearly creates the opportunity to view large amounts of 
information going against these nondiscriminatory practices. 
• Negligent hiring. Employers must consider the potential risk of a negligent 
hiring or negligent retention lawsuit related to social networking profile 
information. It is possible that if a workplace violence incident occurred and 
the attacker’s public social networking profile contained information that 
could have predicted that behavior, the employer may be held liable for neg-
ligence in not using readily available information during the hiring decision. 
Examples and a discussion of these issues follow. 
Discrimination via Social Media Scenario
Imagine that an employer reviews a candidate’s activity on social media platforms 
and discovers the following information about her:
1. The candidate checks in via Foursquare at Woodsman Gym once or twice a day 
usually around 7 a.m., noon, or 6 p.m. 
2. Her Facebook album is fi lled with party photos, like the one in Figure 14.4, show-
ing what might be excessive drinking. 
3. Her resume suggests that she is in her early 30s, but her social profi le about high 
school indicates that her real age is late 40s.
Figure 14.4 In 2011, the 
Federal Trade Commission 
(FTC) ruled that companies 
that research how you 
spend your personal time, 
hobbies, and so on, do not 
violate your privacy. Party 
photos might not show 
illegal behavior but when 
posted on a social network 
could infl uence a potential 
employer’s evaluation of 
a job applicant as well as 
disclose information about 
race, gender, age, and other 
protected characteristics. 
© Bubbles Photolibrary/Alamy

446  Chapter 14     Ethical Risks and Responsibilities of IT Innovations
4. Her posts describe her religious beliefs and customs, family’s serious medical con-
ditions, fi nancial stress, and desire to spend as much time as possible snowboarding.
5. She makes fun of and posts insulting cartoons of people who follow a dress code 
at work.
Like many other job seekers, this candidate is posting, tweeting, and blogging 
information she would not want a recruiter or prospective employer to know about. 
If she is rejected because of her age, religion, or genetic condition, the company has 
committed social media discrimination and is very likely in violation of other laws.
Reducing the Risk of Negligent Hiring
In the past, employment law attorneys dealt with this risk by advising companies to 
avoid using social media in their hiring and recruitment process to avoid legal risk. 
However, that proposal is not realistic. By opting out of social media, recruiting 
firms lose a productive way to find candidates, which could cost them millions of 
dollars. Additionally, background checks must be conducted. Almost all employers 
do some form of background screening in order to avoid the risk of negligent hiring. 
Negligent hiring is a claim made by an injured party against an employer who knew 
or should have known about an employee’s background that indicates a dangerous 
or untrustworthy character. Employers have a legal obligation to make the best 
effort to protect their employees and customers when they hire. Steps companies can 
take to balance the competing risks of negligent hiring and social discrimination are:
1. Ask candidates to sign a disclosure statement. Let candidates themselves dis-
close information found on social media. Explain to them the reason for the 
disclosure statement. 
2. Create a standard process and document it. A consistent and well-documented 
process is needed to ensure and show compliance if there is an EEOC employ-
ment investigation.
3. Avoid coercive practices. Make sure recruiters do not pressure applicants to dis-
close protected information via social media by requiring them to disclose pass-
words or relax privacy settings for purposes of review by the employer.
4. Training. This may sound like a no-brainer, but training and repeated reminders 
are important to emphasize that management intends to be in compliance with 
laws and regulations related to social recruiting.
FINANCIAL 
ORGANIZATIONS MUST 
COMPLY WITH SOCIAL 
MEDIA GUIDELINES
In 2013, the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) released 
new guidelines titled Social Media: Consumer Compliance Risk Management 
Guidance to help financial institutions effectively manage the current risks caused 
by the use of social media (Ciccatelli, 2014). The activities of financial institutions 
are regulated by consumer protection and compliance laws. These institutions must 
take steps to protect their reputations and their clients—very similar to the steps 
that HR departments must take to comply with EEOC guidelines. Key social media 
guidelines for financial institutions are listed in Table 14.1. 
Companies expose themselves to harsh sanctions by federal agencies when they 
violate the privacy policies that their customers rely upon. Unlike social discrimina-
tion, these cases are rather easy to detect and prosecute. For example, the Federal 
Trade Commission (FTC) charged SnapChat for, in effect, deceiving its customers 
with its bogus disappearing messages services. The FTC scrutinizes business prac-
tices to regulate “unfair and deceptive trade practices.” The FTC has been focused 
on curtailing deceptive practices, even if unintentional, by businesses engaged in 
online commerce. While businesses should always ensure that their online adver-
tisements are truthfully conveyed, a business with a social media presence should 
take particular note of the FTC’s recent efforts concerning online privacy, security, 
and advertising. IT at Work 14.1 describes such a case.

14.1     Privacy Paradox, Privacy, and Civil Rights     447  
TABLE 14.1 
Key Social Media Guidelines for Financial Institutions
Guidelines
Descriptions
Institute policies to 
comply with advertising, 
communications, and other 
consumer protection laws
Perform a social media risk assessment and 
then implement social policies to prevent issues 
like spam. For example, staff should know how 
to react when a customer posts confi dential 
information like a bank number on their social 
profi les.
Use monitoring tools
Financial institutions have added social 
channels that can expose their brand to 
additional feedback. Using social monitoring 
tools, they can identify issues that may cause 
a negative reaction and respond quickly. The 
use of social monitoring tools also helps banks 
refute inaccurate statements, protecting their 
brand reputation.
Train employees
Whether or not employees represent your 
brand on social media, their public social 
comments may be seen to refl ect the fi nancial 
institution. The best way to reduce risk is to 
train employees on how to use social networks 
professionally.
FTC Chairwoman Edith Ramirez stated, “If a company 
markets privacy and security as key selling points in pitching 
its service to consumers, it is critical that it keep those prom-
ises” (Fitzpatrick & Kibel, 2014).
SnapChat Fined for Violating Its Own Privacy 
Policies and Misleading Users
The FTC charged SnapChat with violating its promises of 
“disappearing messages.” According to the FTC’s complaint:
1. SnapChat’s mobile app allows consumers to send and 
receive photo and video messages known as snaps. 
SnapChat falsely marketed its app as a service for send-
ing disappearing photo and video messages. Before 
sending a snap, the sender has to designate a period of 
time that the recipient will be allowed to view the snap. 
2. Despite SnapChat’s claims, the FTC contended that sev-
eral methods exist by which a recipient can use tools out-
side of the app to save both photo and video messages, 
allowing the recipient to access and view the photos or 
videos indefinitely. For example, when a person receives 
a video message, the app stores the video file in a loca-
tion outside of the app’s sandbox. Sandbox is the app’s 
private storage area on the device that other apps cannot 
access. 
3. Until October 2013, a recipient could connect his or her 
mobile device to a computer and use simple file brows-
ing tools to locate and save the video file. Although 
this method for saving video files was widely publicized 
as early as December 2012, the FTC contended that 
SnapChat did not mitigate this flaw until October 2013.
4. SnapChat misrepresented its data collection practices by 
transmitting geolocation data from users of its Android 
app despite its privacy policy saying that it did not track 
or access these data. 
5. SnapChat collected contact data from users’ address 
books without notice or consent and continued to do so 
IT at Work 1 4 .1
SnapChat Lied About Disappearing Messages and Privacy

448  Chapter 14     Ethical Risks and Responsibilities of IT Innovations
without notifying users or obtaining their consent until 
Apple modified its operating system to provide notice 
with the introduction of iOS 6.
6. SnapChat’s failure to secure its “Find Friends” feature 
resulted in a security breach that enabled attackers to 
compile a database of 4.6 million SnapChat usernames 
and phone numbers.
Settlement
SnapChat settled FTC charges alleging false promises of dis-
appearing messages and failure to protect consumer data. 
Under the terms of its agreement with the FTC, SnapChat 
is prohibited from misrepresenting the extent to which it 
maintains the privacy, security, or confidentiality of users’ 
data. SnapChat must implement a comprehensive privacy 
program that will be monitored by an independent privacy 
professional for the next 20 years.
Questions
1. Which SnapChat claims of privacy protection were false?
2. Assume users relied on SnapChat’s state privacy policies 
and claims about how the app worked. What potential 
risks did SnapChat users face?
3. If you had used the SnapChat app to send disappear-
ing messages, what would you do when you learned of 
SnapChat’s false claims?
4. Do you think the consequences SnapChat faced as part 
of its settlement with the FT are harsh enough to deter 
false claims? Explain.
Questions
1. Describe privacy. 
2. What is the phenomenon where social users are concerned about privacy 
but their behaviors contradict these concerns? 
3. What is the use of social media to fi nd, screen, and select job candidates?
4. Rejecting a job candidate because of concerns about the person’s health 
from information on his or her Facebook page is an example of what?
5. Age, disability, gender, religion, and race are examples of what?
6. Why are the legal concepts of discrimination and negligent hiring 
competing demands on a business? 
Any discussion about responsible conduct related to data and digital devices raises 
more questions than answers. Does the availability of data justify their use? Can 
shoppers keep their buying habits private? Can people keep their entertainment, 
online gaming, and other legal activities confidential? Do media have the right to 
publish or post highly private text messages of politicians and celebrities? Questions 
about data access, collection, mining, tracking, monitoring, privacy, and profiling 
are examples of IT capabilities that have ethical considerations. Here are cases of 
the power of information and analytics taken too far. Another widely cited case is 
Target’s use of data analytics as discussed in IT at Work 14.2.
14.2  Responsible Conduct
An angry man went into a Target store near Minneapolis 
insisting on talking to a manager: He handed a Target pro-
motion that had been mailed to his daughter to the manager 
saying: “My daughter got this in the mail. She’s still in high 
school, and you’re sending her coupons for baby clothes and 
cribs? Are you trying to encourage her to get pregnant?” 
The confused manager had no idea what was going on. The 
mailer had been sent by Target and addressed to the man’s 
IT at Work 1 4 .2
Target’s Big Data Analytics Too Invasive

14.2     Responsible Conduct     449  
daughter, and it contained specials for maternity clothing 
and nursery furniture. A few days later he called the father to 
apologize again. Instead, the father apologized to the man-
ager, explaining that he has since learned that his daughter 
was pregnant. 
Big Data Analytics Too Invasive
How did Target know? By recognizing that there are some 
brief periods in a person’s life when old routines change sig-
nificantly and new buying habits suddenly appear.
Using big data, models of buying habits, predictive 
analytics, and her purchase history, Target had figured out 
(with about 87 percent probability) that she was pregnant. 
Target informed her family before she did. A lesson that 
Target discovered fairly quickly is that knowing about preg-
nancies in advance creeps out people and can be a public 
relations disaster (Duhigg, 2012). While Target assures 
compliance with all privacy laws, not breaking the law does 
not mean it is in the company’s best interest to invade cus-
tomers’ privacy. 
How Does Target Make Such Accurate Predictions? 
Target assigns all customers a guest ID number that is 
linked to their credit card, name, e-mail address, and social 
media profile. The guest IDs become a bucket to store 
everything they have bought as well as demographic data. 
The demographic data linked to the guest ID include age, 
marital status, number of kids, address, how long it takes 
to drive to the store, estimated salary, whether the person 
moved recently, other credit cards, and visited websites. 
Using its own predictive models, Target identifies custom-
ers who are pregnant. 
Why Does Target Invest in Predictive Analytics? 
Target’s strategy is to capture a greater share of spending 
on baby items by being first to reach and promote to pro-
spective parents. Waiting for public birth records is too late 
because by then parents are bombarded with offers and 
incentives from competing companies. Not everyone appre-
ciates Target’s strategy. 
Questions
1. Is Target’s data mining and predictive analytics a success, 
a failure, or both? Explain your answer.
2. How does Target create profiles of customers?
3. Is Target’s “pregnancy predictor” a long-term competi-
tive advantage? Explain.
4. How can this predictor upset families who receive the 
promotions?
5. How does Target make such accurate predictions? 
6. Why does Target invest in predictive analytics? 
CASES OF 
IRRESPONSIBLE 
CONDUCT
As new sets of data are collected about our lives, those data will contain a new set 
of predictions about us waiting to be mined. The question will be how much control 
we have over that process.
1. Predicting People’s Behavior
Predicting people’s behavior is big business—and increasingly feasible because of 
the volume of accessible information. For example, credit card companies can scru-
tinize your purchases to detect if your life is about to change—so they know what 
you are most interested in buying.
 Canadian Tire, for instance, enabled its credit card business to create psycho-
logical profiles of its cardholders that were built using alarmingly precise correla-
tions. Through data analytics, Canadian Tire found that cardholders who purchased 
carbon monoxide detectors, premium birdseed, and felt pads for the bottoms of 
their chair legs rarely missed a payment. On the other hand, those who bought 
cheap motor oil and visited a Montreal pool bar called “Sharx” were a higher risk 
(Ciarelli, 2010). 
Depending on how intrusive, companies may face backlash from customers or 
be subject to investigations and fines. An example is Google’s Street View Wi-Fi 
scandal—dubbed Wi-Spy. 
2. Mobile Apps and Risky Behaviors
According to app security analytics firm Appthority’s App Reputation Report 
(2014), 93 percent of the top 200 free apps for iOS and Androids exhibited at least 
one risky behavior. However, so did 89 percent of the top 200 paid apps. Just about 

450  Chapter 14     Ethical Risks and Responsibilities of IT Innovations
every app requires that you click “yes” on the user agreement, which gives your 
consent to use your data. Types of risky behaviors are:
1. Location tracking
2. Accessing the device’s address book or contact list
3. Identifying user or phone unique identifi er (UDID)
4.  Recording in-app purchases
5. Sharing data with ad networks and analytics companies
Mobile apps, such as Twitter, Foursquare, and Instagram, routinely gather informa-
tion from personal address books and other places on your phone. Apple admits 
that any app that gathers a user’s information without its permission is in violation. 
However, Apple and Android can only monitor apps available through the Apple 
Store and Google Play. There are countless third-party apps that are unregulated. 
If a user has an app that allows a company to access data on his or her phone and 
that phone is linked to the company’s network, then privacy violations will happen. 
3. Google: Google’s Street View Wi-Spy Snooping Scandal
Google’s Street View cars (Figure 14.5) drove along U.S. streets—and later in 
Europe, Canada, Mexico, and everywhere else—collecting a stream of images to 
feed into Google Maps. Google’s engineers realized the cars could be used for 
wardriving—driving around sniffing out and mapping the physical location of the 
world’s Wi-Fi routers. Wardriving is also a hacking technique, an invasion of pri-
vacy, and an information security risk. 
Creating a database of Wi-Fi hotspot locations would make Google Maps more 
useful on mobile devices. Mobiles without GPS chips could use the database to 
approximate their physical location, and GPS-enabled devices could use the system 
to speed up their location-monitoring systems. When Google was building its system, 
a few start-ups already had created their own Wi-Fi mapping databases. However, 
Google was not only recording the location of people’s Wi-Fi routers. When a Street 
View car encountered an open Wi-Fi network—a non-password-protected router—
it recorded all the digital traffic traveling across that router. That is, when the car was 
within range of someone’s open router, Google captured personal data, including 
login names and passwords, the full text of e-mails, Internet histories, people’s medi-
cal conditions, online dating searches, streaming movies, and all other traffic. 
According to the FCC (Federal Communications Commission) report, French 
investigators reviewed the data Google collected and found “an exchange of emails 
between a married woman and man, both seeking an extra-marital relationship” 
and “Web addresses that revealed the sexual preferences of consumers at specific 
residences.” In the United States, Street View cars collected 200 gigabytes of pri-
vate data between 2008 and 2010. The sniffing stopped only when regulators discov-
ered the practice. Google denied any wrongdoing. 
The FCC posted the following on its website: “Google’s behavior also raises 
important concerns. Whether intentional or not, collecting information sent over 
Wi-Fi networks clearly infringes on consumer privacy.”
The FCC determined that Google’s actions were not technically illegal because 
snooping on unencrypted wireless data is not prohibited by the Wiretap Act. Given 
that Google manages so much of our personal data, this privacy invasion is an 
example of irresponsible conduct.
The story did not end with the FCC’s decision. In May 2012, the FCC’s investiga-
tion into Google’s mapping project was itself being investigated. The renewed atten-
tion followed release of a mostly unredacted version of the FCC’s findings in the case. 
The unredacted findings appear to contradict Google’s claim that it inadvertently 
intercepted “payload data,” or the content of individuals’ Internet communications, 
in the process of gathering information from Wi-Fi networks across the globe for the 
Street View project. The document shows that, during preparations for the Street 
Figure 14.5 Google vehicle 
with camera attached to 
photograph images used in 
Street View maps.
© Jamie Pham/Alamy

14.2     Responsible Conduct     451  
View effort, a Google engineer shared e-mails with colleagues at the firm revealing 
that he designed software for the project that was capable of collecting payload data. 
The new revelations have prompted Consumer Watchdog, a Washington-based advo-
cacy group, to call for a hearing by the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Privacy, 
Technology and the Law.
4.  Are FTC Fines for Privacy Violation Facebook’s 
Business Model? 
Facebook agreed to a settlement with the FTC in 2011 over charges that it deceived 
users about privacy. The eight-count complaint accused Facebook of changing 
privacy practices without notifying users, sharing users’ information without their 
consent, and claiming to check the security of third-party applications when in fact 
it did not, among other charges. As part of the settlement, Facebook promises to 
stop making “deceptive privacy claims” and get users’ permission before changing 
the way it shares their information. The social media company must also submit to 
privacy audits for 20 years. Zuckerberg wrote a blog post repeating his dedication to 
privacy while admitting that “we’ve made a bunch of mistakes.” Privacy advocates 
do not believe that Facebook’s privacy violations were anything but well-calculated 
decisions to test how far they could go before being charged by the FTC. In the 
Daily Beast, Dan Ryan composed what Mark Zuckerberg might have said if he 
dared to be brutally honest (Ryan, 2011):
The truth is, we have no interest in protecting your privacy, and if you still 
believe that we do, then you are stupider than we thought, and believe me, 
we already thought you were pretty stupid. Think about it. The only way 
our business works is if we can track what you do and sell that information 
to advertisers.
Knowing that privacy is unprotected on Facebook, does that shift any or all respon-
sibility to users? 
These cases highlight contentious ethical issues and possibly irresponsible data-
driven business practices. There rarely are easy answers to these dilemmas. 
Competing Responsibilities 
Most major retailers, from supermarket and drug store chains to major investment 
banks, rely on predictive analytics to understand consumers’ shopping habits and 
their personal habits to market more efficiently. There are competing interests and 
trade-offs at work when the issue is privacy. There is also no clear-cut framework 
for deciding what is ethical and what is not. The personal privacy–public security 
debate is a prime example. Typically, privacy invasion is considered unethical. 
An ethically conscious corporate attitude sounds politically correct, but managers 
also have a responsibility to stakeholders. Monitoring may be (or seem to be) the 
responsible thing to do, and with intense competition marketers naturally want to 
use every tool or technique to gain an edge or nullify a risk. 
Globalization, the Internet, and connectivity have the power to undermine 
moral responsibility because it becomes relatively easy to ignore harm. Despite the 
challenges and lack of clear answers, ethics is important because relying on the law 
alone to safeguard civil rights and society is insufficient. The law has its limits in 
large part because it changes so slowly.
THREE-DIMENSIONAL 
(3D) PRINTING AND 
BIOPRINTING—
ADDITIVE 
MANUFACTURING 
DILEMMAS
Another trendy technology that has sparked ethical and other debates is the 3D 
printer and 3D bioprinting. Actual and planned applications include pizzas and 
heart valves (Martin, 2014). Prototype pizzeria 3D printers use cartridges filled with 
foodlike powder. In 2014, surgeons used a 3D printed model of a baby’s skull in an 
intricate surgery to correct a serious birth defect. Bioprinting of aortic valves and 
3D bioprinting technology have been used by researchers at Cornell University to 

452  Chapter 14     Ethical Risks and Responsibilities of IT Innovations
fabricate living heart valves that possess the same anatomical architecture as the 
original valve. In 2013, a two-year-old child in the United States received a wind-
pipe built with her own stem cells. 3D technology may seem like a win–win with 
no dark side or ethics challenges. Unfortunately, that is not true. Tech Note 14.1 
describes the technology involved in the 3D printing process.
TECH NOTE 14.1 3D Printing Process
3D printing works by depositing tiny layers of material to create any shape. Bio-
printing produces 3D biological objects or parts that are highly precise in shape and 
mechanical complexity. Using computer-assisted design (CAD) and/or computer-
assisted manufacturing (CAM) blueprints, the bioprinter deposits ultrathin layers of 
living cells upon each other, following a precise geometric pattern that matches the 
heart valve dimensions, building the part vertically as the layers accumulate. Over 
hours the fi nal tissue construct is completed.
3D Printing Dilemmas and Debated Issues
1. Despite benefi ts, the medical application of 3D printing to produce living tis-
sue and organs, or 3D bioprinting, is expected to spark major ethical debates, 
according to Gartner (2014). 3D-bioprinted human organs may be subject to 
confl icting religious, political, moral, and fi nancial interests. The 3D printing of 
nonliving medical devices, such as prosthetic limbs, is expected to be in high de-
mand because of longer life spans and insuffi cient levels of health care in various 
countries. A major hurdle is determining who is legally responsible for ensuring 
the quality of the resulting organs and devices? Without medical malpractice 
insurance covering these new applications, they cannot proceed. 
2. According to a study by sustainable design strategist and Berkeley mechanical 
engineering expert Jeremy Faludi, 3D printers can exert impacts on the environ-
ment worse than those of standard manufacturing (Martin, 2014). The carbon 
footprint depends on what is being made and type of printer used to make it. 3D 
printers use a lot more energy than conventional milling machines. 3D printers 
can use 100 times more electricity to produce a part than would have been used 
to produce the same part by nonadditive manufacturing. 
3. Gartner (2014) predicts that, by 2018, at least seven of the world’s top multichan-
nel retailers will be using 3D printing technology to manufacture custom stock 
orders. The technology will create new business models and major challenges to 
intellectual property (IP)—causing an estimated loss of at least $100 billion per 
year in IP globally. The risks resulting from the ability to 3D print weapons are 
obvious. 
Questions
1. By avoiding illegal conduct, do companies also act responsibly? Explain 
your answer. 
2. What types of companies can benefi t from predicting people’s behavior? 
3. When is predicting people’s behavior a violation of privacy? Give an 
example.

14.3     Technology Addictions and the Emerging Trend of Focus Management     453  
4. When is predicting people’s behavior not a violation of privacy? Give an 
example.
5. What are the ethical challenges attached to 3D printing and 3D 
bioprinting?
6. Research the current debate about 3D printing and bioprinting. 
Many people live and work in a state of continuous partial attention as they move 
through their day—loosely connected to friends and family through various apps on 
mobile and wearable devices. 
Consider what you use to stay informed and how often you glance at them. You 
might not have noticed the gradual increase in the amount of data and information 
that you receive or check routinely until one day they seem to overwhelm your time. 
How many more things do you check today compared to a year ago? How long can 
you go without checking your devices without experiencing anxiety? When do you 
put down your mobiles and concentrate on one thing at a time? Your answers may 
indicate digital or connectivity overload and your tolerance for distractions. 
The time between a new device or app going from must have to cannot function 
without is rather short. This situation is not limited to only digital natives. Studies 
show that adults are just as distracted as teenagers, which can also be confirmed 
with a casual glance at offices, airports, cafes, and so on.
14.3   Technology Addictions and the Emerging Trend 
of Focus Management
DIGITAL DISTRACTIONS 
AND LOSS OF FOCUS
People do not need to be reminded how their lives are being taken over by tweets, 
texts, e-mail, social media, and annoying electronic static. Business users are more 
likely to suffer from too much data, rather than from data scarcity. This condition, 
known as cognitive overload, interferes with our ability to focus and be productive. 
Maggie Jackson (2008) suggested: “We’re really facing the limit of human ability to 
cope with stimuli in our environment.”
How big is this problem and how much does it cost? Some researchers estimate 
that distraction costs hundreds of billions of dollars a year in lost productivity. 
Gloria Mark, a professor of informatics at the University of California, Irvine, says 
a worker distracted by a Web search that goes rogue or a new text or tweet can take 
about 25 minutes to return to the task at hand and get focused again (Dumaine, 
2014). Digital distraction and lack of focus in the workplace is getting the atten-
tion of senior management. When Inc. called the CEOs of technology companies 
Instagram, Box, and Zumba, they confirmed that the lack of focus on the job is a 
big concern for them. 
FOCUS 
MANAGEMENT—THE 
ANTIDISTRACTION 
MOVEMENT
Senior management at Google, SAP, Instagram, Box, and Zumba are experiment-
ing with new ways to diminish cognitive overload in order to help their employees 
stay focused. For example, at Google, employees take courses that help to sharpen 
their attention skills. The founders of Zumba and Box have developed their own 
methods to carve out focus time, such as putting aside large blocks of time to think 
undisturbed.
The Importance of Being Able to Focus 
Nobel Prize–winning neuroscientist Eric Kandel wrote in his book In Search of 
Memory that only by intensely concentrating can a person link new ideas and 

454  Chapter 14     Ethical Risks and Responsibilities of IT Innovations
facts “…meaningfully and systematically with knowledge already well-established 
in memory” (Kandel, 2006). He explained the importance of mental discipline to 
successful performance. If your mind is free of distraction, your mind is better able 
to absorb data, interactions, and trends and synthesize the new information with 
what you already know. As a result, you are more likely to come up with innovative 
ideas. If you are multitasking or are trying to function with only partial attention, 
your ability to synthesize information may be compromised. 
Researchers at the Communication Between Humans and Interactive Media 
Lab at Stanford University studied digital distraction and focus. In 2009, research-
ers gave the same three cognitive tests to two different groups of test subjects:
1. Media (high) multitaskers. Forty-nine subjects who spent a lot of time searching 
the Internet, gaming online, watching TV, and hanging out on social media sites. 
2. Low multitaskers. Fifty-two subjects who spent less time online and multitasked 
signifi cantly less often. 
In 2009, many believed that the Internet sharpened cognitive skills. Gaming 
required fast thinking and good motor skills. In contrast to widely held assumptions, 
the subjects who were heavy online users scored poorly on the cognitive test. One 
explanation for their poor performance was that they had attention deficits—less 
control over their attention. Because of their inability to concentrate for long, they 
were not able to distinguish important information from trivia. One of the research-
ers, Clifford Nass, whose findings are published in the Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, said “They’re suckers for irrelevancy. Everything distracts 
them” (Ophir, Nass, & Wagner, 2009). The researchers continue to study whether 
chronic media multitaskers are born with an inability to concentrate or are damag-
ing their cognitive control by willingly taking in so much at once. Science also shows 
that the best strategy to improve focus is to practice doing it. 
Michael Merzenich, a neuroscientist, gave a biological explanation of the 
impacts of multitasking on focus ability. He explained that the more you focus, the 
more your brain releases a chemical called noradrenaline, which helps you concen-
trate on the task at hand. While these researchers believe that the minds of multi-
taskers are not working as well as they could, there are those who disagree (Ophir, 
Nass, & Wagner, 2009).
Questions
1. What are several potential causes of cognitive overload?
2. What are the consequences of constant distractions?
3. When a person is distracted, how long does it take to return to the task 
at hand and get focused again?
4. Why are senior managers interested in focus management? 
5. What is the difference between the performance of high and low multi-
taskers on cognitive tests?
6. How can multitaskers improve their ability to focus? 
Accenture’s Technology Vision 2014 is an analysis of key IT trends that are expected 
to disrupt businesses. It is updated yearly to help organizations set their IT strategy 
and investment priorities. According to Vision 2014, becoming a truly digital busi-
ness is crucial to how enterprises innovate and differentiate from competitors. A 
comparison of the disruptive technologies in 2013 and 2014 are listed in Table 14.2. 
14.4  Six Technology Trends Transforming Business

14.4     Six Technology Trends Transforming Business     455  
Technology Vision 2014 explores the six IT trends that hold the most potential to 
transform businesses over the next three years. The days of innovative, technology-
focused start-ups being the only market disruptors may be coming to an end. Large 
enterprises are starting to take advantage of their size, skills, and scale to transform 
into truly digital businesses.
TABLE 14.2 
Comparison of Technology Trends, 2013 and 2014
2013 
2014
Beyond the cloud 
Digital-physical blur
Seamless collaboration 
From workforce to crowdsource
Design for analytics 
Data supply chain 
Data velocity 
Harnessing hyperscale
Software-defi ned networking 
Business of applications
Active defense 
Architecting resilience
TREND 1 DIGITAL-
PHYSICAL BLUR: 
EXTENDING 
INTELLIGENCE TO 
THE EDGE 
The convergence of several technologies is blurring the digital and physical worlds. 
These converging technologies are:
• The explosion of connected M2M (machine-to-machine) devices and IoT 
(Internet of Things)
• Greater bandwidth
• Advanced robotics, including expanding human–robot collaboration in 
industries beyond manufacturing
• Increased use of real time analytics
The physical–digital blur signifies a new layer of connected intelligence that 
augments employees, automates processes, and integrates machines into our lives. 
Controlling the physical world with sensors and digital devices depends on band-
width and the ability to analyze data in real time.
Smartphones transform users’ digitally augmented versions of themselves—
able to create and share information in real time. Wearable devices and autono-
mous drones are changing the ways in which we experience the world. Intelligent 
interfaces are emerging that allow decisions to be made on the edge—where digital 
and physical worlds meet, which could be on your wrist, in your hand, or in your 
field of vision. 
As the line between digital technology and the real world continues to blur, 
traditional companies are leveraging and enhancing their physical assets to create 
better user experiences.
TREND 2 FROM 
WORKFORCE TO 
CROWDSOURCE: 
THE RISE OF THE 
BORDERLESS 
ENTERPRISE
With cloud, social, and collaboration technologies, organizations can access and 
leverage talent and resource pools located anywhere and everywhere; in effect, an 
enterprise where ideas are solicited from a crowd of experts, that is, crowdsourced, 
similar to Kickstarter’s crowdfunding concept.
In addition to crowdfunding, companies are using Kickstarter to provide mar-
ket insight and assess product viability for a lot less than what traditional methods 
cost. By determining what people will actually pay for, the process influences and 

456  Chapter 14     Ethical Risks and Responsibilities of IT Innovations
validates products and pricing strategies and sometimes leads to initial consumption 
and to product advocates. Accenture has developed initial models that show that 
crowdsourcing can lead to higher profits for producers.
Wikipedia relies on crowdsourcing for its content. Harnessing talent 
and resources to support strategic business goals will always be a challenge. 
Crowdsourcing can give every business access to an agile workforce that is not only 
better suited to solving some of the problems that organizations struggle with today 
but in many cases will do it for free. For example, GE currently uses crowdsourcing 
services to solve its most complex problems. 
TREND 3 DATA SUPPLY 
CHAIN: PUTTING 
INFORMATION INTO 
CIRCULATION
Because of legacy systems and data silos that limit the value that organizations get 
out of their data, enterprise data are often underutilized. Accenture recommends 
that companies start treating data like a supply chain. Data need to flow easily 
through the entire organization—and eventually throughout the data systems of 
their business partners.
Achieving seamless data flows and treating data like an asset require data 
storage, IT infrastructure, big data platforms, and APIs. Walgreens, for example, 
opened its prescription API to third-party developers in order to make it easier for 
customers to refill their prescriptions.
Only one in five companies integrates its data across the enterprise. To truly 
unlock the potential of big data, companies have to treat it more like a supply chain, 
enabling its flow through the organization and supplier ecosystem. One way to do 
this, as Google has shown with Google maps data, is opening up the applications 
programming interface. The result—800,000 websites use Google Maps data.
TREND 4 HARNESSING 
HYPERSCALE: 
HARDWARE IS CRITICAL 
AGAIN 
For many years, software has been the focus of managers’ attention, with hardware 
being largely ignored. With enormous demands for processing power, hardware 
matters more than ever in transforming enterprises into digital businesses.
Every industry is being impacted by hyperscale computing systems—the super-
sized, scalable, and resilient data centers pioneered by data-dependent and social 
media companies.
Traditional consumer goods company Unilever, tire manufacturer Pirelli, and the 
NBA have data processing requirements similar to technology giants Amazon and 
Google. All of them are faced with data challenges that hyperscale computing can 
help to solve, specifically huge amounts of data that need to be processed at speed—
in real time. Unilever, Pirelli, and the NBA are using the sap.com platform SAP 
HANA to perform real time analytics on huge datasets for competitive advantage.
Ford, GM, and Toyota build vehicles that are embedded with hundreds of sensors, 
telematics, and real time connectivity. Data collection every day, hour, or second 
depends on hyperscale systems that can store and analyze these data at speed. High-
performance companies are increasingly recognizing that hyperscale systems are a 
vital part of becoming a digital business. 
Hardware is a hotbed of innovation as companies optimize their power con-
sumption, processors, solid-state memory, and infrastructure architectures to 
increase data center efficiency, scale upward, and drive down costs.
TREND 5 BUSINESS OF 
APPLICATIONS: THERE’S 
AN APP FOR THAT! 
Enterprises are following consumers by rapidly adopting apps to create better oper-
ational agility. Accenture says that 54 percent of the highest performing IT teams 
have already deployed enterprise app stores. This makes life simpler for employees 
and accelerates business growth.
TREND 6 
ARCHITECTING 
RESILIENCE: BUILT TO 
BE FAILURE PROOF 
Business runs on networks and digital technology. Technology failures are busi-
ness failures. That is why companies such as Netflix use automated testing tools 
to attack their systems to make sure they are resilient. For example, Netflix built 
resiliency into its IT architecture by following two design principles: isolation and 
redundancy. Isolation means that a failure in one component cannot bring down 

Assuring Your Learning     457  
the entire edifice, while redundancy means that every component is backed up by 
an alternative in case it fails.
IT must adopt a new mindset to ensure that systems are dynamic, accessible, 
and continuous—designed not just to specification but also for resilience under 
failure and attack.
NEXT WAVE OF 
DISRUPTION WILL BE 
MORE DISRUPTIVE
High-performing business leaders now accept that their organizations’ future suc-
cess is tied to their ability to keep pace with technology. Accenture reports that 
its clients tell them that technology is more important than ever to their business 
success. Some sense that we are on the verge of a new technology revolution that 
will be more disruptive than previous ones. The flexibility of new technologies 
and architectures will naturally change how IT makes it easier for organizations to 
innovate.
Questions
1. What technologies are blurring the boundary between the physical and 
digital worlds?
2. What are the benefi ts of crowdsourcing?
3. Referring to trend 3, how should companies treat their data?
4. What is hyperscale? 
5. What do business apps improve?
6. Why is resilience necessary? 
Key Terms
breach of privacy
civil right 
cognitive overload 
corporate social media 
discrimination 
discrimination
hyperscale 
isolation
negligent hiring
open Wi-Fi network 
privacy 
privacy paradox
protected class
redundancy
social recruitment
wardriving 
Assuring Your Learning
1. Why will companies and recruiters continue to engage 
in social recruiting?
2. Visit two or more social media sites and review infor-
mation that people have posted about themselves—
or their friends have posted about them. What types 
of protected class information did you fi nd? Give 
examples.
3. When organizations source their hiring to recruiting 
fi rms, how might that increase or decrease the risk of 
social media discrimination?
4. Consider Max Drucker’s statement about employers 
being in a “tough spot.” Explain the two risks that 
employers face.
5. How has IT changed the way you communicate in 
the last two years? 
6. What changes do you predict in the way we commu-
nicate with each other in future? 
7. Many questions were asked in the fi rst two sections 
of this chapter—about the privacy paradox, privacy, 
and civil rights and responsible conduct. Answer 
those questions. 
8. In your opinion, how does multitasking impact your 
performance?
DISCUSS: Critical Thinking Questions

458  Chapter 14     Ethical Risks and Responsibilities of IT Innovations
1. Social media discrimination is now a serious consid-
eration for employers. Managers can evaluate vendor 
options such as LinkedIn Recruiter to limit liability 
and to remove protected information from profi les. 
Venture-funded startup BranchOut offers a similar 
tool for Facebook recruiting called RecruiterConnect.
a. Research recruiting service providers and 
vendors. Select two of them.
b. Review the website of each service or vendor.
c. Describe the features they provide to defend 
against negligent hiring. 
d. Do each of them protect against social 
discrimination? Explain your answer and give 
examples.
EXPLORE: Online and Interactive Exercises 
1. Refer to the discrimination scenarios in this chapter. 
For each scenario, explain whether or not it should 
be used in the hiring decision.
2. In your opinion, what is the meaning of responsible 
conduct with respect to the use of social media for 
screening purposes?
3. Do you agree with the FTC’s 2011 rule that states 
that searches by hiring companies into how you 
spend your personal time, hobbies, and the like do 
not violate your privacy? 
4. Clerks at 7-Eleven stores enter data regarding cus-
tomers’ gender, approximate age, and so on, into a 
computer system. However, names are not keyed in. 
These data are then aggregated and analyzed to im-
prove corporate decision making. Customers are not 
informed about this, nor are they asked for permis-
sion. What problems do you see with this practice?
5. Discuss whether cognitive overload is a problem in 
your work or education. Based on your experience, 
what personal and organizational solutions can you 
recommend for this problem? 
6. Assume that you read about a new nonalcoholic 
drink discovery called “Don’t-forget-a-thing.” This 
remarkable drink, being marketed to students for 
$9.99 plus shipping and handling, would give the 
ANALYZE & DECIDE: Apply IT Concepts to Business Decisions
perfect recall of what he or she had read in the text-
book in preparation for the exam. How would you 
verify the truth and accuracy of this drink—or any 
new drink or drug treatment—before ordering it or 
ingesting it? Identify fi ve sources of trusted health, 
medical, or drug information. 
7. The State of California maintains a database of 
people who allegedly abuse children. (The database 
also includes names of the alleged victims.) The list 
is made available to dozens of public agencies, and it 
is considered in cases of child adoption and employ-
ment decisions. Because so many people have access 
to the list, its content is easily disclosed to outsiders. 
An alleged abuser and her child, whose case was 
dropped but whose names had remained on the list, 
sued the State of California for invasion of privacy. 
Debate the issues involved. Specifi cally:
a. Who should make the decision or what criteria 
should guide the decision about what names 
should be included and what the criteria 
should be?
b. What is the potential damage to the abusers 
(if any)?
c. Should the State of California abolish the list? 
Why or why not?
Business Case: Apple’s CarPlay Gets Intelligent
At the 2014 Geneva International Motor Show, Apple unveiled 
CarPlay, an integration that ties Apple’s mobile operating 
system (iOS) into automobiles.
 
CarPlay is Apple’s iPhone in-car integration system. It lets 
drivers perform voice-enabled and touch-screen control of 
things, like making and answering calls, text messaging, and 
playing music, and also anticipates their needs by plotting 
driving routes based on their schedule and normal routine. 
Originally named “iOS in the Car,” the service supports third-
party music apps like Spotify and iHeartRadio and will be 
available in cars made by, for example, Ferrari, Mercedes, and 
Volvo.
 
An interesting part of the announcement were details 
about CarPlay’s artifi cial intelligence (AI) capabilities. The 
CASE 14.2

References     459  
software can scan through a user’s data, such as calendar or 
e-mails, to try to pull up relevant destinations and driving 
directions. With that, Apple has made its biggest push into 
predictive services. 
 
Apple already has the personal assistant Siri since the 
iPhone 4S release, but so far, the service has not had an 
emphasis on technology based on the user’s context. CarPlay 
supports the iPhone 5, iPhone 5S, and iPhone 5C running 
iOS 7, which may also help drive new customers to the Apple 
ecosystem and push users with older iPhone models to 
upgrade.
Questions
1. Using privacy concepts from this chapter, identify the 
ways in which CarPlay can violate a user’s privacy.
2. Consider the privacy paradox. How does that principle 
predict users’ reactions to CarPlay? That is, do you 
expect users to be willing adopters of this AI 
technology? 
3. Getting a customer hooked on the CarPlay technology 
means that the company is positioned to expand on it 
out of the vehicle, especially in the areas of wearables 
and home appliances. How might the integration of data 
from your car, smartphone, wearables, and home appli-
ances impact your privacy?
4. What are your concerns about CarPlay’s predictive 
analytics capabilities?
5. Do people who decide to use CarPlay also have a reason-
able expectation of privacy? Explain. 
Video Case: Vehicle-to-Vehicle Technology to Prevent Collisions
In Ann Arbor, Michigan, the U.S. Department of Transporta-
tion (DOT), the University of Michigan Transportation Research 
Institute, and the Michigan Department of Transportation did 
a pilot test of 3,000 cars, trucks, and buses equipped with 
vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communications. Based on the success 
of the pilot project, in 2014 the DOT announced that it would 
take steps to enable V2V communications to prevent colli-
sions. V2V technology is the next generation of auto safety 
improvements—after seatbelts and airbags. By helping drivers 
avoid crashes, V2V communication will play a key role in the 
U.S. remaining the leader in the global automotive industry.
 
The technology informs drivers of changing road condi-
tions and potential dangers in order to prevent accidents. 
These wireless systems are networked with traffi c manage-
ment systems. For example, if an agency learns that brakes 
have been applied several times in the same spot, a road crew 
could be dispatched to treat the pavement. Additionally, if a 
crash is detected, drivers can be diverted to alternate routes.
 
Visit YouTube and search Michigan Department of Trans-
portation for the video, dated September 17, 2012. The video 
is also posted on StateTechMagazine.com where you can 
search the same title.
Questions
1. How much do crashes cost society?
2. What can help decrease crashes? 
3. What types and percent of crashes can connected vehicle 
technology prevent? 
4. What are other benefi ts of connected vehicle technology?
5. What are some of the benefi ts of a traffi c management 
system?
CASE 14.3
Accenture.  Technology Vision 2014: Every Business is a Digital 
Business.  January 27, 2014. accenture.com/us-en/technology/
technology-labs/Pages/insight-technology-vision-2014.aspx
Appthority. App Reputation Report. Summer 2014. appthority.
com/resources/app-reputation-report
Bader, C. “The Risks and Responsibilities of Tech Innovation.” 
MIT Sloan Management Review, June 10, 2014.
Blank, G., G. Bolsover, and E.Dubois, “A New Privacy Para-
dox: Young People and Privacy on Social Network Sites.” 
Oxford Internet Institute. May 9, 2014. oxfordmartin.ox.ac.
uk/downloads/A%20New%20Privacy%20Paradox%20
April%202014.pdf
CareerBuilder.com. “Forty-Five Percent of Employers Use 
Social Networking Sites to Research Job Candidates, Career-
Builder Survey Finds.” August 19, 2009. 
Cavoukian, A. “Privacy is a Social Norm.” The Globe and Mail, 
August 23, 2012. 
Ciarelli, N. “How Visa Predicts Divorce.” The Daily Beast, 
April 6, 2010. 
Ciccatelli, A. “SEC Issues New Social Media Guidance for 
Financial Advisors.” Inside Counsel, April 3, 2014. 
Cohen, J. & Balz, D. “Poll: Privacy Concerns Rise after NSA 
Leaks.” The Washington Post, July 23, 2013. 
Davis, W. N. “Google Glass is already causing legal experts to 
see problems.” ABA Journal Law News. April 1, 2014. 
Dobuzinskis, A. “California Woman Ticketed for Driving with 
Google Glass.” Reuters, October 31, 2013. 
Duhigg, C. “How Companies Learn Your Secrets.” The New York 
Times. February 16, 2012. nytimes.com/2012/02/19/magazine/
shopping-habits.html?pagewanted
1&_r
2&hp&
References

460  Chapter 14     Ethical Risks and Responsibilities of IT Innovations
Dumaine, B. “The Kings of Concentration.” Inc. Magazine, 
May 2014. 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. “Social Media 
Is Part of Today’s Workplace But Its Use May Raise Employ-
ment Discrimination Concerns.” Press release, EEOC.gov, 
March 12, 2014. 
Fitzpatrick, A. & G. Kibel “Technology, Digital Media and 
Privacy Alert.” Inside Counsel, June 17, 2014. insidecounsel.
com/2014/06/17/technology-digital-media-and-privacy-alert
Gartner. “Gartner Says Uses of 3D Printing Will Ignite Major 
Debate on Ethics and Regulation.” Press release, January 29, 
2014. http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2658315
Jackson, M. The Erosion of Attention and the Coming Dark 
Age. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books  2008, 
Kandel, E.R. In Search of Memory. New York, NY: W. W. 
Norton & Company, 2006. 
Martin, G. “So 3-D Printers May Be Nifty and Trendy, But 
Environmentally Friendly? Not Necessarily.” California 
Magazine of UC Berkeley, March 11, 2014. 
Ophir, E., Nass, C. and Wagner, A. “Cognitive control in media 
multitaskers.” Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences. Vol. 106, No. 37. September 15, 2009. 
Perry, T. “Woman wearing Google Glass found not guilty of 
distracted driving.” LA Times. January 16, 2014. 
Rainie, L., S. Kiesler, R. Kang,  & H. Madden. “Anonymity, 
Privacy, and Security Online.” PEWInternet.org, 2013. 
Ryan, D. “The Truth About Facebook Privacy—If Zuckerberg 
Got Real.” The Daily Beast, November 30, 2011. 
Taylor, J. “Feds Interrogate Man Wearing Google Glass in 
Movie Theater.” BetaBeat.com, January 21, 2014.
Whitney, L. “Google Glass Wearer Challenges Distracted 
Driving Charge.” CNET.com, December 4, 2013.

2D tag A barcode-like image used to identify a merchant or payee.
3D bioprinting Medical application of 3D printing to produce living 
tissue and organs.
3D printing Also known as additive manufacturing, builds objects 
layer-by-layer to create real-world objects.
5G Fifth generation mobile communications network.
Acceptable use policy (AUP) Explains what management has 
decided are acceptable and unacceptable activities, and the conse-
quences of noncompliance.
Access control Limiting access to certain documents or data.
Active data warehouse Real-time data warehousing and analytics.
Ad hoc report An unplanned report that is generated to a mobile 
device or computer on demand as needed.
Additive manufacturing See 3D printing.
Advanced persistent threat (APT) Stealth network attack in which 
an unauthorized person gains access to a network and remains 
undetected for a long time.
Aggregation A calculation, such as Sum, Average, or Count.
Agility The ability to respond quickly and appropriately.
Analytical tools Software or apps for data analysis.
Anonymous A loose association of hacktivists.
Application controls Safeguards that are intended to protect specific 
applications.
Application programming interface (API) A gateway to facilitate the 
transfer of data from one website app to another. 
Applications portfolio List of major, approved IS projects that are 
also consistent with the long-range plan.
Assets Things of value that need to be protected.
Asynchronous Javascript and XML A group of technologies and 
programming languages that make it possible for webpages to 
respond to users’ actions without requiring the entire page to reload.
Attack vectors Vulnerabilities that exist in networks, operating sys-
tems, apps, databases, mobile devices, and cloud environments.
Audit Procedure of generating, recording, and reviewing a chrono-
logical record of system events to determine their accuracy.
Augmented reality A technology that superimposes a computer-
generated image onto an image of the real world to provide infor-
mation or entertainment.
Avatar An icon, figure, or visual representation of a person in com-
puter games, simulations, virtual worlds, or online discussion forums.
Backdoors Type of malware that enables access to a network without 
logging in.
Backlinks External links that point back to a site.
Back-office operations Activities that support the fulfillment of 
orders.
Bandwidth A network’s capacity or throughput.
Barcode A machine-readable code consisting of numbers and a pat-
tern of thick and thin lines that can be scanned to identify the object 
on which the code appears.
Baseline Specification of the project plan that has been formally 
reviewed and agreed upon. It should be changed only through a 
formal change control process.
Big data Datasets whose size and speed are beyond the ability of typi-
cal database software tools to capture, store, manage, and analyze. 
Biometric control Automated method of verifying the identity of a 
person, based on physical or behavioral characteristics.
Black hat SEO Search engine optimization tactics that try to trick a 
search engine into thinking a website has high-quality content, when 
in fact it does not.
BlackPOS Malware designed to be installed on POS devices in order 
to record data from credit and debit cards swiped through the 
infected device.
Blog Online journals where people regularly post personal or profes-
sional content in a variety of digital formats including text, photo-
graphs, video, and music.  
Blogging platform A software application used to create, edit and add 
features to a blog. Wordpress and Blogger are two of the most 
popular blogging platforms. 
Blogosphere A network enabling bloggers to comment on, and link 
to other blogs in their posts, in effect maintaining a dialogue or 
conversation with other bloggers.
Botnet A network of hijacked computers that are controlled remotely, 
typically to launch spam or spyware.
Breach of privacy Unauthorized disclosure of personal information.
Bring your own apps (BYOA) Employees use their own apps instead 
of using apps provided by the company.
Broadband Refers to wide bandwidth technologies that create fast, 
high-volume connections to the Internet and World Wide Web.
Business case Presentation or document that outlines the justification 
for the start-up and funding of a project. 
Business intelligence (BI) Category of applications for gathering, 
storing, analyzing, and providing access to data to help enterprise 
users make better decisions.
Business process management (BPM) Methods, tools, and technol-
ogy to support and continuously improve business processes. 
Business process reengineering (BPR) Eliminating the unnecessary 
non-value-added processes, then simplifying and automating the 
remaining processes to significantly reduce cycle time, labor, and 
costs. 
Business processes Series of steps by which organizations coordinate 
and organize tasks to get work done. 
Business record Documentation of a business event, action, decision, 
or transaction.
Business-driven development approach A development approach 
that starts with business strategy and work backwards to identify 
data sources and data that needs to be acquired and analyzed.
Business-to-business (B2B) Markets in which the buyers, sellers, and 
transactions involve only organizations, not individual consumers.
Business-to-business (B2B) commerce Selling products and services 
to other businesses. 
BYOD Bring your own device is a growing trend in which employees 
use their own devices for business purposes.
Capital budgeting The process of analyzing and selecting investments 
with the highest ROI.
Cascading style sheets (CSS) A language used to enhance the appear-
ance of webpages written in a markup language.
Change data capture (CDC) CDC processes capture the changes 
made at data sources and then apply those changes throughout 
enterprise data stores to keep data synchronized.
Glossary
  G-1  

G-2    Glossary
Critical infrastructure Systems and assets, whether physical or virtual, 
so vital to the United States that the incapacity or destruction of 
such systems and assets would have a debilitating impact on secu-
rity, national economic security, national public health or safety, or 
any combination of those matters. 
Critical path Longest path of tasks through a project, as shown on a 
Gantt chart. A delay of any task on the critical path will delay the 
project. 
Critical success factors (CSFS) Those things that must go right for a 
company to achieve its mission.
Critical task Task or activity on the critical path.
Cross-functional business process Involves two or more functions, for 
example, order fulfillment and product development.
Cross-sell To sell additional complimentary products or services.
Crowdfunding Raising funds for a project from the public, or crowd, 
via the web.
Crowdsourcing A model of problem solving and idea generation that 
marshals the collective talents of a large group of people.
Customer experience (CX) Building the digital infrastructure that 
allows customers to do whatever they want to do, through whatever 
channel they choose to do it.
Customer lifetime value (CLV) Formula for estimating the dollar 
value, or worth, of a long-term relationship with a customer. 
Customer-centric Business models strive to create the best solution 
or experience for the customer. In contrast, product-centric models 
are internally focused on creating the best product. 
Cycle time Time required to complete a given process. 
Dashboards Data visualizations that display the current status of key 
performance indicators (KPIs) in easy-to-understand formats.
Data Data are the raw material from which information is produced; 
and the quality, reliability, and integrity of the data must be main-
tained for the information to be useful.
Data analytics Refers to the use of software and statistics to find 
meaningful insight in the data, or better understand the data. 
Data center A location storing a large number of network servers 
used for the storage, processing, management, distribution, and 
archiving of data, systems, web traffic, services, and enterprise 
applications. Data center also refers to the building or facility that 
houses the servers and equipment.
Data disclosure Reporting system where data items are tagged to 
make them easily searchable.
Data discovery Data exploration and discovery of hidden relation-
ships.
Data entity Anything real or abstract about which a company wants 
to collect and store data.
Data governance Control of enterprise data through formal poli-
cies and procedures to help insure that data can be trusted and is 
accessible.
Data mart Is a lower-cost, scaled-down version of a data warehouse 
that can be implemented in a much shorter time. Data marts serve 
a specific department or function, such as finance, marketing, or 
operations.
Data mining Is a specific analytic technique that enables users to 
analyze data from various dimensions or angles, categorize it, and 
find correlations or patterns among fields in the data warehouse.
Data science Managing and analyzing massive sets of data for pur-
poses such as target marketing, trend analysis, and the creation of 
individually tailored products and services.
Data silo Stand-alone data stores available for a specific function or 
department, but not accessible by other ISs.
Data tampering A common means of attack that is overshadowed by 
other types of attacks. It refers to an attack during which someone 
Channel conflict Competition between a manufacturer’s distribution 
partners that sell through different channels.  Channel conflict can 
occur at the wholesale, retail, or internal sales department level.
Circuit switching A telecom network that transmits voice or data via 
a dedicated channel (connection).
Click-through rates (CTR) The percentage of people who click on a 
hyperlinked area of a SERP or webpage.
Climate change mitigation Any action to limit the magnitude of long-
term climate change.
Cloud computing A general term that refers to a style of computing in 
which IT services are delivered on-demand and accessible via the 
Internet. Common examples are Dropbox, Gmail, and Google Drive. 
Cloud computing stack Cloud Computing is often described as a stack 
consisting of a broad range of services built on top of one another, 
for example SaaS, PaaS, and IaaS.
Cloud storage service Remote network storage that makes it easy to 
access your documents from any of the devices you work on.
Cloud strategy Short for cloud computing IT strategy.
COBIT (Control Objectives for Information and Related 
Technology) IT governance framework which many companies 
use as their IT governance guide.
Cognitive overload Condition when business users suffer from too 
much data that interferes with their ability to focus and be productive.
Collaborative filtering Makes recommendations based on a user’s 
similarities to other people. 
Collection analysis module Creates utility indexes that aid in provid-
ing search results.
Command and control (C&C) channel The way in which botnets are 
controlled remotely or used to carry out malicious activities.
Commodities Basic things that companies need to function.
Competitive advantage A difference between a company and its 
competitors that matters to customers. 
Competitive forces model Model developed by Michael Porter, also 
called the five-forces model, to identify competitive strategies. 
Computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM) Computer-integrated 
systems that control day-to-day shop floor activities.
Consumerization of information technology (COIT) Trend where 
more and more users bring their personal mobile devices and 
their own mobile apps to work and connect them to the corporate 
network.
Content-based filtering Recommends products based on the product 
features of items the customer has interacted with in the past.
Contract hackers Hackers available for hire or complete hack attacks 
that can be bought.
Core business processes Accounting, finance, sales, marketing, 
human resources, inventory, production, and manufacturing. 
Corporate procurement or purchasing The buying of products and 
services by an organization for its operational and functional needs. 
Corporate social media discrimination Illegal use of information 
about protected classes to select or weed out candidates.
Crawler control module A software program that controls a number 
of “spiders” responsible for scanning or crawling information on the 
web.
Crawler search engines Rely on sophisticated computer programs 
called “spiders,” “crawlers,” or “bots” that surf the Internet, locat-
ing webpages, links, and other content that are then stored in the 
SE’s page repository.
Creative destruction A term coined by the economist Joseph 
Schumpeter in 1942 to warn that innovation can disrupt industries 
in capitalistic societies and force established companies and busi-
ness models to either adapt or fail. 
Credentials Log-in information, such as username, password, or PIN.

Glossary     G-3  
E-commerce Process of buying, selling, transferring, or exchanging 
products or services or information via the public Internet or pri-
vate corporate networks.
Economic order quantity (EOQ) An inventory model that is used to 
answer both questions of when to order and how much to order, 
the EOQ model takes all costs into consideration.
EEOC (Equal Employment Opportunity Commission) Enforces 
federal laws prohibiting discrimination in employment.
Electronic fund transfer (EFT) A transfer of funds from one bank 
account to another over a computerized network.
Electronic records management (ERM) A system that consists of 
hardware and software that manage and archive electronic docu-
ments and image paper documents; then index and store them 
according to company policy.
Electronic wallet (e-wallet) A software application that can store 
encrypted information about a user’s credit cards, bank accounts, 
and other information necessary to complete electronic transac-
tions, eliminating the need to re-enter the information during the 
transaction.
Enterprise 2.0 The use of social media tools for collaboration on 
company intranets to increase productivity. 
Enterprise application integration (EAI) Middleware that connects and 
acts as a go-between for applications and their business processes. 
Enterprise architecture (EA) The way IT systems and processes are 
structured. EA is an ongoing process of creating, maintaining, and 
leveraging IT. It helps to solve two critical challenges: where an 
organization is going and how it will get there.
Enterprise data mashup Combination of data from various business 
systems and external sources, often in real-time, without necessarily 
relying on a middle step of ETL (extract, transform, and load) from 
a data warehouse.
Enterprise data warehouse (EDW) A data warehouse that pulls 
together data from disparate sources and databases across an entire 
enterprise.
Enterprise graph Platform that shows how users are related to one 
another. It enables developers and customers to seamlessly connect 
people, conversations, and data across all their business services.
Enterprise IT architecture Guides the evolution and expansion of 
information systems, digital technology, and business processes.
Enterprise mashups Combining data from internal business sources 
(e.g., sales records, customer information, etc.) and/or information 
from external sources for enhanced usefulness and productivity.
Enterprise risk management (ERM) Risk-based approach to manag-
ing an enterprise that integrates internal control, the Sarbanes–
Oxley Act mandates, and strategic planning. ERM is intended to be 
part of routine planning processes rather than a separate initiative.
Enterprise search tools Used by employees to search for and retrieve 
information related to their work in a manner that complies with 
the organization’s information-sharing and access control policies.
Enterprise social Private (company-owned) social media, software, 
platforms, or apps specially designed for use by business leaders and 
employees to fulfill the strategic mission.
Enterprise systems Cross-functional and inter-organizational systems 
that support the business strategy.
E-procurement The re-engineered procurement process using e-busi-
ness technologies and strategies to control costs and simplify pur-
chasing processes.
E-sourcing Procurement methods such as auctions, RFQ processing, 
private exchanges, and secondary activities such as trading partner 
collaboration, contract negotiation, and supplier selection. 
Executive information system (EIS) An information system specifi-
cally designed to support senior management.
Exploit Tool or technique that takes advantage of a vulnerability.
enters false or fraudulent data into a computer, or changes or 
deletes existing data.
Data visualization (data viz) Tools that make it easier to understand 
data at a glance by displaying data in summarized formats, such as 
dashboards and maps, and by enabling drilldown to the detailed 
data. 
Data warehouse Systems that integrate data from databases across 
an entire enterprise are called enterprise data warehouses (EDW).
Database A repository or data store that is organized for efficient 
access, search, retrieval, and update.
Database management system (DBMS) Software used to manage the 
additions, updates, and deletions of data as transactions occur; and 
support data queries and reporting. They are OLTP systems.
Decision model A model that quantifies the relationship between 
variables, which reduces uncertainty.
Decision support system (DSS) Interactive applications that support 
decision making.
Declarative languages A programming language that simplifies data 
access by requiring that users only specify what data they want to 
access without defining how that is to be achieved.
Deliverables The outputs or tangible things that are produced by a 
business process. Common deliverables are products, services, 
actions, plans, or decisions, such as approval or denial of a credit 
application. Deliverables are milestones, produced in order to 
achieve specific objectives. 
Demand management Knowing or predicting what to buy, when, and 
how much. 
Digital business models How a business generates revenue or profit 
from digital products or services.
Digital dependents The emerging generation of young people who 
are growing up in a world of broadband connections, constant con-
nectivity, and related technology and who become uncomfortable 
if they do not have access to it.
Digital immigrants Typically a member of an older age cohort that may 
be increasingly comfortable with technology but much less likely to 
incorporate mobile technology into their shopping behavior.
Digital natives The first generation to have grown up surrounded by 
digital devices (i.e., computers, smartphones, digital cameras, and 
video recorders, etc.) and Internet connectivity.
Direct conversion Type of conversion in which the old system is cut 
off and the new system is turned on at a certain point in time.
Direct procurement Purchasing materials to produce finished goods.
Dirty data Data of such poor quality that they cannot be trusted or 
relied upon for decisions. 
Discussion groups A forum to ask questions and solicit input from 
other members of the group.
Disruptive innovation New technologies offering the capability of 
transforming traditional business practices, creating new value 
networks, and spawning new markets.
Distributed database system A database system that allows apps on 
computers and mobiles to access data from both local and remote 
databases.
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack Attack that bombards 
a network or website with so much traffic that it crashes and  
becomes vulnerable to other threats.
Document object model (DOM) A programming API for docu-
ments. Programmers use it to manipulate (e.g., build, add, modify, 
delete, etc.) HTML documents.
Do-not-carry rules Security rules based on the assumption that 
devices will inevitably be compromised.
Dwell time The amount of time a user stays on a webpage before 
returning to the search engine results page.

G-4    Glossary
Hacktivist Short for hacker-activist or someone who does hacking for 
a cause. Hacking, regardless of motive, is a crime. 
Hadoop Hadoop is a data processing platform that distributes com-
puting problems across a number of servers so it is capable of 
processing big data. 
Hashtags Descriptive keywords designated by the # sign attached to 
Twitter messages to make it easier for other users to find them.
Horizontal exchanges Sites where many buyers and sellers that use 
the same products or services conduct business transactions. 
Hybrid recommendation engines Develop recommendations based 
on some combination of content-based filtering, collaboration fil-
tering, knowledge-based and demographic systems.
Hybrid search engines Combine the results of a directory created by 
humans with results from a crawler search engine, with the goal of 
providing both accuracy and broad coverage of the Internet.
Hyperscale Computing systems that are the supersized, scalable, and 
resilient data centers pioneered by data-dependent and social media 
companies.
Hypertext markup language (HTML) The predominant language for 
webpages, used along with CSS, to describe how things will appear 
on a webpage.
Implementation Process of converting from the old system to the new 
system.
Inbound logistics Receiving of inventory, parts or products from sup-
pliers or other sources.
Inbound marketing An approach to marketing that emphasizes SEO, 
content marketing, and social media strategies to attract customers.  
Often viewed as an alternative to traditional marketing strategies 
based on advertising and personal selling.
Income statement Summarizes a company’s revenue and expenses 
for one quarter of a fiscal year or the entire fiscal year. Also known 
as P&L (profit and loss) or earnings statement. 
Indexer module Creates look-up tables by extracting words from 
webpages and recording the URL where they were found.
Indirect procurement Organizations purchasing products for daily 
operational needs.
Industry structure Determines the range of profitability of the aver-
age competitor and can be very difficult to change.
Informal processes Processes that are typically undocumented, have 
inputs that may not yet been identified, and are knowledge-intensive. 
Information Data that have been processed, organized, or put into 
context so that it has meaning and value to the person receiving it.
Information and communications technology (ICT) IT industry sector.
Information governance The control of enterprise data through for-
mal policies and procedures. A goal of data governance is to pro-
vide employees and business partners with high quality data they 
trust and can access easily on demand.
Information overload Inability of a manager or decision maker to 
process or analyze data because of an overwhelming volume of 
data.
Informational search Using search engines to conduct research on a 
topic or product.
Insider fraud A variety of criminal behaviors perpetrated by an orga-
nization’s employees or contractors.
In-store tracking Use of mobile technology to track a customer’s 
movement through a retail store for a better  understanding of 
individual consumer preferences as well as creating optimal store 
layout.
Integrated change control Processes that help to manage the disrup-
tion resulting from requested changes and corrective actions across 
the project lifecycle.
Interface To connect to and exchange data with apps and systems. 
Extendable markup language (XML) A set of rules and guidelines 
for describing data that can be used by other programming lan-
guages. It makes it possible for data to be shared across the web.
Extensibility Ability to get data into and out of the cloud service.
Extensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL) A language for 
electronic communication of business data. Each item, such as cash 
or depreciation expense, is tagged with information about various 
attributes, such as calendar year, audited/unaudited status, cur-
rency, and so on.
Extract, transform, load (ETL) Technology involved in preparing raw 
data for analytics that includes three procedures: data extracted 
from designated databases; data transformed by standardizing 
formats, cleaning the data, integrating them; and data loaded into 
a data warehouse.
FASB Develops U.S. accounting standards and principles.
Fault tolerance Means that no single failure results in any loss of 
service.
Financial misrepresentation Situation in which a company has inten-
tionally deceived one or more other parties.
Five-forces model Model developed by Michael Porter, also called 
the competitive forces model, to identify competitive strategies. 
Flexible manufacturing systems (FMS) Systems that can accommo-
date the manufacture of different parts at different volumes. FMS 
systems schedule the manufacture of a part in the most expedient 
way by examining the current workload across each of eight 
machine tools.
Folksonomy A system of classifying and organizing online content into 
categories by the use of user-generated metadata such as keywords.
Formal processes Processes that are documented and have well-
established steps.
Fraud risk management A system of policies and procedures to pre-
vent and detect illegal acts committed by managers, employees, 
customers, or business partners against the company’s interests. 
Front-office operations Activities, such as sales and advertising that 
are visible to customers.
Gantt chart Horizontal bar chart that graphically displays the project 
schedule. 
General controls Controls established to protect the system regard-
less of the specific application.
Geocoding Process that can convert postal addresses to geospatial 
data that can then be measured and analyzed.
Geographic information system (GIS) Captures, manages, analyzes, 
and displays multi-dimensional geographic data.
Geospatial data Identifies the geographic location and characteristics 
of natural or constructed features and boundaries on the earth, 
typically represented by points, lines, or polygons.
Ghost pages Webpages that are optimized to attract many people but 
contain a redirect command so that users are sent instead to another 
page to increase traffic on that page. 
Giant global graph Illustration of the connections between people 
and/or documents and pages online. 
Go/No-Go decision Formal decision made by the project manager, 
sponsor, and appropriate executives and stakeholders.
Goal seeking Model that starts with the desired outcome (goal) and 
a set of variables that impact that outcome, which are used to cal-
culate how that outcome could be achieved and whether it’s feasible 
to achieve that desired outcome.
Groundswell The spontaneous effort of people using online tools to 
obtain information, support, ideas, products, and bargaining power 
from each other.
Group dynamics Group processes that emerge as the members work 
together.

Glossary     G-5  
Lean manufacturing system A system used to minimize waste and 
deal with the complexity of inventory management, where suppliers 
deliver small lots on a daily or frequent basis, and production 
machines are not necessarily run at full capacity.
Legacy systems Older information systems that have been main-
tained over several decades because they fulfill critical needs. 
Link farms Websites built solely for the purpose of linking back to a 
promotional page.
Link spamming Generating backlinks for the primary purpose of 
search engine optimization, not to add value for the user.
Logistics Entails all the processes and information needed to move 
products from origin to destination efficiently.
Lulzsec Hacktivist group that is a spin-off of Anonymous.
Machine-to-machine (M2M) technology Enables sensor-embedded 
products to share reliable real-time data via radio signals.
Manufacturing execution systems (MES) Manage operations on the 
shop floors of factories.
Manufacturing quality control (QC) systems Systems that provide 
data about the quality of incoming materials and parts, as well as 
the quality of in-process, semifinished, and finished products.
Market share Percentage of total sales in a market captured by a 
brand, product, or company.
Mashup A web app that pulls data from various sources and displays 
that on another page to create new functionality.
Master data Data about the entities of importance to an enterprise, 
such as customers, products, accounts, and other business-critical 
data information that are needed for operations and business 
transactions. 
Master data management (MDM) Synchronizes all business critical 
data from disparate systems into a master file, which provides a 
trusted data source. 
Master file MDM links and synchronizes all critical data from those 
disparate systems into one file, called a master file, that provides a 
common point of reference. 
Maverick buying Corporate purchasing outside the established 
approved procurement system.
Metadata Data that describe and provide information about other 
data.
Meta-search engines Compile search response listings by combining 
results from several other search engines. 
MHI An international trade association that has represented the 
material handling, logistics and supply chain industry.
Microblog A blog that consists of frequent but very brief posts con-
taining text, pictures or videos.  Twitter is perhaps the most well-
known example of a microblog.
Micropayments Transactions involving relatively small sums of money.
Microsoft cloud Provides a hybrid infrastructure and capabilities to 
manage enterprise apps and data.
Milestone Used to manage the project work effort, monitor results, 
and report meaningful status to project stakeholders.
Millennials Generation born between early 1980s to the early 2000s.
Mission Set of outcomes an enterprise wants to achieve. 
Mobile biometrics Security defenses, such as voice and fingerprint 
biometrics, for mobile devices.
Mobile browser A web browser that is optimized to display web 
content effectively on a small mobile device such as a smart phone.
Mobile check-in strategy The use of mobile apps to enhance shop-
ping behavior at retail outlets with discounts, coupons, descriptive 
videos, etc.
Mobile commerce or m-commerce The buying or selling of goods and 
services using a wireless, handheld device such as a cell phone or 
tablet (slate) computer.
Internal control environment Work atmosphere that a company sets 
for its employees.
Internal threats Threats from employees. They are a major challenge 
largely due to the many ways an employee can carry out malicious 
activity.
Internet of Things (IoT) Refers to a set of capabilities enabled when 
physical things are connected to the Internet via sensors.
Internet protocol (IP) The basic technology that makes global com-
munication over the web possible.
Intrusion detection system (IDS) Defense tool used to monitor net-
work traffic (packets) and provide alerts when there is suspicious 
traffic, or to quarantine suspicious traffic.
Intrusion prevention systems (IPS) Defense system designed to take 
immediate action—such as blocking specific IP addresses—when-
ever a traffic-flow anomaly is detected.
Inventory control systems Stock control or inventory management 
systems.
IP address Every device that communicates with a network must 
have a unique identifying IP address. An IP address is comparable 
to a telephone number or home address.
Ipv4 The Internet protocol for over three decades, now reaching the 
limits of its design and running out of IP addresses.
Isolation Means that a failure in one component can’t bring down the 
entire system.
IT consumerization The migration of consumer technology into 
enterprise IT environments. 
IT governance Supervision, monitoring, and control of the organiza-
tion’s IT assets.
IT strategy Shapes the direction of IT investments over the next one 
to five years to maximize business value and shareholder wealth.
IT–business alignment Complex management activity of aligning IT 
strategy with business strategy. 
Javascript An object-oriented language used to create apps and 
functionality on websites. Examples of Javascript apps include pop-
up windows, validation of webform inputs, and images that change 
when a cursor passes over them.
Just-in-time (JIT) One of the two widely used models to minimize 
waste and deal with the complexity of inventory management. JIT 
inventory management attempts to minimize holding costs by not 
taking possession of inventory until it is needed in the production 
process. 
Key performance indicators (KPIs) Business metrics used to evaluate 
performance in terms of critical success factors, or strategic and 
operational goals.
Keyword In the context of web search or SEO, a word or phrase that 
describes the content on a webpage.  Search engines use keywords 
to match webpages with user search queries.
Keyword conversion rates The likelihood that using a particular 
keyword to optimize a page will result in converting a website visi-
tor into a buyer.
Knowledge Information that has been processed, organized, and put 
into context to be meaningful, and to convey understanding, expe-
rience, accumulated learning, and expertise as they apply to a cur-
rent problem or activity.
Lagging indicators Confirm what has already happened. They evalu-
ate outcomes and achievements. 
Latency Elapsed time (or delay) between when data is created and 
when it is available for a query or report.
Latency-sensitive apps Apps that depend on quick no-delay transmis-
sion, such as voice and video.
Leading indicators Indicators that help predict future events to iden-
tify opportunities.

G-6    Glossary
Onshore sourcing Work or development that can be sourced to con-
sulting companies or vendors that are within the same country.
Open Graph Facebook’s new initiative to connect all the different 
relationships that exist on the Internet by linking websites to 
Facebook.
Open source An application programming interface (API) that any-
one can use, usually for free.
Open Wi-Fi network Non-password-protected router.
Operating margin A measure of the percent of a company’s revenue 
left over after paying for its variable costs, such as wages and raw 
materials. An increasing margin means the company is earning 
more per dollar of sales.
Operating plan Plan that defines how to execute the IT strategic plan.
Operational level Level on which managers and supervisors work 
most closely with the workforce and customers and play a more 
interpersonal role than any of the other levels of management.
Order fulfillment Set of complex processes involved in providing 
customers with what they have ordered on time and all related 
customer services.
Order fulfillment process The process of moving products from 
orders to the customers that includes credit check and payment 
collection, picking and shipping departments to pack the product, 
print the mailing label, and prepare for shipping, and notifying 
customers that their orders are on the way.
Organic search listings Search results that are heavily influenced by 
website content and design features. 
Outbound logistics Shipping activities.
Outsource relationship management (ORM) company Company that 
provides automated tools to monitor and manage the outsourcing 
relationships.
Packet A block of data or file that is transmitted over a network to 
their destination.
Packet switching Transfers data or voice in packets.
Page repository A data structure that stores and manages informa-
tion from a large number of webpages, providing a fast and effi-
cient means for accessing and analyzing the information at a later 
time.
PageRank A Google website evaluation algorithm that counts back-
links, based on the assumption that people are more likely to link 
to high-quality websites than poor-quality sites.
Paid search listings A form of advertising purchased from search 
engine companies in which advertisers pay search engines based on 
how many people click on their ads.
Parallel conversion Conversion strategy in which the old system and 
the new system operate simultaneously for a period of time. That 
is, both systems process the same data at the same time, and the 
outputs are compared.
Patches Software programs to fix a vulnerability in a system or app.
Payload Refers to the actions that occur after a system has been 
infected. The payload carries out the purpose of the malware.
Payment card industry data security standard (PCI DSS) A data 
transmission security standard based on encryption that was created 
by Visa, Mastercard, American Express, and Discover to improve 
customers’ trust in e-commerce
Pay-per-click (PPC) A form of payment based on how many viewers 
clink on a link to a marketer’s page.
Petabyte A unit of measurement for digital data storage.  A petabyte 
is equal to one million gigabytes.
Phishing Deceptive method of stealing confidential information by 
pretending to be a legitimate organization, such as PayPal, a bank, 
a credit card company, or other trusted source.
Planners Lab Software designed to build DSSs.
Mobile display strategy Use by retailers of QR codes and Short 
Message Service (SMS) technology to encourage store customers 
to view short videos featuring selected merchandise.
Mobile e-commerce The use of wireless handheld devices to order 
and/or pay for goods and services from online vendors. 
Mobile location-based marketing A marketing strategy that uses 
information from a mobile device’s GPS or customer’s mobile 
check-in on a social network to determine the content of marketing 
communications they receive on the device (e.g., advertisements, 
coupons, special offers).
Mobile marketing A variety of activities used by organizations to 
engage, communicate, and interact over Wi-Fi and telecommunica-
tions networks with consumers using wireless, handheld devices.
Mobile payment The use of systems that make transactions from 
smartphones and other mobile devices convenient, safe, and secure. 
Mobile retailing The use of mobile technology to promote, enhance, 
and add to value to the in-store shopping experience. 
Mobile visual search engine A search engine that uses an image 
instead of a text-based query to search for information on the web.
Moral hazard A situation that takes the risk (and the deterrent) out 
of committing fraud.
MRO supplies Items purchased for maintenance, repair, and opera-
tions, such as office supplies, and not resold to generate revenue.
Navigational search Using a search engine to locate particular web-
sites or webpages.
Near field communication (NFC) Enables two devices within close 
proximity to establish a communication channel and transfer data 
through radio waves.  NFC are location-aware technologies that are 
more secure than other wireless technologies like Bluetooth and Wi-Fi.
Near-field communication (NFC) technology General description 
covering technologies that communicate within a limited distance. 
Negligent hiring Claim made by an injured party against an employer 
who knew or should have known about an employee’s background 
that indicates a dangerous or untrustworthy character.
Net neutrality A principle holding that Internet Service Providers 
(ISPs) and their regulators should treat all Internet traffic the same 
way.
Network effect From the field of economics, the network effect 
explains how the perceived value of a product or service is affected 
by the number of people using the product or service.
Newsgroups Online communities similar in many ways to online bul-
letin boards, where members exchange messages on various topics. 
NOSQL A heterogeneous group of database systems that is capable 
of processing large web applications. 
Objectives Building blocks of strategy, these are action-oriented 
statements that define the continuous improvement activities that 
must be done to be successful. Objectives set out what the business 
is trying to achieve.
Occupational fraud Deliberate misuse of the assets of one’s employer 
for personal gain.
Office graph Uses signals from email, social conversations, docu-
ments, sites, instant messages, meetings, and more to map the 
relationships between the people and concepts.
Offshoring Sourcing that is done off-shore.
Omni-channel retailing The effort by retailers to fully integrate both 
traditional and emerging methods to influence consumers. 
Online analytical processing (OLAP) systems Systems for analysis of 
complex data, typically stored in a data warehouse or data mart.
Online transaction processing (OLTP) Events or transactions are 
processed as soon as they occur.
Online transaction processing (OLTP) systems Volatile systems that 
are designed to process and store transaction data.

Glossary     G-7  
Redundancy Every component is backed up by an alternative in case 
it fails.
Relational database A standard database model that had been used 
by most enterprises.  Relational databases store data in tables 
consisting of columns and rows, similar to the format of a spread-
sheet.
Relational database management system (RDBMS) System that 
provides access to data using a declarative language—SQL or struc-
tured query language.
Remote administration trojan (RAT) Create an unprotected back-
door into a system through which a hacker can remotely control 
that system.
Remote wipe capability A feature of a smart device wherein it can be 
instructed remotely to delete the contents.
Replicate How a virus or other malware makes copies of itself.
Resource description framework (RDF) A language used to repre-
sent information about resources on the Internet.
Responsibility matrix A document that lets everyone know who is 
responsible for completion of tasks. 
Responsiveness Means that IT capacity can be easily scaled up or 
down as needed, which essentially requires cloud computing.
Retrieval/ranking module Determines the order in which pages are 
listed in a search engine results page.
Retweet Forwarding a Twitter message to everyone in a user’s net-
work.
Reverse supply chain Type of supply chain where products that are 
returned make up the supply chain; goods are moving in the reverse 
direction.
Rich snippets Rich, attractive listings produced on search engine 
result pages by websites optimized with metadata for semantic 
technology. 
Risk Probability of a threat exploiting a vulnerability.
Rogue app monitoring Type of defense to detect and destroy mali-
cious apps in the wild.
Rootkit A type of malware that installs itself on a network.
Router A device that transmit data packets from their source to their 
destination based on IP addresses, and links computers to the 
Internet, so users can share the connection.
RSS aggregator Enables users to pull content from a number of 
sources into a single location making it easier to follow news stories 
and blog posts from multiple sites.
RSS reader Allows users to aggregate regularly changing data, such 
as blog entries, news stories, audio, and video.
Safety stock Extra inventory that are used as a buffer to reduce the 
risk of stockout. 
Scalability A system that can increase (or decrease)  in size to handle 
data growth or the load of an increasing number of concurrent 
users. 
Scalable Adjustable to meet changes in business needs.
Scope creep Refers to the growth of the project, which might seem 
inconsequential—at least to the person who is requesting that 
change.  Scope creep is the piling up of small changes that by them-
selves are manageable, but in aggregate are significant.
Search engine An application for locating webpages or other content 
(e.g., documents, media files) on a computer network.  Popular 
web-based search engines include Google, Bing, and Yahoo.
Search engine marketing (SEM) A collection of online marketing 
strategies and tactics that promote brands by increasing their visibil-
ity in SERPs through optimization and advertising.
Search engine optimization (SEO) A collection of strategies and 
techniques designed to increase the number of visitors to a website 
as a result of the website’s rank on search engine results pages.
Plug-ins Buttons or features on non-Facebook sites that interact with 
Facebook in some way.
Postmortem Method for evaluating project performance, identifying 
lessons learned, and making recommendations for future projects.
Primary activities Business activities directly involved in the produc-
tion of goods and services. 
Privacy Right to self-determine what information about you is made 
accessible, to whom, when, and for what use or purpose.
Privacy paradox Refers to a phenomenon where social users claim to 
be concerned about privacy, but their behaviors contradict these 
concerns to an extreme degree.
Private cloud A single-tenant environment with stronger security and 
control for regulated industries and critical data. A private cloud 
resides within an enterprise’s own network and firewall.
Private social networking service The use of social technology to cre-
ate a community restricted to members selected by the SNS’ owner. 
Private SNSs allow a greater degree of control over the network. 
Process Series of steps by which organizations coordinate and orga-
nize tasks to get work done. 
Production and operations management (POM) Function that is 
responsible for processes that transform inputs into value-added 
outputs.
Project Well-planned sequential series of tasks to achieve a result. 
Projects have a defined beginning and end; a scope, resources, and 
a budget. Projects are approved before they are funded and allo-
cated resources.
Project management Structured methodology to plan, manage, and 
control the completion of a project throughout its lifecycle.
Project portfolio Portfolio that lists major resource projects, includ-
ing infrastructure, application services, data services, and security 
services that are consistent with the long-range plan.
Project portfolio management (PPM) Set of business practices to 
manage projects as a strategic portfolio.
Propagate How a virus spreads to other networks or devices.
Protected class Characteristics identified by law that cannot be used 
in the hiring process.
Public cloud A shared cloud architecture run over a public network, 
such as the Internet. It allows multiple clients to access the same 
virtualized services and utilize the same pool of servers across a 
public network.
Quality score An ad rating determined by factors related to the user’s 
experience.
Quick response (QR) codes A machine-readable code typically used 
to store a link to a URL or web address that can be read by a mobile 
device.
Radio frequency identification (RFID) Method of identifying unique 
items using radio waves. Typically, a hand-held reader communi-
cates with a tag, which holds digital information in a chip.
Real time search tool Help to pinpoint current trends by monitoring 
web searches, news stories, videos views, and blog posts about a 
particular topic.
Really simple syndication (RSS) Allows users to subscribe to multiple 
sources (e.g., blogs) and have the content displayed in a single 
application, called an RSS Reader or RSS Aggregator, enabling 
readers to personalize how they want  their news organized and 
displayed.
Real-time processing Processessing of data or transactions as they 
occur.
Recommendation engines Proactively identify products that have a 
high probability of being something the consumer might want to buy.
Red flag Fraud indicators—lavish vacations, jewelry, and cars that 
somebody could not afford.

G-8    Glossary
job candidate did not want considered or that is illegal to use in the 
hiring process.
Social web The new technologies, often called Web 2.0, that dramati-
cally increase the ability of people to interact with businesses and each 
other, sharing and finding information, and forming relationships.
Social, mobile, and cloud (SOMOCLO) Leading digital technologies.
Software-as-a service (SaaS) A widely used model in which software 
is leased and available on demand instead of being owned or 
licensed from the vendor.
Sourcing Refers to an IT deployment strategy in which systems are 
developed or IT work is done by a third-party or vendor.
SPARQL Protocol and RDF Query Language Query languages used 
to write programs that can retrieve and manipulate data stored in 
RDF format.
Spiders Also known as web bots or simply “bots,” spiders are small 
computer programs designed to perform automated, repetitive 
tasks over the Internet.  They are used by search engines for scan-
ning webpages and returning information to be stored in a page 
repository.
Spot sourcing The purchase of indirect materials in one industry as-
needed, using an exchange.
Standard operating procedures (SOP) Set of well-defined, written 
instructions for how to perform a function or activity. SOPs provide 
the framework for complex processes to be managed more effec-
tively.
Statement of work (SOW)  Defines the project plan, but does not 
offer any options or alternatives in the scope.
Stock keeping unit (SKU) A code number, typically a machine-
readable bar code, assigned to a single item of inventory.
Stockout Inventory shortage.
Strategic plan Document used to communicate the company’s goals 
and the actions needed to achieve their goals. 
Strategic planning A top management activity that sets priorities, 
focuses energy and human and technology resources, strengthens 
operations, and ensures that employees and business partners work 
toward common goals.
Strategy Defines the plan for how a business will achieve its mission, 
goals, and objectives.
Structured data Highly organized data easily included in a relational 
database that can be readily searched. 
Structured decisions Decisions that have a well-defined method for 
solving and the data needed to reach a decision.
Structured query language (SQL) Standardized language for access-
ing databases.
Sunk cost Refers to the money already spent on the project.
Supply chain All businesses involved in the production and distribu-
tion of a product or service. 
Supply chain management (SCM) The efficient management of the 
flows of material, data, and payments along the companies in the 
supply chain, from suppliers to consumers.
Supply chain visibility Awareness and sharing of POS data and data 
about product orders, inventory levels, demand forecasts, transpor-
tation, and logistics by trading partners from raw material to deliv-
ery to the end customer. 
Support activities Activities that support primary activities.
Switch A device that transmit data packets and acts as a controller, 
enabling networked devices to talk to each other efficiently.
SWOT analysis Analysis of an enterprise’s strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities, and threats.
Synchronous communication Dialogue or conversation that takes 
place in real-time, without the long delays between exchanges that 
occur, for instance, in email or discussion board conversations.
Search engine results page (SERP) The list of links and other descrip-
tive information about webpages returned by a search engine in 
response to a search query.
Sell-side marketplace Organizations selling their products or services 
to other organizations from their own private e-marketplace or 
from a third-party site.
Semantic search engines Use natural language processing, contextual 
cues, synonyms, word variations, concept matching, specialized 
queries, and other strategies to create search results that are supe-
rior to those created by simple keyword-matching algorithms.
Semantic web An extension of the World Wide Web that utilizes a 
variety of conventions and technologies and languages developed 
by the W3C that allow machines to understand the meaning of web 
content.
Sentiment analysis Analysis of comments and social media posts to 
understand consumers’ attitudes or feelings.
Service pack Patches released by Microsoft to update and fix vulner-
abilities in its operating systems.
Shadow pages Webpages that are optimized to attract lots of people 
but contain a redirect command so that users are sent instead to 
another page to increase traffic on that page.
Sharepoint Collaborative and social platform from Microsoft. 
Sharing sites Websites that make it easy for users to upload and share 
digital content like photos, videos or music.
Short code A short five- or six-character number used for product 
promotions or other interactions with customers. 
Short message service (SMS) A technology used to send and receive 
text messages on mobile devices via a telecommunications network.
Showrooming Using mobile search engine for locating product 
reviews and price comparisons while shopping in brick-and-mortar 
stores.
SMS database strategy Compiling and tracking short message service 
(SMS) codes to encourage customers to opt-in to receiving coupons 
and other offers via text message. 
Social bookmarking An app for tagging or labeling online content for 
later retrieval.
Social commerce Taking advantage of social media to promote sales 
through both online and retail channels.
Social engineering Also known as human hacking—tricking users 
into revealing their credentials and then using them to gain access 
to networks or accounts. From an IT security perspective, social 
engineering is a hacker’s clever use of deception or manipulation 
of people’s tendencies to trust, to try to be helpful, or to be curious.
Social graph A visual representation of the relationships and connec-
tions between individuals and groups.
Social media A collection of web applications, based on Web 2.0 
technology and culture, that allows people to connect and collabo-
rate with others by creating and sharing digital content.
Social media optimization Effective use of strategies designed to 
enhance a company’s standing on various social media sites such as 
Facebook and Twitter.
Social monitoring services Allow users to track conversations taking 
place on the web, particularly on other social media sites.
Social network analysis (SNA) Mapping and measuring of relation-
ships and flows between people, groups, organizations, computers, 
or other information or knowledge processing entities.
Social network sprawl Refers to a problem when businesses end up 
interacting with multiple social networks inside their own company.
Social networking service (SNS) An online platform or website that 
allows subscribers to interact and form communities or networks 
based on real-life relationships, shared interests, activities, and so on.
Social recruitment Refers to use of social media to find, screen, and 
select job candidates. Often it involves searching information the 

Glossary     G-9  
Vertical search engines Focus on webpages related to a particular 
topic and help to drill down by crawling pages that other search 
engines are likely to ignore.
Virtual communities Offer several ways for members to interact, col-
laborate, and trade with no regard for geographical or political 
boundaries.
Virtual machine (VM) A software-created computer or operating 
system.
Virtualization A technique that creates multiple operating systems 
that run on a single physical machine.
Voice biometrics Authentication method based on a user’s voice-
print.
Voice over IP (VOIP) Network that carries voice calls by converting 
voice (analog signals) to digital signals that are sent as packets.
Volatility A characteristic of databases that refers to the process by 
which databases are constantly in use or being updated.
Vulnerability A weakness that threatens the confidentiality, integrity, 
or availability (CIA) of an asset.
Wardriving Refers to driving around sniffing out and mapping the 
physical location of the world’s Wi-Fi routers. Wardriving is also a 
hacking technique, an invasion of privacy, and an information 
security risk.
Wearable technology Digital technology embedded in clothing or 
other things that are worn.
Web 2.0 A term used to describe a phase of World Wide Web evolu-
tion characterized by dynamic webpages, social media, mashup 
applications, broadband connectivity, and user-generated content.
Web directories Created by human editors and typically organized 
by categories, these were once the dominant method for finding 
web content. 
Web ontology language (OWL) The W3C language used to catego-
rize and accurately identify the nature of things found on the 
Internet.
What-if analysis Refers to changing assumptions or data in the model 
to see the impacts of those changes on the outcome.
Wide area network (WAN) Type of mobile network distributed over 
a large area, such as an office park 
Widget A web app that pulls data from various sources and displays 
it on another page to create new functionality.
Wiki A collaborative app that allows multiple people to create and 
edit online content.
Work breakdown structure (WBS) List of tasks in a project shown in 
sequential order, resources allocated to each task, and schedule.
World Wide Web A network of documents on the Internet, called 
webpages, constructed with HTML markup language that supports 
links to other documents and media (e.g., graphics, video, audio, 
etc.).
Xmlhttprequest A Javascript object that serves as an API used by 
programs to retrieve data or resources from an URL without 
requiring a page load. It plays an important role in providing pro-
grammers with the ability to create dynamic and interactive web-
pages and applications.
Yammer Social network geared towards enterprises. Employees col-
laborate across departments, locations and business apps. 
Zero-day attacks Malware so new their signatures are not yet known.
Zombie An infected computer that can be commanded to monitor 
and steal personal or financial data and act as spyware.
Systematic sourcing The trading of materials that are direct inputs to 
manufacturing, usually in large quantities, in an environment of a 
long-term B2B relationship. 
Tactical adoption approach Deploying cloud services incrementally 
results in apps and services that are patched together to create end-
to-end business processes. This is a short-sighted approach.
Tactical level Level on which middle-level managers design business 
processes, procedures, and policies to implement strategic plans. 
Tags Identifiers that describe various aspects of a webpage.
Terms of service (TOS) agreement A formal listing of the policies, 
liability limits, fees, and user rights and responsibilities associated 
with using a particular service. Users are typically required to 
acknowledge they have read, understand and agree to the terms of 
the TOS before they are allowed to use the service.
Text mining A specific analytic technique that involves interpreting 
words and concepts in context.
Threat Something or someone that can damage, disrupt, or destroy 
an asset.
Time-to-exploitation Elapsed time between when a vulnerability is 
discovered and when it is exploited.
Total quality management (TQM) A quality control system.
Touchpoint Any action or interaction with a customer, such as email, 
text, direct mail, phone call, social media message, and so on.
Traffic shaping Ability to prioritize and throttle network traffic.
Transaction processing system (TPS) A system designed to process 
specific types of data input from ongoing transactions.
Transactional search Using a search engine to determine where to 
purchase a product or service.
Transparency Being able to access current data to learn what is 
needed in order to make informed decisions without delay.
Triple constraint Three attributes–time, scope, and cost–that must be 
managed effectively for successful completion and closure of any 
project.
Tweet A brief 140-character message or post broadcast on Twitter, a 
microblogging service.
Twittersphere The universe of people who use Twitter, a microblog-
ging service.
Uniform resource identifiers (URI) One of the features that allow 
data to be used by multiple applications. 
Unstructured data Information that is not organized in a systematic 
or predefined way and more likely to contain inaccuracies or errors.
Unstructured decisions Decisions that depend on human intelligence, 
knowledge, and/or experience—as well as data and models to solve 
them.
Up-sell To sell more expensive models or features
Usenet The initial platform for online communities making it possible 
for users to exchange messages on various topics in public newsgroups.
Value added reseller (VAR) Customizes or adds features to a ven-
dor’s software or equipment and resells the enhanced product. 
Value driver Any activity that enhances the value of a product or 
service to consumers, thereby creating value for the company. 
Advanced IT, reliability, and brand reputation are examples. 
Variants Modified versions of an existing malware.
Vector Specific method that malware uses to propagate, or spread, 
to other machines or devices.
Vertical exchanges Sites where many buyers and sellers conduct busi-
ness transactions that serve only one industry along the entire supply 
chain.


1-800-Flowers, 360
A
AAA, 39, 284, 378
AACSB (Association to Advance Collegiate 
Schools of Business), 136–137
Accelerating Medicines Partnership, 89
Accenture, 301, 403, 454, 456, 457
Adaptive Insights, 378
Adobe, 142, 145
ADP Corporation, 376
Adsa, 128
Adweek, 313
Afl ac, 267
Afl ac Cancer Center and Blood Disorders Service 
of Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta, 267
Agistix, 308–309
Airbus, 335
Alcatel-Lucent, 136
Ally Bank, 273–275
Amazon:
IT advancements at, 271–272
recommendation engines used by, 182, 209, 213
use of digital business model by, 12
Amazon Web Services (AWS), 64
AMC (U.S. Army Materiel Command), 354
American Apparel, 242
American Express:
electronic records management at, 105
on Facebook, 229
indirect procurement at, 279
American Marketing Association, 256
Andersen Consulting, 350
Anonymous (hacktivist group), 150
Apple:
bargaining power of, 22
business strategy of, 25–26
and CarPlay, 458–459
and customer relationship management, 360
data center of, 54
data collection by, 450
digital technology released by, 13
and Ducati, 301
geospatial data tracking by, 385
near-fi eld communication technology used by, 119
recommendation engines used by, 213
and Siri, 166
in textbook market, 294
Appthority, 449
Aqumin, 376
Argo Corporation, 96
Arthur Andersen, 170
Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of 
Business (AACSB), 136–137
AT&T:
extranets used by, 130
NFC used by, 27
AutoTrader, 16
Avanade, 350
Avon, 358, 364–365
B
BAE Systems, 311–312, 416
Banamex, 289
Bank of America, 222–223
Bernie Madoff Investment Securities LLC, 316
Bitcoin, 197
Bitly, 9
Blogger Platform, 247
Bloomberg, 376
Boeing Co.:
and leap engines, 335
smartphone built by, 146–147
Boers & Co Fine Metalworking, 347
Bolsa de Comercio de Santiago, 51
Booz Allen, 403
Box, 257, 453
BP, 395
Breier Neidle Patrone Associates, 416
Bridgestone, 378
Burger King, 3, 4
C
California Grown, 353
California Highway Patrol (CHP), 439
California Pizza Kitchen, 52
Canadian Tire, 449
Capital One, 92
CareerBuilder, 444
CareFX, 383–384
CarMax, 101–102
Caterpillar, Inc., 128
Center for International Business Education and 
Research (Duke University), 406
Center for Project Management, 420
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA):
cyberattacks toward, 150
data published by, 20
Centre for Therapeutic Target Validation 
(CTTV), 89
Chegg.com, 293–294
Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE), 376
Cisco Systems, 113, 261, 326
Citibank, 223–224
Citizen National Bank, 361
CLG (Corporate Leaders Group on Climate 
Change), 131
Climate Group, 133
Cloud Standards Customer Council, 57
CNN, 213
Coca-Cola:
data management at, 71–75
data visualization used by, 378
mobile commerce by, 279
Combined Systems, Inc., 150
Comcast, 260–261
Common Short Code Association (CSCA), 290
Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA), 399
Communication Between Humans and Interactive 
Media Lab, 454
Consumer Watchdog, 451
Cornell University, 451–452
Corporate Leaders Group on Climate Change 
(CLG), 131
CourseSmart, 294
Cowen’s Group, 143
CSCA (Common Short Code Association), 290
CTTV (Centre for Therapeutic Target Validation), 89
Cupid Media, 145
D
D33Ds Company (hacker group), 155
DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency), 97–98
The Data Warehouse Institute (TDWI), 99, 100
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
(DARPA), 97–98
Delange, 27
Delicious.com, 256
Dell, 17, 46, 269
Dell Boomi, 46
Dell Computer, 277
Deloitte Consulting:
and data visualization, 369–371
and FinCEN, 108
on supply chains, 356, 357
Diigo, 256–257
Dillard’s Inc., 350
Dogpile.com, 187
DOJ (U.S. Department of Justice), 324
Dow Chemical, 25
Dragonfl y, 353
Dropbox, 257
Ducati, 299–302
Duke University, 406
E
eBay:
data breach at, 145
data discovery with, 374
move to cloud technology by, 10
outsourcing by, 404–405
as sell-side marketplace, 277
EBI (European Bioinformatics Institute), 89
EEOC (Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission), 444
Employease.com, 279
Enron, 316
Epicor, 347
Epinions, 236
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
(EEOC), 444
ESPN, 283
European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI), 89
Evernote:
brainstorming on, 129
data breach at, 145
EVO-ERP, 340
ExactTarget, 31
Exxon Mobil, 314
F
Facebook:
Ally Bank on, 274
American Express on, 229
and APIs, 229
business use of, 222
Citibank on, 223
and cybersecurity, 164
data-driven marketing through, 314
data science at, 9
domination of social networking by, 239–241
Organization Index
  O-1  

O-2    Organization Index
Facebook (Continued)
Hadoop used by, 95
how to get un-friended on, 233
and plug-ins, 229
plug-ins for, 230
privacy violations by, 451
recommendation engines used by, 213
social graphs on, 236
as social networking service, 231
use of digital business model by, 11
as virtual community, 238–239
FASB (Financial Accounting Standards Board), 315
Fashioning Change, 213
Fast Company, 213
FCC, see Federal Communications Commission
FDA (Food and Drug Administration), 353
Federal Communications Commission (FCC):
on net neutrality, 117
and Wi-Fi snooping, 450
Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
(FFIEC), 446
Federal Trade Commission (FTC):
on cybersecurity regulations, 157
and Facebook privacy-violation fi nes, 451
fi nes for data breaches from, 170
and privacy, 445
and social media guidelines, 446
Ferrari, 335
FFIEC (Federal Financial Institutions Examination 
Council), 446
Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB), 315
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network 
(FinCEN), 108
FinCEN (Financial Crimes Enforcement 
Network), 108
First Choice Ski, 305–306
First Wind, 95
Flickr, 231
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 353
Food Network, 283
Ford Motor Company:
collaboration technology at, 127
global trends at, 137
and hyperscale computing, 456
Forrester, 41, 341
Foursquare, 267, 285, 385, 450
FoxMeyer Drugs, 350
Frost and Sullivan, 192
FTC, see Federal Trade Commission
G
Gain Capital, 376
Gartner:
as cloud consultant, 403
on competitive advantage, 20
on costs of Target data breach, 143
on CRM market, 360
on data analytics market, 372
on enterprise architecture, 43
on 3D printing technology, 332, 452
General Electric (GE):
crowdsourcing used by, 456
data analytics at, 94
General Motors (GM), 273
data visualization by, 384
geospatial data used by, 368
and hyperscale computing, 456
Genpact, 404
Glassdorr data, 8–9
GlaxoSmithKline, 89
Global Cyber Security Capacity Centre, 443
Global Payments, Inc., 141
GM, see General Motors
Gmail, 190
Goldman Sachs, 332, 334
Goodreads, 213
Google:
as crawler search engine, 187
and customer surveys, 313
and data storage, 190–191
digital technology released by, 13
ethical issues faced by, 440, 450–451
focus management at, 453
quality scores determined by, 203–204
search features of, 195
semantic search features of, 208, 209
social networking by, 241
H
Harris Corp., 430, 431
Hartford Hospital, 383–384
Healthcare Information and Management Systems 
Society (HIMSS), 68
Hershey Food Corp., 349
Hertz, 108
HIMSS (Healthcare Information and Management 
Systems Society), 68
Home Depot, 314
HP, 403
HSBC, 418
I
I2O (Information Innovation Offi ce), 97
IAOP (International Association of Outsourcing 
Professionals), 406–407
IBM, 285, 376, 403
DMBSs offered by, 79
Second Life used by, 242
and social media services, 341
SPSS Analytic Catalyst of, 368
IEA (International Energy Agency), 
131–132
IKEA, 285
Infi nity Insurance, 96–97
Infor, 340, 347
Information Innovation Offi ce (I2O), 97
Information Security Forum, 156
InnoCentive, 25
Instagram, 450, 453
Intel, 390–392
Intel Security, 34–37
International Association of Outsourcing 
Professionals (IAOP), 406–407
International Energy Agency (IEA), 131–132
IT Governance Institute, 157
J
JDA Software Group, 350
JD Edwards, 340
JetBlue, 401
Jive, 345
Joint Munitions Command (JMC), 354
JPMorgan Chase, 142, 376
K
Kickstarter, 425, 455
L
Lehman Brothers, 316
Liberty Wines, 61
Linden Research, 242
LinkedIn, 443–444
cloud services at, 404
data science at, 9
lax security at, 177–178
as professional networking site, 239
recommendation engines used by, 213
Living Social, 145
Looksmart.com, 187
L’Oreal, 242
LulzSec, 150
M
McAfee, 34
McCain Foods, 2–6
McDonald’s, 96
McKinsey, 332, 334, 407
McKinsey Global Institute (MGI), 87
Macy’s, 265–268, 314, 385
Magic Software, 380
Mercedes-Benz, 243
Merita Bank, 289
MGI (McKinsey Global Institute), 87
MHI, 356, 357
Michaels Stores, 145
Microsoft:
bargaining power of, 22
as CRM vendor, 358
digital technology released by, 13
DMBSs offered by, 79, 80
and enterprise resource planning, 346
recommendation engines used by, 213
security vulnerabilities at, 154–155
service packs offered by, 164
and Yammer/SharePoint, 341–343
MicroStrategy, 101, 386
Mobatech, 283
N
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA):
carbon monitoring by, 135
on greenhouse gases, 131–132
National Basketball Association (NBA), 12, 456
National Climatic Data Center, 54
National Highway Traffi c Safety Administration 
(NHTSA), 136
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST), 56
National Security Agency, see U.S. National 
Security Agency (NSA)
NBA (National Basketball Association), 12, 456
NBC News:
data visualization used by, 378
recommendation engines used by, 213
NBC Universal, 285
Nestlé Nespresso S. A., 404
Netfl ix:
recommendation engines used by, 182, 210, 213
and resilience, 456
NIH (U.S. National Institutes of Health), 89
Nike, Inc.:
geospatial data used by, 368
search technology at, 182–186
Nikon, 378
NIST (National Institute of Standards and 
Technology), 56
NSA, see U.S. National Security Agency
O
Offi ce Depot, 311
1-800-Flowers, 360

Organization Index     O-3  
Oracle:
BPM software by, 19
as CRM vendor, 358
and data visualization, 374
DMBSs offered by, 79
and enterprise resource planning, 340, 346
and social media services, 341
social network of, 345
Overstock.com, 277
Owl Canyon, 353
Oxford Internet Institute, 443
Oxford University, 89
P
P. F. Chang’s China Bistro, 31
Pandora, 213
PayScale, 347
Pei Wei Asian Diner, 31
PepsiCo, 369–372
Peters Ice Cream, 347
Pink Floyd, 122
Pirelli, 456
Presto, 380
Pricewaterhouse Coopers, 149
Procter & Gamble (P&G), 127–128
Programmable Web, 250
Q
Quicken Loans, Inc., 99
R
Rackspace, 64
Red Robin Gourmet Burgers, Inc., 342–344
Reuters, 213
RichRelevance, 217
Roambi, 377
Rolling Stone, 213
Royal Bank of Scotland, 289
S
Safeway, 369–372
Sage, 340, 346
Salesforce.com:
Chatter add-on, 345
as CRM vendor, 358
as SaaS vendor, 64
sales automation software by, 315
and social media services, 341
Samsung, 119, 213
SAP:
and Avon, 365
as CRM vendor, 358
and data visualization, 374, 386
and enterprise resource planning, 340, 350
SAS, 374
ScanSource, 350
Schurman Fine Papers, 311
SEC, see U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
Second Life, 242–243
Selinko, 27
Senate Banking Committee, 168
SHRM (Society for Human Resource 
Management), 443
Siemens:
data visualization used by, 378
3D printing at, 335
Siri, Inc., 166
Smart Grid Consumer Collaborative (SGCC), 123
SnapChat, 446–448
Society for Human Resource Management 
(SHRM), 443
Sony, 111–113
Southwest Airlines, 401
Spotify, 121–122
Standard Chartered, 418
Stanford University, 454
Starbucks, 287, 368
Starwood Hotels, 242
Stitch Fix, 213
Stratasys Ltd., 335
Surgery Center of Baltimore, 105
SwellPath, 184–185
T
Target, 266, 270
big data analytics by, 448–449
data breach at, 142–145
Target Discovery Institute, 89
Technorati.com, 245, 247
Teradata, 32, 79
Ticketmaster Spain, 119
Time Inc., 213
Tin Eye, 197
Total Produce, 119–120
Toyota, 310
data visualization used by, 378
and hyperscale computing, 456
TradeCard, 275
Trader Joe’s, 353
Travelocity, 92
Tripadvisor, 213
TUI Travel, 305
Tumblr, 247, 250
Twitter:
Ally Bank on, 274
and cybersecurity, 164
data collection by, 450
mashups with, 252
as microblogging SNS, 248–250
as online community, 236
use of digital business model by, 11
Zappos on, 260
U
Uber, 55
Ubisoft, 145
Unilever:
database used by, 128
and hyperscale computing, 456
social platform of, 64
United Airlines, Inc., 259–260
United Nations:
on climate change, 131
Guiding Principles on Business and Human 
Rights, 440
U.S. Army Materiel Command (AMC), 354
U.S. Census Bureau, 430–432
U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 151
U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ), 324
U.S. Department of State, 156
U.S. Department of Transportation, 459
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 
440–441
U.S. military, use of data mining by, 97–98
U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH), 89
U.S. National Security Agency (NSA), 54, 190, 443
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC):
fi nes for data breaches from, 170
and Bernie Madoff, 166, 168
University of Cincinnati, 105
University of Michigan, 459
V
Vanderbilt University Medical Center (VUMC), 
67–68
VenueGen.com, 255
Verizon, 368
VUMC (Vanderbilt University Medical Center), 
67–68
W
Wachovia, 418
Walgreens, 456
Walmart:
bargaining power of, 22
data and text mining used by, 96
geospatial data used by, 368
and Procter & Gamble, 127–128
Warner Music, 120
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, 89
WhatsApp, 55
Wikipedia, 257
and crowdsourcing, 456
as online community, 236
The Wild Feathers, 120
Wine.com, 217–218
WordPress, 247
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), 205
Y
Yahoo.com:
attacked by Android malware, 164
as hybrid search engine, 187
Yellow Pages, 286
YouTube:
Ally Bank on, 274
and Comcast, 260–261
as online community, 236
recommendation engines used by, 213
as sharing site, 231, 232
upload rates of, 134
usage of, 190
Z
Zappos, 260
Zepp Labs, 15
Zipcar, 14
Zumba, 453


A
Aken, Scott, 150
All, Ann, 360
Ashton, Kevin, 7
B
Barnett, Charles J., 51
Bellegarde, Penelope, 306
Berners-Lee, Tim, 205, 226
Bernoff, Josh, 234, 235, 245
Bezos, Jeffrey, 12, 271
Bippert, Doug, 75
Birol, Faith, 131
Broussard, Clay, 370
Brown, Christian, 210
C
Carroll, Dave, 259–260
Cerf, Vinton, 119
Choi, Grace, 336
Clapper, James, 152
Coburn, Tom, 430
Collins, Susan, 430
Connelly, Sheryl, 137
Curtis, Kirsten, 370
D
Davenport, Thomas, 9
Dolan, Vince, 120
Drucker, Peter, 360
E
Eliason, Frank, 261
F
Faludi, Jeremy, 452
Fortin, Cam, 217
G
Goldman, Jonathan, 9
Gretzky, Wayne, 25, 26
Grossman, Jeremiah, 178
Gutierrez, Carlos M., 430, 431
H
Hammerbacher, Jeff, 9
Harte, Michael, 399
Hayward, Tony, 395
Heathfi eld, Susan, 239
Hoffman, Reid, 9
Hsieh, Tony, 260
I
Ingham, Francis, 177
Iñigo de la Serna, 124
J
Jackson, Maggie, 453
Jobs, Steve, 25, 26, 209
Johnson, Shawn, 186
Jung, Andrea, 364
K
Kandel, Eric, 453–454
Kaplan, Robert, 400
Kazanjy, Pete, 87
Kroes, Neelie, 114
L
Laping, Chris, 344
Li, Charlene, 234, 235, 245
Lieberthal, Kenneth G., 151
Lim, Jenn, 260
Lindberg, Michael, 383–384
Loveland, Gary, 149
M
McClennon, Mark, 64
McConnell, Mike, 150
McCoy, Sheri, 365
Madoff, Bernard, 166–168, 320
Madrigal, Alexis, 210
Mark, Gloria, 453
Martin, Roger L., 390
Mason, Hilary, 9
May-Treanor, Misty, 185–186
Merzenich, Michael, 454
Mitnick, Kevin, 161
Mollohan, Alan, 431
N
Nass, Clifford, 454
Noble, Robert, 88
Norton, David, 400
O
Obama, Barack, 248, 255
Oksanen, M., 97
Olander, Stefan, 186
Ollman, Gunter, 179
Owyang, Jeremiah, 249
P
Palomäki, P., 97
Patil, D. J., 9
Porter, Michael, 21, 23
R
Raimondi, Marc, 431
Reardon, Martine, 267
Rigglesworth, Simon, 305, 306
Rogers, Mike, 150–151
Romney, Mitt, 248
Ryan, Dan, 451
S
Schumpeter, Joseph, 334
Schwanhausser, Mark, 223
Sezer, Esat, 73, 74
Silei, Christiano, 301
Solis, Brian, 249
Spataro, Jared, 341
Steinhafel, Greg, 143, 144
Stone, David, 374
Sumlin, Carrie, 274
Symonds, Michelle, 420
T
Thornton, Janet, 89
Tomlinson, Ray, 118
V
Vallance, Patrick, 89
W
Warburton, Jon, 311–312
Wheeler, Tom, 117
Y
Yogurtcu, Tendu, 87
Z
Zuckerberg, Mark, 229, 239–241, 442–443, 451
Name Index
  N-1  


2D tags, 288
3D bioprinting, 334–335
3D printing, 332–337
ethical concerns with, 451–452
and supply chain, 357
3G networks, 118, 119
4G networks, 114, 118, 119
5G networks, 114
802.11 standard, 125–126
2013 U.S. State of Cybercrime Survey, 149
2014 Global State of Information Security 
Survey, 149
A
AaaS (applications as a service), 403
Abadie, Cecilia, 439–440
Acceptable use policies (AUPs), 158–159
Access, to data, 77
Access control:
in cybersecurity, 153
with dashboards, 381
in enterprise search, 192
in IT security management, 172
Accountability, as recordkeeping principle, 104
Accounting, as business process, 17
Accounting cycle fraud, 167
Accounting principles (COBIT), 157
Accounting software packages, 316
Accounting systems, 304, 315–323
Accounts payable (AP) function, 404–405
Accuracy, data, 303
ACID test, 304
Active data warehouses (ADWs), 91–92
ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act), 324, 444
Adaptive Discovery software, 378
Additive manufacturing, 332
ADEA (Age Discrimination in Employment Act), 
324, 444
Ad hoc reports, 51
Administrative controls, in IT security 
management, 172
Advanced persistent threat (APT), 149, 161–162
Advanced scouting systems, 12
Advanced search, 195
Advance Research Projects Agency network 
(ARPAnet), 118–119
Advertising dashboards, 381
ADWs (active data warehouses), 91–92
Aerospace industry, 335
Afghanistan, 97–98
Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA), 
324, 444
Aggregation, data, 375
Agility, 19, 62–65
Agriculture, 14
Airbus A320 aircraft, 335
Airline industry:
balanced scorecard in, 401–402
use of data warehouses by, 93
AJAX (asynchronous JavaScript and XML), 228
Alliance strategy, 23
AlphaVision, 376
Amazon Mechanical Turk, 25
American Idol, 290
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), 324, 444
Amsterdam, Netherlands, 27
Analytics:
and business intelligence, 101–102
CarMax’s use of, 101–102
in Google Maps API, 139
preparing data for, 90–92
supply chain, 357
tracking customers with, 306
Analytical data, 85
Android, 450
botnets on, 164
launch of, 13
mobile games on, 282
security apps on, 165
Angry Birds, 282
Anomaly detections, 169
Anti-money-laundering (AML) 
guidelines, 418
Antivirus (AV) software, 161, 163
AP (accounts payable) function, 404–405
APIs, see Application program interfaces
API value chain, 122
Apps:
cybersecurity of, 163–166
latency-sensitive, 117
malicious, 165
malware on, 164
for mobile entertainment, 283
mobile games as, 282
Apple Store, 450
Application architecture, 44
Application controls, 171
Application program interfaces (APIs):
for dashboards, 380
and Facebook, 229
and mashups, 251
as networks, 121–123
and Web development, 227
Applications as a service (AaaS), 403
Applications portfolios, 397
App Reputation Report, 449
APT (advanced persistent threat), 149, 161–162
Arab Spring, 150, 248
ARPAnet (Advance Research Projects Agency 
network), 118–119
“As a service” (XaaS) models, 62, 65, 403
Assets:
in cyber risk management, 152
safeguarding of, 321
Assurance of Learning Requirements, 136–137
Asynchronous JavaScript and XML (AJAX), 228
Atomicity, 304
Attack surface, 149
Attack vectors:
created by mobile devices, apps, and clouds, 
165–166
in cyber risk management, 154
Auctions, in e-commerce, 277
Audits:
as control activity, 322
of control systems, 173
in cybersecurity, 153
Augmented reality (AR):
in mobile commerce, 285
in retail strategies, 268
AUPs (acceptable use policies), 158–159
Authentication, 153, 172
Authorization, control access, 172
Automated APIs, 121
Automobile industry:
potential for digital development in, 14
3D printing in, 335
and vehicle-to-vehicle communications, 459
Availability:
in cyber risk management, 154
as recordkeeping principle, 104
Avatars, 242
AV (antivirus) software, 161, 163
Awareness, in IT security management, 170
AWS (Amazon Web Services), 64
B
B2B, see Business to business
B2C (business to consumer), 271–277
Backdoors, 160
Backlinks, 199, 200
Back-offi ce operations, 355
Backstage Pass Program, 266
Balanced scorecard (BSC), 400–403
defi ned, 390
uses of, 392
Bandwidth:
broad, 227
for data networks, 114
defi ned, 118
Banking (banking sector):
international, 275
mobile, 288–290
multi-currency, 275
online, 272–275
and social networking, 222–224
use of data warehouses by, 93
Bankruptcy Act, 324
Bank Secrecy Act IT Modernization 
program, 108
Bank Transfer Day, 222
Barcodes, 265
Bargaining power, 22
Barriers to content, 201
Barriers to entry, 22
Baseline, 427
Batch processing, 50
Behavioral feasibility, 433
Benefi ts administration, 326–327
Best of the Web, 187
BI, see Business intelligence
BIA (business impact analysis), 174
Big bang approach, 365
Big data:
Coca-Cola’s approach to, 74–75
defi ned, 2
in digital business, 8
and genomics, 88–89
handled by transportation management 
systems, 308
as a service, 65
Big data analytics:
data management, 86–89, 93–96
invasiveness of, 448–449
Bill payments, mobile, 288
Bing, 187, 208
Biometric controls, 172
Subject Index
  S-1  

S-2    Subject Index
CIA triad, 153
CIM (computer-integrated manufacturing), 
311–312
CIO (chief information offi cer), 394, 398–399
Ciphertext, 153
Circuit switching, 116
Cisco Visual Networking Index (VNI), 123
CISO (chief information security offi cer), 398
Civil rights, 445
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 324
Civil Rights Act of 1966, 324
Clear text, 153
Click-and-mortar organizations, 276
Click-through rates (CTRs), 194
for paid search advertising, 204
in quality scores, 203–204
and ranking factors, 199
and relevance scores, 200
Climate change, 130–133
Climate change mitigation, 135
Cloaked pages, 202
Cloning, 290
Cloud computing:
accounting software as, 316
and brainstorming, 129
and business intelligence, 101
cybersecurity of, 149, 163–166
in digital business, 6–7
and enterprise systems, 339
for human resource information systems, 325
in information management, 56–59
as IT infrastructures, 53
in transportation management systems, 308–309
vulnerability of, 163–164
Cloud computing stack, 62–63
Cloud infrastructure, 58–59
Cloud services:
in information management, 62–65
selection of, 56–58
strategy for, 403
Cloud storage service, 257
Cloud strategy, 403–404
Cloud technology:
carbon footprint of, 135
in social-mobile-cloud model, 9–10
Cluetrain Manifesto, 234
Clustered search, 208
CLV, see Customer lifetime value
CMO (chief marketing offi cer), 398
CNNMoney, 347
COBIT (Control Objectives for Information and 
Related Technology), 157
CoCA (cost of customer acquisition), 204
Cognitive overload, 453
Cognitive skills, Internet’s effect on, 454
COIT (consumerization of information 
technology), 164
Cold start, and recommendation engines, 211–212
Collaboration:
and business intelligence, 342–343
as business network function, 115
and enterprise social platforms, 341
for networks, 127–130
virtual, 127–128
Yammer and, 342–343
Collaborative fi ltering, 210–211
Collection analysis module (crawler search 
engines), 188
Command and control (C&C) channel, 164
Commodities, 20
Common values, as element of social media, 233
Communication:
as business network function, 115
IT steering committee and, 396
Business intelligence (BI):
and collaboration, 342–343
and data management, 99–102
defi ned, 76
Business models:
defi ned, 6
for online retailing, 276
and Web development, 227
Business networks, 115–116
Business objects, 374
Business planning, online, 276
Business processes:
characteristics of, 18
components of, 17
cost of ineffi cient, 41
defi ned, 15
and enterprise resource planning, 351
redesign of, 340
Business process management (BPM), 15–19
Business process measures 
(balanced scorecard), 401
Business process reengineering (BPR), 18
Business records, 102, 103
Business strategy:
and business intelligence, 100–101
and IT strategy, 395, 397–399
and outsourcing, 406
Business to business (B2B):
defi ned, 3
e-commerce, 277–279
McCain Foods as, 3
Business to consumer (B2C), 271–277
Business value, of data and text mining, 96–97
Business value drivers, 393
BYOA (bring your own apps), 164
BYOD (bring your own device), 148–149
C
CAD (computer-assisted design), 452
California, 136
CAM (computer-assisted manufacturing), 452
Capital budgeting, 322
Carbon cycle, 132
Carbon emissions, 131, 133–135
Carbon footprints, 135–136
CarPlay, 458–459
Cascade hybid recommendation engines, 212
Cascading style sheets (CSS), 228
Casinos, 13
Categorizing:
as element of social media, 233
in text mining, 98
CBA (Commonwealth Bank of Australia), 399
CBOE (Chicago Board Options Exchange), 376
C & C (command and control) channel, 164
CDC (change data capture), 90
Centralized databases:
architecture of, 80
at Coca-Cola, 72
CEO (chief executive offi cer), 395, 398
CFO (chief fi nancial offi cer), 398
Change data capture (CDC), 90
Channel confl ict, 275–276
Channel hopping, 269
Chatter, 345
Chief executive offi cer (CEO), 395, 398
Chief fi nancial offi cer (CFO), 398
Chief information offi cer (CIO), 394, 398–399
Chief information security offi cer (CISO), 398
Chief marketing offi cer (CMO), 398
Chief risk offi cer (CRO), 398
Chief technology offi cers (CTOs), 29
CHP (California Highway Patrol), 439
Biometrics:
in cybersecurity, 153
mobile, 166
voice, 166
Bioprinting, 451–452
Biotechnology, 88–89
Birst, 374
Black Book model, 75
Black hat SEO tactics, 201–202
BlackPOS, 142–144
Black smartphone, 146–147
Blogs:
as online community, 236
social networking, 245–250
as Web 2.0 applications, 231
Bloggers, 245–246
Blogosphere, 245
Bluetooth technology:
defi ned, 125
and GPS, 120
Boeing 737 aircraft, 335
Bots, 187
Bot herders, 162
Botnet(s):
on android phones, 164
in cybersecurity, 153, 162
Bot network, 153
Bounce rate, 199, 200
BPM (business process management), 15–19
BPR (business process reengineering), 18
Brainstorming apps, 129
Brand advocates, 252
Branded search queries, 185
Breach of privacy, 442
Breakeven analysis, 433
Bribery, 167
Bring your own apps (BYOA), 164
Bring your own device (BYOD), 148–149, 
164–165
Broadband:
fi xed-line, 118
at home, 226
mobile, 118
and Web development, 227
Browse feature (of Spotify), 121
BSC, see Balanced scorecard
Budgeting, 322
Buffer stock, 309
Build-outs, 124–125
Business, digital, see Digital business
Business analytics, 96
Business architecture, 44
Business case, 417, 421, 422
Business continuity:
electronic record management systems for, 104
with virtualization, 61
Business continuity plan, 173
Business-driven development approach, 100
Business functions, 297–327
accounting and fi nance systems, 315–323
computer-integrated manufacturing, 311–312
at Ducati, 299–302
ethical issues with, 327
human resource systems, 323–327
inventory control systems, 309–310
logistics management, 309
manufacturing and production systems, 307
manufacturing execution systems, 311
POM technologies, 310–311
quality control systems, 310
sales and marketing systems, 312–315
solving challenges with, 302–306
transportation management systems, 307–309
Business impact analysis (BIA), 174

Subject Index     S-3  
at McCain Foods, 5
monitoring services reporting to, 253
Data:
accuracy of, 303
consistency of, 78
disclosure of, 317
fl ow of, 47–49
from functional systems, 298
geospatial, 368
human analysis of, 88
in information systems, 47
integrated, 108
integrity of, 304
ownership of, 83–84
point-of-sale, 369
quality of, 40, 50, 80, 100
security of, 303
selection of appropriate, 100
sparsity of, 212
supply chains and fl ow of, 355
unstructured, 8, 192
use of, 46
validity of information from, 88
virtualization of, 56
volatility of, 75, 78
Data aggregation, 375
Data analytics:
defi ned, 2
at Financial Crimes Enforcement 
Network, 108
McCain Foods’ use of, 4–5
Data architecture, 44
Data as a service (DaaS), 64
Database(s):
data warehouses vs., 90
defi ned, 75
in information systems, 47
Database management systems 
(DBMSs), 75–86
Data centers:
cloud computing vs., 58
at Google, 190
in information management, 53–56
Data chaos, 55
Data disclosure, 317
Data discovery, 372, 374
Data-driven marketing, 314
Data entity, 85
Data errors, 86
Data governance:
defi ned, 36
in health-care industry, 67–68
in information management, 45–47
at Intel Security, 34–37
weak or nonexistent, 46
Data latency, 77
Data life cycle, 84–85
Data management, 70–105
big data analytics, 86–89, 93–96
and business intelligence, 99–102
at Coca-Cola, 71–75
data and text mining, 96–99
database management systems, 75–86
data warehouses, 89–93
with electronic records management, 102–105
in health-care industry, 67–68
Data marts:
data warehouses vs., 90
defi ned, 76
Data mining:
for customer relationship management, 360
data management, 96–98
defi ned, 97
Data networks, 113–121
Cost leadership strategy, 23
Cost of customer acquisition (CoCA), 204
Covert resistance, 433
Crawlers, 187
Crawler control module, 188
Crawler search engines, 187–189
Creative destroyer, 334
Credit, as type of crowdfunding, 237
Credit cards:
cybersecurity for, 157–158
mobile payments with, 287
Credit card industry, 93
Critical infrastructure, 147–148
Critical path, 429
Critical success factors (CSFs), 24
Critical tasks, 429
CRM (customer relationship management), 338, 
358–362
CRO (chief risk offi cer), 398
Cross-functional business processes, 17, 303
Cross-selling, 35
Crowdfunding, 237–238
defi ned, 425
and milestones, 425, 426
Crowdsourcing, 237, 455–456
CrownWorx 3D printer, 335
CSFs (critical success factors), 24
CSS (cascading style sheets), 228
C-suite, 398
CTOs (chief technology offi cers), 29
CTRs, see Click-through rates
Culture:
as element of social media, 233
and IT strategy, 398
Customers:
acquisition and retention of, 359–360
bargaining power of, 22
and supply chain, 356
Customer-centric business model, 34, 360
Customer complaints, 259–261
Customer data mashups, 379
Customer experience (CX), 6, 359
Customer lifetime value (CLV):
and customer relationship management, 359
defi ned, 337
Customer lock-in strategy, 23
Customer loyalty, 340
Customer measures (balanced scorecard), 401
Customer orientation strategy, 23
Customer relationship management (CRM), 338, 
358–362
CX (customer experience), 6, 359
Cyberattacks, on Google, 190
Cyber risk management, 152–163
Cybersecurity, 141–174
BlackPOS malware, 142–144
cyber risk management in, 152–163
cyberthreats, 144–152
fraud defense in, 166–169
and internal control, 169–174
for mobiles, apps, and clouds, 163–166
objectives of, 151
Cyberthreats:
in cybersecurity, 144–152
defi ned, 144
Cycle time, 16
D
DaaS (data as a service), 64
Daily Beast, 451
Damage control, 170
Dashboards, 380–384
on casino fl oors, 13
and IT strategy, 398
synchronous, 255
on the Web, 229–231
Communication technologies, 127–130
Community(-ies):
as element of social media, 233
online, 235–236
for social networking, 235–244
virtual, 235, 238–239
Competitive advantage:
customer relationship management as, 360
in digital business, 19–25
in mobile commerce, 280–282
Competitive forces model, 21–24
Compliance:
and accounting functions, 315–316
electronic record management systems for, 
104–105
enhanced, with information management, 42
in HR systems, 324
in IT security management, 170
as recordkeeping principle, 104
with XBRL tagging, 318
Compound hybid recommendation engines, 212
Computer-assisted design (CAD), 452
Computer-assisted manufacturing (CAM), 452
Computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM), 
311–312
Computer systems failures, 160
Concept search, 208
Confi dentiality:
and cyber risk management, 154
and information theft, 150
Confl ict of interest, 167
Connected Generation, 223
Connectedness:
of mobile networks, 127
of society, 136, 137
Connections, as element of social media, 233
Consistency, of data, 78, 304
Consumerization of information technology 
(COIT), 164
Contaminated food, 353
Content, 234, 257
Content-based fi ltering, 209–210
Content control, 232
Content creators, 225
Contracts:
and data warehouses, 92
with vendors, 408
Contract hackers, 155
Control Objectives for Information and Related 
Technology (COBIT), 157
Conversation(s):
as element of social media, 233
markets as, 234
tools for, 255–256
Core business processes, 337
Corporate governance, 168–169
Corporate procurement, 278
Corporate purchasing, 278
Corporate social media discrimination, 444
Corporation(s):
attacked by advanced persistent threats, 161–162
legal rights of, 324
Correction (IT security management), 170
Costs:
and innovation, 357
project, 419
sunk, 430
Cost–benefi t analysis, 173–174
Cost–benefi t principle, 157
Cost control, 323
Cost estimations, 426

S-4    Subject Index
Employment fraud, 318
Empowered price sensitivity, 269
Encryption, 153
Energy:
required by virtual machines, 61
usage of, by Google, 190–191
and wind power, 95
Enforcement procedures (cybersecurity), 159
Engine parts, 3D printing for creating, 335
Enterprise 2.0, 255
Enterprise application integration (EAI), 346
Enterprise apps, 456
Enterprise architecture (EA):
design of, 40
for information management, 42–45
Enterprise clouds, 58
Enterprise data, 85
Enterprise data management, 71–74
Enterprise data mashups, 377–380
Enterprise data warehouses (EDWs), 74, 89–93
Enterprise Graph, 343
Enterprise mashups, 251
Enterprise resource planning (ERP), 338, 346–352
customer relationship management vs., 359
initial failures with, 349–350
selection of, 348–349
success factors with, 350–352
Enterprise risk management (ERM):
and cloud strategy, 403, 404
for IT governance, 157
Enterprise search, 191–192
Enterprise social (term), 341
Enterprise social platforms, 341–345
Enterprise systems, 331–362
customer relationship management systems, 
358–362
defi ned, 338
enterprise resource planning systems, 346–352
implementation of, 337–341
social platforms for, 341–345
supply chain management systems, 352–358
for 3D printing, 332–337
Enterprise technology, trends in, 25–27
Entry barriers strategy, 23
Environmental hazards, 160
EOQ (economic order quantity) model, 309
E-procurement, 278
Equal Employment Opportunity Act, 324
Equal Pay Act of 1963, 324
Equipment independence, of social media, 234
Equity, as type of crowdfunding, 237
E-records, 103
ERM, see Electronic records management; 
Enterprise risk management
ERP, see Enterprise resource planning
ERP Vendor Shootout, 348
Error correction, 82–83
E-sourcing, 277–278
E-textbook readers, 293
Ethical issue(s), 438–454
with business functions, 327
focus management, 453–454
of Google Glass, 439–442
with networks, 136–137
privacy as, 244, 442–444
and responsible conduct, 448–453
in search engine optimization, 201–202
and social media guidelines, 446–448
social recruitment, 443–446
ETL (extract, transform, and load), 90
Eventual consistency, 78
Exabyte (EB), 123
Exception reports, 50–51
Exchanges, 278–279
Direct conversion, 434
Directories, mobile, 286
Direct procurement, 278
Direct-to-consumer (DTC) sales, 182
Dirty data:
costs of, 81–83
at Intel Security, 34–37
Disaster recovery, 104
Disclosure statements, 446
Disconnect anxiety, 136
Discrimination:
and civil rights, 445
corporate social media, 444
defi ned, 444
and hiring practices, 445
Discussion groups, 256
Disposition, as recordkeeping principle, 104
Disruptive innovation, 293
Distracted driving, 136
Distraction, digital, 453–454
Distributed database systems, 80–81
Distributed denial-of-service (DDoS), 147, 148
Document object model (DOM), 228
Donations, as type of crowdfunding, 237
Do-not-carry rules, 150–151
Download rates, 119
Driving, while distracted, 136
Drug development, 88–89
Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1990, 327
DTC (direct-to-consumer) sales, 182
Ducati Communication System, 301
Dump Memory Grabber, 142
Durability, of data, 304
Dwell time, 199–201
E
E. coli, 353
EA, see Enterprise architecture
EAI (enterprise application integration), 346
Early Web, social Web vs., 226
EB (exabyte), 123
E-books, 272
E-commerce, 271–279
business to business, 277–279
business to consumer, 271–277
issues in, 275–276
by Nike, 184
in omni-channel retailing, 269–270
recommendation engines used by, 209
use of data warehouses by, 93
E-commerce dashboards, 381
Economic feasibility, 433
Economic order quantity (EOQ) model, 309
Edge services, 403
EDWs (enterprise data warehouses), 74, 89–93
EFT (electronic funds transfer), 275, 355
EHRs (electronic health records), 67–68
EIS (executive information system), 40
Electronic data interchange (EDI), 128
Electronic funds transfer (EFT), 275, 355
Electronic health records (EHRs), 67–68
Electronic records, 103
Electronic records management (ERM), 102–105
Electronic wallet (e-wallet), 271
E-mail:
development of, 225
malware delivered by, 160
origin of, 118
Embedded objects, 14
Embezzlement, 167
Employees, mining, for ideas, 344
Employee development, 326
Employee relationship management, 327
Data roles, 375
Data science, 8–9
“Data Scientist: The Sexiest Job of the 21st 
Century” (Davenport and Patil), 9
Data silos, 38–39
Data storage, at Google, 190–191
Data supply chain, 456
Data tampering, 161
Data transfer capacity, 119
Data types, 375
Data visualization, 367–386
defi ned, 2
digital dashboards, 380–384
enterprise data mashups, 377–380
geographic information systems, 384–386
in Google Maps API, 139
and learning, 371–377
at McCain Foods, 5
at Safeway and PepsiCo, 369–371
Data warehouses:
at Coca-Cola, 72
data management, 89–93
defi ned, 75–76
and volatility, 53
DB2, 79
DBMSs (database management systems), 75–86
DDoS (distributed denial-of-service), 147, 148
DSSs (decision-support systems), 48–49, 51–53
Decision models, Coca-Cola’s use of, 75
Decision processes, 128–129
Decision-support systems (DDSs), 48–49, 51–53
Declarative languages, 76
Deepwater Horizon explosion and oil spill, 395
Defense-in-depth model, 147, 158–160
Defense sector:
supply chains in, 354
3D printing in, 334
use of data warehouses by, 93
Defense strategy, for IT security management, 
170–171
Deliverables, 17, 418
Demand management, 279
Demographic systems, 211
Dental work, and 3D printing, 335
Denver International Airport (DIA), 415–417
Desktop technology, operating systems for, 121
Detection, 170
Deterrence, 170
Development, of employees, 326
DIA (Denver International Airport), 415–417
Diavel, 300
Differentiation strategy, 23
Digital business, 1–29
businesses as, 6–15
business process management for, 15–19
competitive advantages in, 19–25
defi ned, 6
digital technologies for, 6–9, 13–15
enterprise technology trends for, 25–27
IT expertise in, 27–29
McCain Foods as, 2–6
models for, 11–13
social-mobile-cloud model for, 9–11
Digital business model, 6
Digital dashboards, 380–384
Digital dependents, 269
Digital distraction, 453–454
Digital immigrants, 269
Digital IQ global survey, 398
Digital music service, 121–122
Digital natives, 269
Digital–physical blur, 455
Digital technologies, 6–9, 13–15
Dimensions (of data), 375

Subject Index     S-5  
Executive information system (EIS), 40
Exploit (term), 153, 154
Exploration (text mining), 98
Exposure, 153
Extendable markup language (XML), 206, 228
Extensibility, 404
EXtensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL), 
298, 317–318
External transactions, 49
Extract, transform, and load (ETL), 90
Extranets:
as collaboration technology, 129
and SharePoint, 342
F
Faceted search, 208
Facial recognition, 441
Fault tolerance:
in cybersecurity, 153
of DBMSs, 80
Feasibility studies, 433–434
Federal Prosecution of Corporations, 324
Feedback, 414
Filetype, in searches, 195
Filtering, data, 77
Finance, as business process, 17
Finance systems, 304, 315–323
Financial disclosure, 317
Financial measures (balanced scorecard), 401
Financial meltdowns, 320
Financial misrepresentation, 316
Financial performance dashboards, 381
Financial ratio analysis, 323
Financial sector, 286–291
and anti-money-laundering guidelines, 418
data governance in, 45
data warehouses used by, 93
social media use by, 26, 447
supply chains in, 355
Financial value drivers, 393
Firewalls, 153
5G networks, 114
Five-forces model, 21–24
Fixed-line broadband, 118
Flexibility, 19
Flexible manufacturing systems 
(FMSs), 312
Focused search, 195
Focus management, 453–454
Folksonomy, 256
Food industry:
and contamination, 353
data governance in, 45
Food Safety Modernization Act (FSMA), 6
Forecasting, 92, 322
Formal processes, 18
The Forrester Wave: Enterprise Social Platforms, 
Q3 2011, 341
4G networks, 114, 118, 119
FrameWorx 3D printer, 335
Fraud:
accounting cycle, 167
and cybersecurity, 166–169
defi ned, 166
fi nancial meltdowns triggered by, 320
internal, 168–169, 318
occupational, 166
prevention and detection of, 318–320
senior management fi nancial reporting, 167
Fraud risk management, 318
Front-offi ce operations, 355
Frozen food industry, 4
FSMA (Food Safety Modernization Act), 6
Greenhouse gases (GHGs), 131–133
Groundswell, 234, 235
Group dynamics, 128
Group work, 128–129
Growth strategy, 23
H
Hackers:
contract, 155
and cybercrime, 147
data stolen by, 144, 145
Hacking:
by hacktivists, 150
as industry, 155
and user satisfaction, 201
Hactivist(s):
and cybersecurity, 150
defi ned, 148
visibility of, 149
Hadoop, 87, 94–95
Hadoop File Systems (HDFS), 95
Hardware, cybersecurity, 159–160
Hardware stores, 3D printing for, 334
Hardware virtualization, 60
Harvard Business Review (HBR), 88, 400
Hashtags, 250
Hashtag activism, 248
Hashtag journalists, 248
HDFS (Hadoop File Systems), 95
Health care:
data analytics in, 94
data errors in, 86
data governance in, 45, 67–68
data management in, 67–68
electronic records management in, 105
issues with information in, 38–39
potential for digital development in, 14
regulations on social media use by, 26
3D printing in, 334–335
use of data warehouses by, 93
wireless technology used in, 123
Health information exchange (HIE), 68
Health records executive committee, 68
Heat maps, 372–373
Hedge funds, 376
HIE (health information exchange), 68
High Leverage Network (HLN), 136
Hiring, negligent, 445–447
HIVE, 369–371
HLN (High Leverage Network), 136
Holistic business strategy, 390
Horizontal exchanges, 278, 279
Hosted services, 63
Hotel industry, use of mobile 
commerce by, 284
HR, see Human resources
HRISs (human resource information systems), 
324–325
HR mashups, 380
HR systems, 304, 323–327
HTML (hypertext markup language), 206
Human error, as unintentional threat, 160
Human resource information systems (HRISs), 
324–325
Human resources (HR):
as business process, 17
and data visualization, 376
as support activity, 24
Human resource (HR) systems, 304, 323–327
Hybrid recommendation engines, 212–213
Hybrid search engines, 187
Hyperscale computer systems, 456
Hypertext markup language (HTML), 206, 228
Fulfi llment:
multichannel, 357
order, 355–356
Full-text similarity search, 207
Functions, business, see Business functions
Functional exchanges, 279
G
G
, 241
GAAP (generally accepted accounting 
principles), 315
Gambling, online, 156, 283, 321–322
Games, mobile, 282
Gantt charts, 426
“Garbage in, garbage out” (GIGO), 81
Gb (gigabyte), 71
Gen C, 223
General controls, in IT security management, 
171–172
Generally accepted accounting principles 
(GAAP), 315
Generally accepted recordkeeping principles, 104
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 
2008 (GINA), 444
Genomics, 88–89
Geocoding, 384
Geographic information systems (GISs), 368, 
384–386
Geospatial data, 368, 371
GetGlue.com, 267
GHGs (greenhouse gases), 131–133
Ghost pages, 202
Ghost text, 202
Giant Global Graph, 236
Gigabyte (Gb), 71
GIGO (“garbage in, garbage out”), 81
GINA (Genetic Information Nondiscrimination 
Act of 2008), 444
GISs (geographic information systems), 368, 
384–386
Global e-Sustainability Initiative (GeSI), 133
Global mean temperature (GMT), 131
Global warming, 132–135
GMT (global mean temperature), 131
Goal seeking analysis, 52
Go/no-go decision, 425, 434
Google Alerts, 197, 254
Google Analytics, 198
Google Customer Surveys, 313–314
Google Docs, 64
Google Earth, 190
Google Glass, 13, 439–442
Google Maps:
as big data, 456
ethical concerns with, 450
and GPS, 385
mashups with, 252
as travel app, 283–284
Google Maps API, 122, 139, 227
Google Play, 165, 450
Google
, 241
Google
 Hangout, 255
Google Trends, 197
Google Wallet, 267, 287
Governance, 395. See also Data governance
Government(s):
attacks on, by advanced persistent threats, 
161–162
attacks on, by hacktivists, 150
and cybersecurity, 157
do-not-carry rules for, 150–151
use of data warehouses by, 93
GPS technologies, 120

S-6    Subject Index
Isis Mobile Wallet, 27
Isolation, 304, 456–457
IT-business alignment, 390
IT careers, 28–29
IT consumerization, 19
IT department, 340
IT governance, 157
IT industry:
proposed changes in, 134–137
role of, in global warming, 132–133
IT infrastructure, 53
IT project managers, 29
IT steering committees, 396–397
IT strategic planning, 393
IT strategy, 389–408
balanced scorecard, 400–403
and balanced scorecard, 400–403
and business strategy, 395, 397–399
categories of, 394
and governance, 395
at Intel, 390–392
for IT sourcing, 403–408
and strategic planning process, 392–397
IT systems, 304
IT vendors, 405–408
iWatch, 13, 119
J
JackBe, 380
Japan:
mobile banking in, 289
QR codes in, 281
JavaScript, 206
Java technology, 184
JIT (just-in-time) inventory management systems, 
309–310
Job growth, IT, 28
Job markets, online, 275
Job rotation, 320
Just-in-time (JIT) inventory management systems, 
309–310
K
Kaching app, 399
Key performance indicators (KPIs), 423
on dashboards, 380
as measures, 375
selection of appropriate, 100–101
types of, 41
used at McCain Foods, 5
Keywords:
Nike’s use of, 184–185
and relevance scores, 200
in web searches, 182
Keyword conversion rates, 198, 204
Keyword tricks, 202
Kindle e-readers, 272
Kinect for Windows, 13
Klout, 254
KM (knowledge management), 341
Knowledge:
in information systems, 47
sharing, in social networking, 255–257
Knowledge-based systems, 211
Knowledge management (KM), 341
Knowledge workers, 192
Know your customer (KYC), 418
KPIs, see Key performance indicators
KPMG Data Loss Barometer, 148
KYC (know your customer), 418
Insurance industry:
data visualization in, 376
use of data warehouses by, 93
Intangible benefi ts (customer relationship 
management), 362
Integrated business strategy, 390
Integrated change control, 428–429
Integrated data, 108
Integrated testing, 415
Integrity:
in cyber risk management, 154
of data, 77, 304
as recordkeeping principle, 104
Intellectual property (IP):
fi nding, on Web, 197
and 3D printing, 452
Intelligence, of mobile networks, 127
Intelligent analysis, 169
Intentional threats, 160
Interface(s):
defi ned, 337
with legacy systems, 332
user-friendly, 40
Intermodal transport, 307–308
Internal Campaign Report, 306
Internal control(s):
and cybersecurity, 169–174
and fraud, 320–321
Internal fraud, 168–169, 318
Internal threats, 156
Internal transactions, 49
International banking, 275
Internet:
and cognitive skills, 454
origin of, 118–119
Internet banks, 273–275
Internet of Things (IoT), 7–8
Internet Protocol (IP), 110–111
Internet services, 190
Intranets:
as collaboration technology, 129
and SharePoint, 342
Intrusion detection systems (IDSs):
in cybersecurity, 153
as IT defense, 163
Intrusion prevention systems (IPSs), 163
Intuit Financial Services, 222
Inventory control systems, 309–310
Inventory costs, 128
Inventory holding costs, 309
Investment industry, use of data 
warehouses by, 93
IOS 5, and voice biometrics, 166
IoT (Internet of things), 7–8
IP (Internet Protocol), 110–111
iPad:
competitors of, 272
on corporate networks, 165
at Ducati, 301
launch of, 13
IP addresses, networks’ use of, 
110–111
iPhones:
and CarPlay, 458–459
digital payments by, 27
mobile games on, 282
sports apps on, 283
IPO (input-processing-output) model, 48
IPSs (intrusion prevention systems), 163
IP Version 4 (IPv4), 110–111
IP Version 6 (IPv6), 111–113
IR (information retrieval) services, 187
IRT (incident response team), 159
ISs, see Information systems
I
IaaS, see Infrastructure as a service
iBeacon, 385
IBM Cognos, 386
ICT (information and communications 
technology), 113, 132–137
Ideas, mining employees for, 344
Identity theft, 169
ILoveYou worm, 161
iMindmap Online, 129
Immediate consistency, 78
Implementation:
of enterprise resource planning, 349–350
of enterprise systems, 337–341
of new system, 434
and outsourcing, 406
Inbound logistics, 24, 309
Inbound marketing, 200, 201
Inc., 453
Incident response communication plans, 159
Incident response team (IRT), 159
Income statements, 315
Indexer module (crawler search engines), 188
Indirect procurement, 278
Industrial design, 3D printing for, 335
Industry structure, 19
Infl uence patterns, 269
Informal processes, 18
Information:
defi ned, 47
fl ow of, 305
in mobile commerce, 280–282
sharing of, between retailers and suppliers, 
127–128
supply chains and fl ow of, 355
Informational search, 193
Information and communications technology 
(ICT), 113, 132–137
Information management, 33–65
cloud computing in, 56–59
cloud services in, 62–65
data centers in, 53–56
data governance in, 45–47
defi ned, 37
enterprise architecture for, 42–45
information systems in, 47–53
at Intel Security, 34–37
purpose and benefi ts of, 37–42
virtualization in, 59–62
Information overload, 100
Information-protection models, 149
Information retrieval (IR) services, 187
Information sources, monitoring, 159
Information systems (ISs):
as business process, 17
context of, 53
in information management, 47–53
integration of, 340
Infrastructure as a service (IaaS), 
63, 64, 403
In-house development, 394
In-house production, 356
Initial Web, 206
Innovation, 357
Innovation measures (balanced scorecard), 401
“Innovations That Drive Supply Chains,” 
356–357
Innovation strategy, 23
Input-processing-output (IPO) model, 48
In Search of Memory (Kandel), 453–454
Insider fraud, 318
In-store tracking, 281
Insurance, and supply chain, 356

Subject Index     S-7  
L
Lagging indicators, 400
LANs (local area networks), 126
Latency, 77
Latency-sensitive apps, 117
Leading indicators, 400
Lean manufacturing systems, 310, 348
Learning, and data visualization, 371–377
Legacy systems, 331–332, 338, 364
Legal feasibility, 433
Legality principle (COBIT), 157
Licenses, software and cloud-computing, 58
LifeLog app, 15
Line (app), 55
Link farms, 202
Link spamming, 202
Listeria, 353
Local area networks (LANs), 126
Location-based marketing, 285
Logistics:
defi ned, 355
of e-commerce, 276
inbound, 24, 309
outbound, 24, 309
Logistics management, as business function, 309
Logistics mashups, 380
Long-range IT plan, 396
Long-Term Evolution (LTE), 119
Looking Further with Ford—2014 Trends, 137
Lost business, due to dirty data, 82
Loyalty, customer, 340
Loyalty effect, 360
LTE (Long-Term Evolution), 119
M
M2M, see Machine-to-machine technology; 
Mobile-to-mobile communications
M2M (mobile to mobile) communications, 114
M2M (machine-to-machine) technology, 7, 357
M3 QuickStep, 347
Machine-to-machine (M2M) technology, 7, 357
Maintenance, system, 434
Make-A-Wish Foundation, 268
Malicious apps, 165
Malware:
defi ned, 142
types of, 160–161
and user satisfaction, 201
Management development, 326
Management information systems (MISs), 47–51
Managers, and web technology, 229
Manufacturing:
additive, 332
as business function, 304, 307
and dirty data, 84
Manufacturing execution systems (MESs), 311
Manufacturing on-demand, 336
Manufacturing quality control (QC) systems, 310
MapReduce, 94–95
Markets, as conversations, 234
Marketing:
with blogs and microblogs, 248
as business process, 17
data-driven, 314
data needs of, 85
inbound, 200, 201
location-based, 285
mobile, 280
outbound, 201
potential for digital development in, 14
as primary activity, 24
used by Internet banks, 274
wireless marketing, 284–286
Mobile devices:
and car crashes, 136
cybersecurity of, 163–166
entertainment on, 283
Facebook accessed from, 240
hackers’ use of, 150–151
search engines on, 194–195
services on, 10
trend towards use of, 26
used in retail shops, 196
Mobile directories, 286
Mobile display strategy, 266–267
Mobile e-commerce, 279. See also Mobile 
commerce (m-commerce)
Mobile entertainment, 283
Mobile games, 282
Mobile infrastructure, 124
Mobile location-based marketing, 285
Mobile marketing, 280
Mobile payment, 267
Mobile payment systems, 286–288
Mobile Phone Biometric Security Analysis and 
Forecasts 2011-2015, 165
Mobile phone card reader, 287–288
Mobile retailing, 280
Mobile search, 194–195
Mobile technology:
carbon footprint of, 135
as disruptive innovation, 293
operating systems for, 121
in social-mobile-cloud model, 9–10
trends in, 123
Mobile-to-mobile (M2M) communications, 114
Mobile traffi c, drivers of, 115
Mobile visual search engine, 282
Mobility:
as business network function, 115
in customer relationship management, 361
as a service, 65
and supply chain, 357
Model(s). See also specifi c models
for digital business, 11–13
social-mobile-cloud, 9–11
Modeling (text mining), 98
Money laundering, 156
Monitoring programs, in mobile commerce, 281
Monitoring services, for social networking, 252–254
Moral hazard, 319
MRO supplies, 279
MTV Movie Awards, 290
Multichannel fulfi llment, 357
Multi-currency banking, 275
Multistrada, 300
Multitasking, 137, 454
Munitions, 354
My AutoTrader, 16
MySQL, 79
N
NameTag, 441
Natural language search, 208
Navigational search, 193
Near-fi eld communication (NFC) technology, 
26–27
business uses of, 119–120
and Google Wallet, 267
and Kaching app, 399
mobile payments with, 287
Negligent hiring, 445–447
Net neutrality, 117–118
search engine, 193–194
on social networks, 10
supported by data warehouses, 92
wireless, 284–286
Marketing management, 314–315
Marketing planning, online, 276
Market research, 313–314
Market share, 86
Mashups:
enterprise, 251
enterprise data, 377–380
for social networking, 250–251
used by businesses, 252
as Web 2.0 applications, 231
of wireless technologies, 120
Mass social media, 230–231
Master data:
in database management systems, 85
and data governance, 46
at Intel Security, 36
Master data management (MDM):
at Coca-Cola, 74
in database management systems, 85
and data governance, 46
at Intel Security, 36
Master fi le, 36
Master reference fi les, 85
Maverick buying, 279
MayDay support system, 12
MDM, see Master data management
Measures (of data), 375
Medium-range IT plan, 397
Meetings:
and project success, 415
tools for, 255–256
Memory, for virtual machines, 61
Mental discipline, 454
MESs (manufacturing execution systems), 311
Metadata, 205
Meta-search engines, 187
Microblogs, 247–249
Micro moments, 137
Micropayments, 288
Microsoft Cloud, 342
Microsoft Dynamics AX ERP, 350
Microsoft Dynamics CRM, 386
Microsoft Excel, 376
Microsoft Offi ce, 386
Microsoft Outlook, 345
Microsoft Project, 425, 426
Microsoft Sidebar, vulnerabilities of, 154–155
MicroStrategy Cloud, 101
Milestones, 425, 426
Millennials, 344
Mink makeup 3D printer, 336
MISs (management information systems), 47–51
Misappropriation, 167
Mission, 302
Mixed hybrid recommendation engines, 212
Mobile banking, 288–290
Mobile bill payments, 288
Mobile biometrics, 166
Mobile broadband, 118
Mobile browsers, 281
Mobile check-in strategy, 267
Mobile commerce (m-commerce), 279–291
defi ned, 279
fi nancial services, 286–291
information in, 280–282
at Macy’s, 265–268
mobile entertainment, 283
in omni-channel retailing, 269–270
social networking, 284
travel services, 283–284

S-8    Subject Index
Piracy, 441
Plaintext, 153
Plans:
tactical, 397
Planners Lab, 52
Planning:
for enterprise resource planning, 352
Platform:
blogging, 247
Web as, 226–227
Platform as a service (PaaS), 63, 64, 149, 403
Plug-ins, 229
PMBOK (Project Management Body of 
Knowledge), 412
Poaching, 405
Point-of-sale (POS) data, 369
Point-of-sale (POS) payment terminals:
data collected by, 74
security breaches at, 142–144
POM (production and operation management), 
307, 310–311
Ponemon 2013 Cost of Data Breach Study, 142
Popularity, as ranking factor, 199
POS payment terminals, see Point-of-sale payment 
terminals
PostgreSQL, 79
Postmortem, 413, 431
Power usage effectiveness (PUE), 191
PPC (pay-per-click) advertising, 194, 203–204, 314
PPM (project portfolio management), 418
Practical Guide to Cloud Service Level 
Agreements, 57
Predictive analytics, 449, 451
Preprocessing, in text mining, 98
Prevention, in IT security management, 170
Pricing:
of products and services, 314
supported by data warehouses, 92
Primary activities, 24
Privacy:
breach of, 442
defi ned, 442
on Facebook, 240
and social media, 244
Privacy invasions, 441
Privacy paradox, 442, 443
Private clouds, 58
Private exchanges, 278–279
Private social networking services, 243
Processes, business, see Business processes
Processing:
batch, 50
and data quality, 50
online transaction, 50
real time, 50
Products, pricing, 314
Product development time, 128
Production, as business process, 17, 304, 307
Production and operation management (POM), 
307, 310–311
Productivity:
increased with digital technology, 6
of salespeople, 314–315
Product liability, 440
Professional networking sites, 239
Profi les, as element of social media, 233
Profi ling, data, 77
Profi tability analysis, 315, 323
Profi t margin, 21
Programming technologies, 227
Project(s), 412–414
defi ned, 413
failure of, 413–414
runaway, 432
Operating systems, 121
Operations, 17, 24
Operational effectiveness strategy, 23
Operational level, of business, 303
Operational value drivers, 393
Operation Aurora, 162, 179
Opportunistic repricing, 405
Opportunities (in SWOT analysis), 20
OptionVision, 376
Oracle Hyperion Profi tability and Cost 
Management software, 323
Orbiting Carbon Observatory-2 (OCO-2), 132, 135
Order fulfi llment, 355–356
at Avon, 364
as cross-functional business process, 303
in e-commerce, 276
Order fulfi llment dashboards, 381
Ordering costs, 309
Order-to-cash process, 16
Organic search listings, 193
Organizational feasibility, 433
Organized crime, 155, 156
Oslo (app), 343
Outbound logistics, 24, 309
Outbound marketing, 201
Outsource relationship management (ORM) 
companies, 394
Outsourcing, 406–407
Oversight, as business function, 321
Overspecialization, in recommendation 
engines, 212
Overt resistance, 433
Ownership, of data, 83–84
P
PaaS, see Platform as a service
Packets, 110, 117
Packet switching, 116, 118–119
PageRank algorithm, 199
Page repository:
for crawler search engines, 188
for web directories, 187
Page titles, 200
Paid search listings, 193–194
Paid search strategies, 203–205
Panda (Google update), 201
Parallel conversion, 434
Passwords, 155
Patches, 164
Payload, of malware, 160
Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard 
(PCI DSS), 157–158
Payment companies, 287
Pay-per-click (PPC) advertising, 194, 203–204, 314
Payroll services, 376
Pb (petabyte), 71, 189
Penguin (Google update), 201
Performance evaluations, 326
Performance metrics, 396
Periodic reports, 50
Personally identifi able information (PII), 157
Personnel planning, 326
Petabyte (Pb), 71, 189
Phased conversion, 434
Phishing, 156
and advanced persistent threats, 161
in mobile banking, 290
spear, 162
Phrases, on websites, 200
Physical controls, 171–172
Physical–digital blur, 455
PII (personally identifi able information), 157
Pilot conversion, 434
Net present value (NPV), 433
Net semi-neutrality, 117
NetSuite, 340
Network(s), 110–137
APIs, 121–123
and climate change, 130–133
collaboration and communication technologies 
for, 127–130
data, 113–121
ethical issues with, 136–137
at Sony, 111–113
and sustainability, 133–136
wireless, 123–127
Network effect, 241
Networking standards, Wi-Fi, 125–126
Network speeds, 114
Network virtualization, 60
New England Journal of Medicine, 51
Newsfeed feature (Facebook), 240
Newsgroups, 235
New users, and recommendation engines, 211–212
New York State, 136
Nexus 7 (data mining system), 97–98
NFC technology, see Near-fi eld communication 
technology
NHTSA (National Highway Traffi c Safety 
Administration), 136
Niche strategy, 23
Nonlinear infl uence patterns, 269
Nonlinear search patterns, 269
Nonstandardized data formats, 39
NoSQL (not only SQL) systems, 79–80
Notifi cation procedures, for cybersecurity, 159
Not only SQL (NoSQL) systems, 79–80
NPV (net present value), 433
O
Objectives:
of business strategy, 390
defi ned, 15
Occupational fraud, 166, 318
OCO-2 (Orbiting Carbon Observatory-2), 132, 135
Odle, Keith, 439
Offi ce Graph, 343
Offshoring, 394, 405–406
OLAP (online analytics-processing) systems, 79
OLTP, see Online transaction processing
Omni-channel retailing, 269–270
On-demand computing, 63
On-demand manufacturing, 3D printing for, 336
On demand reports, 51
Online analytics-processing (OLAP) systems, 79
Online banking, 272–275
Online business planning, 276
Online comments, monitoring of, 223
Online communities, 235–236
Online gambling, 156, 283, 321–322
Online job markets, 275
Online marketing planning, 276
Online retailing:
issues in, 275–276
viability and risk of, 276
Online transaction processing (OLTP), 50, 79, 304
Onpage factors, 199, 200
Onshore sourcing, 394
Ontology-based search, 208
Open Directory Project, 187
Open Graph initiative, 241
Open source APIs, 227
Open Wi-Fi networks, 450
Operating management corruption, 167
Operating margin, 87
Operating plan, 390

Subject Index     S-9  
Project baseline, 427
Project management, 412–434
and basic characteristics of projects, 418–419
defi ned, 412
at Denver International Airport, 415–417
and enterprise resource planning, 351–352
failure in, 413–415
project closing, 431
and project life cycle, 421–428
project monitoring, 428–431
project planning, 421–428
and scope creep, 419
seven deadly sins of, 420–421
and system development life cycle, 432–434
Project Management Body of Knowledge 
(PMBOK), 412
Project milestones, 425, 426
Project plans, 414
Project portfolios, 397
Project portfolio management (PPM), 418
Project scope, 418
Project teams, 414
Protected classes, 444
Protection, as recordkeeping principle, 104
Protocols, network, 118
Public clouds, 58
Public exchanges, 278–279
PUE (power usage effectiveness), 191
Pull-through ads, 314
Push-through ads, 314
Q
QC (quality control) systems, 310
QlikView, 368, 374, 375
QR codes, see Quick response codes
Quality control (QC) systems, 310
Quality of service (QoS), 116–117
Quality score, 203–204
Query(-ies):
in database management systems, 77, 78
and semantic search engine, 207
Query interface (crawler search engines), 188
Quick response (QR) codes:
in mobile commerce, 281–282
mobile payments with, 287, 288
retail strategies using, 266
R
Radio frequency identifi cation (RFID), 26–27
and food contamination, 353
and geospatial data, 385
as payment method, 314
in quality control, 310
Ramirez, Edith, 447
Ranking factors, 199–200
RATS (remote-access trojans), 160
R & D, see Research and development
RDBMSs (relational management systems), 76
RDF (resource description framework), 206
Reading level, 201
Realistic download rates, 119
Really simple syndication (RSS), 231, 251
Real time processing, 50
Real time search, 197
Real time systems, 2
Real time updating, 234
Recommendation engines, 193, 209–214, 217–218
Recommender systems, 209
Records, business, 102, 103
Recordkeeping, 104
Recovery, in IT security management, 171
Risk assessment:
for control systems, 173–174
and customer relationship management, 362
Risk factors, for fraud, 318–319
Risk management, 153
Rivalry, among fi rms, 22
Roambi Analytics, 377
RoAS (return on advertising spend), 204
Rogue apps, 165
Rogue app monitoring, 166
ROI, see Return on investment
Rootkit, 160
Routers:
in business networks, 115
unprotected, 450
Royalities, as crowdfunding, 237
RSS (really simple syndication), 231, 251
RSS aggregator, 251
RSS reader, 251
RSS technology, 251–252
Runaway projects, 432
S
SaaS, see Software as a service
Safety stock, 309
Sales:
as primary activity, 24
supported by data warehouses, 92
Sales and distribution channels, 314
Sales and marketing systems, 304, 312–315
Salesperson productivity, 314–315
Sales team dashboards, 381
Salmonella, 353
Santander, Spain, 124
SAP HANA, 456
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX), 157, 170
SAS Enterprise Miner, 360
Satisfries, 4
Scalability, of DBMSs, 80
Schiphol Airport (Amsterdam, Netherlands), 27
SCM, see Supply chain management
Scope, project, 418
Scope creep, 416, 419
SDLC (system development life cycle), 432–434
Search:
as business network function, 115
informational, 193
navigational, 193
transactional, 193
Search engines:
as business, 182
crawler, 187–189
hybrid, 187
meta-, 187
mobile visual, 282
search technology, 186–191
semantic, 187
vertical, 197–198
Search engine marketing (SEM), 193–194
Search engine optimization (SEO):
by Nike, Inc., 184–185
in search engine marketing, 194
as search technology, 198–202
Search engine results page (SERP), 182, 188
Search history, 195
Search patterns, 269
Search technology, 182–205
business uses of, 191–198
at Nike, Inc., 182–186
paid search strategies, 203–205
search engine optimization, 198–202
search engines, 186–191
Search tools button, 195
Recruitment:
at Avon, 364
as HR activity, 325
on professional networking sites, 239
Red fl ags, 320
Reduce stage (of MapReduce), 94
Redundancy, 457
Reference results, 207
Regulations:
on “as a service” models, 65
for information management, 38
on use of social media, 26
Related search, 207
Relational databases, 76
Relational management systems 
(RDBMSs), 76
Relationships. See also Customer relationship 
management
as business network function, 115
with employees, 327
Relevance, as ranking factor, 200
Remote-access trojans (RATS), 160
Remote wipe capability, 166
Replenishment, and supply chain, 356
Reporting tools, 372
Repricing, opportunistic, 405
Reputation, as ranking factor, 199
Request for information (RFI), 406
Request for proposal (RFP), 406
Research and development (R&D):
on lowering carbon emissions, 135
and 3D printing technology, 333
Resilience, 456–457
Resistance, overt vs. covert, 433
Resource allocation, 396
Resource description framework (RDF), 206
Respondeat superior doctrine, 324
Responsibility matrix, 426, 427
Responsible conduct, 448–453
Responsiveness, 19
Retail banks:
dirty data at, 83–84
distrust of, 222–223
Retailers:
sharing information with suppliers, 127–128
use of data warehouses by, 93
use of mobile devices in, 196
Retailing:
mobile, 280
online, see E-commerce
Retailing technology, 14, 268–271
Retention, of records, 104
Retrieval/ranking module 
(crawler search engines), 188
Return on advertising spend (RoAS), 204
Return on investment (ROI), 433
balanced scorecard and, 390
and enterprise resource planning, 351
Returns, and supply chain, 356
Retweet, 250
Revenue dashboards, 381
Revenue models, 276
Reverse supply chains, 355
Review sites, 199
Rewards, as crowdfunding, 237
RFI (request for information), 406
RFID, see Radio frequency identifi cation
RFP (request for proposal), 406
Rich snippets, 208
Risk(s):
in cyber risk management, 154
in cybersecurity, 153
with outsourcing, 405
and project management, 414

S-10    Subject Index
Social Web, 206, 225–235
SODDI defense, 395
Software:
for business process management, 18–19
for cybersecurity, 159–160
Software as a service (SaaS), 377
accounting software as, 316
and cloud computing, 58
in cloud computing stack, 62–64
as cloud service, 149
and enterprise resource planning, 340
in HR systems, 325
in international banking, 275
SOPs (standard operating procedures), 
18, 303–304
Sourcing, 394, 404–405
crowdsourcing, 237, 455–456
e-sourcing, 277–278
IT, 403–408
onshore, 394
outsourcing, 406–407
spot, 278
systematic, 278
SOW (statement of work), 421, 424–425
SOX (Sarbanes-Oxley Act), 157, 170
Spam, 162, 201
SPARQL protocol and RDF query language 
(SPARQL), 206
Sparsity, data, 212
Spear phishing, 162
Spiders, 187, 189
SportVU, 12
Spot sourcing, 278
SPSS Analytic Catalyst, 368, 376
Spyware:
botnets as, 162
time-to-exploitation of, 164
SQL (structured query language), 76
SQL Server, 79
SquareUp, 305
Staffi ng, and IT steering committee, 396
Standard 15: Management of Curricula 
(AACSB), 137
Standard operating procedures (SOPs), 
18, 303–304
Statement of work (SOW), 421, 424–425
Steering committees, IT, 396–397
Stock-keeping units (SKUs), 336–337
Stock markets, 375–376
Stockouts, 309, 370–371
Storage virtualization, 60
Storm worm, 162
Strategic (SWOT) analysis, 20, 393, 394
Strategic IT plan, 396
Strategic plans, 302–303
Strategic planning, 21
as business challenge, 302–303
by CIO, 399
defi ned, 390
Strategic planning process, 392–397
Strategy(-ies):
for competitive advantage, 23
defi ned, 21
Street View, 450–451
Strengths (in SWOT analysis), 20
Structured data, 192
Structured decisions, 52
Structured query language (SQL), 76
Subscription monitoring services, 252–253
Sunk costs, 430
Superleggera Superbike, 299
Suppliers, 356
bargaining power of, 22
sharing information with retailers, 127–128
Site speed, 201
Site traffi c, 199
SKUs (stock-keeping units), 336–337
SLAs, see Service level agreements
SMART 2020 Report, 133, 134
Smartband, 15
Smart city, 124
SMART criteria, 390
Smart grids, 123
Smartphones, 165, 455
SmartSantander, 124
SmartStands, 119–120
Smash and Grab (phishing campaign), 142
Smishing, 290
SMS database strategy, 267
SMSs, see Short message services
SMT (Service Model Transformation) program, 365
SNA (social network analysis), 236
SNSs (social networking services), 221, 231, 
238–239
Social bookmarking, 231
Social bookmarking search, 197
Social bookmarking tools, 256
Social commerce, 269
Social engineering:
and cybersecurity, 148
by Bernie Madoff, 167–168
for malware, 161
Social graphs, 236–237
Social media:
benefi ts of, 232
changing buyer behavior with, 133
and communication on the Web, 229–231
cybersecurity and monitoring of, 159
defi ned, 226
elements of, 232–234
mass, 230–231
and negligent hiring, 444–446
privacy concerns of, 244
and ranking factors, 199
sentiment analysis on, 97
used by Internet banks, 274
Social Media: Consumer Compliance Risk 
Management Guidance, 446
Social media optimization, 194
Social mention, 253–254
Social metrics, 253–254
SocialMiner, 261
Social-mobile-cloud model, 9–11
Social monitoring services, 252
Social networks:
marketing on, 10
vulnerability of, 163–164
Social network analysis (SNA), 236
Social networking, 221–257
and banking, 222–224
blogs and microblogs, 245–250
dominated by Facebook, 239–241
knowledge sharing in, 255–257
mashups for, 250–251
and mobile commerce, 284
monitoring services for, 252–254
RSS technology for, 251–252
services and communities for, 235–244
on Web 2.0, 225–235
Social networking services (SNSs), 221, 231, 
238–239, 243
Social network sprawl, 343
Social outreach, 223
Social platforms, enterprise, 341–345
Social recruitment, 443–444
Social technology:
carbon footprint of, 135
in social-mobile-cloud model, 9–10
Secondary activities, 315
Section 302 (SOX), 170
Section 805 (SOX), 170
Security. See also Cybersecurity
in centralized databases, 80
of data, 77, 303
in enterprise search, 192
in mobile banking, 290
in mobile commerce, 280
Security procedures, 159
Segregation of duties, 320
Sell-side marketplaces, 277
SEM (search engine marketing), 193–194
Semantically annotated results, 207
Semantic annotations, 207
Semantic search engines, 187
Semantic technology, 205–209
Semantic Web, 205, 236
Senior management:
commitment to IT planning by, 397–398
and enterprise resource planning, 352
project success and buy-in from, 414
support of, for cybersecurity, 158
Senior management fi nancial reporting fraud, 167
Sensors:
data from, 93–95
in quality control, 310
in smart city, 124
Sentiment analysis, 97
SEO, see Search engine optimization
Separation of duties, 319
SERP (search engine results page), 182, 188
Service(s). See also Cloud services; Short message 
services (SMSs); Social networking services; 
Software as a service (SaaS)
applications as a service, 403
cloud storage, 257
data as a service, 64
digital music, 121–122
edge, 403
fi nancial, 286–291
hosted, 63
information retrieval, 187
infrastructure as a service, 63, 64, 403
Internet, 190
payroll, 376
platform as a service, 63, 64, 403
pricing of, 314
as primary activity, 24
social monitoring, 252
for social networking, 235–244
subscription monitoring, 252–253
technology as a service, 403
travel, 283–284
Service level agreements (SLAs), 56–57, 65, 394, 408
Service Model Transformation (SMT) program, 365
Service packs, 164
Shadow pages, 202
SharePoint, 341–342, 386
Sharing sites, 231
Shipments, and supply chain, 356
Shipping costs, 309
Shirking, 405
Shopkick app, 267, 285, 385
Shortages, costs of, 309
Short codes, 290
Short message services (SMSs):
mobile payments with, 287
retail strategies using, 266
short codes in, 290
Showrooming, 195, 265
Signatures, of malware, 161
Simplicity, of mobile networks, 127
Siri, 13

Subject Index     S-11  
Supplier lock-in strategy, 23
Supply chain(s):
in defense sector, 354
defi ned, 4, 334
and fl ow of materials/data/money, 355
and order fulfi llment/logistics, 355–356
reverse, 355
Supply chain management (SCM), 4, 338, 352–358
Supply chain visibility, 369–370
Support activities, 24, 315
Surgical applications, of 3D printing, 334–335
Sustainability, 137
and climate change, 130, 131
and networks, 133–136
of supply chains, 357
Sustainable business strategy, 390
Sustainable value drivers, 393
Switches, 115, 116
Switching costs strategy, 23
SWOT (strategic) analysis, 20, 393, 394
Synchronous communication, 255
Syntactic annotations, 207
System analysis, 433
Systematic sourcing, 278
System development life cycle (SDLC), 432–434
T
Tableau Desktop, 368, 372, 374, 375
Tactical adoption approach, 403
Tactical level, of business, 303
Tactical plans, 397
Tags:
as element of social media, 233
as Web 2.0 applications, 231
with XBRL, 317–318
Tag clouds, 375
Talent shortage, 357
Tangam’s Yield Management Solution (TYM), 13
Tangible net benefi ts (customer relationship 
management), 362
Tasks:
critical, 429
project, 419
Tb (terabyte), 71
TCO (total cost of ownership), 136, 349
TCP/IP (transmission control protocol/Internet 
protocol), 118, 119
TDWI (The Data Warehouse Institute), 99, 100
Technical architecture, 44
Technical feasibility, 433
Technology(-ies). See also Mobile technology; 
Search technology
bio-, 88–89
as business sector, 87
cloud, 9–10, 135
and customer relationship management, 359
desktop, 121
enterprise, 25–27
enterprise mashup, 379
and enterprise resource planning, 346
for food manufacturers, 4
machine-to-machine, 7, 357
retailing, 14, 268–271
social, 9–10, 135
trends in, 454–457
wearable, 9, 11, 15
Technology silos, 191
Technology Vision 2013 report, 11
Technology Vision 2014 report, 454–455
TELEform software, 105
Terabyte (Tb), 71
Teradata Database, 79
Terms of service (TOS) agreements, 241, 244
Twitpic, 249
Twitterfeed, 249
Twitterholic, 249
Twitter Search, 197, 254
Twittersphere, 249
2D tags, 288
TYM (Tangam’s Yield Management Solution), 13
U
UGC (user-generated content), 232
Unifi ed Data Center (UDC), 56
Uniform resource identifi ers (URIs), 206
Unintentional threats, 160
Unit testing, 415
Universal product codes (UPCs), 370
Unstructured data, 8, 192
Unstructured decisions, 52
UPCs (universal product codes), 370
Up-selling, 35
Urbee, 33, 334
URIs (uniform resource identifi ers), 206
Usenet, 235
User-generated content (UGC), 232
User identifi cation, 172
User input, and project success, 415
User satisfaction, 200, 201
Us Weekly, 213
V
V2V (vehicle-to-vehicle) communications, 459
Validation, of public self, 137
Value-added networks (VANs), 128
Value-added resellers (VARs), 337
Value chain, 24, 122
Value drivers, 392–393
VANs (value-added networks), 128
VARs (value-added resellers), 337
Variance, from baseline, 427
Variants, of malware, 161
Variety, in data analytics, 87
Vectors, 160
Vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communications, 459
Velocity, in data analytics, 87
Vendors, IT, 405–408
Veracity, in data analytics, 87
Vertical exchanges, 278
Vertical search engines, 197–198
Videos, on mobile devices, 283
Virtual collaboration, 127–128
Virtual communities, 235, 238–239
Virtualization:
of data, 56
in information management, 59–62
Virtualization layer, 60
Virtual machines (VMs), 59–62
Virtual private networks (VPNs):
as collaboration technology, 129–130
and enterprise resource planning, 346
Viruses, 160
Vishing, 290
Visibility, of cybercriminals, 149
Vision statement, 390
Visual Designer for Dashboards, 378
Visualization, data, see Data visualization
Viz tools, 2
VMs (virtual machines), 59–62
Voice biometrics, 166
Voice over IP (VoIP) networks, 115
Volatility:
of data, 75, 78
of databases, 53, 90
Terrorism, 156
Testing:
integrated, 415
system, 434
unit, 415
Text, amount of, on websites, 200
Textbooks, 293–294
Texting and driving, 136
Text mining:
data management, 96–99
defi ned, 97
Theoretical download rates, 119
Threat(s):
in cyber risk management, 154
and cybersecurity, 153
intentional, 160
of new competitors, 22
of substitution of product/service, 22
in SWOT analysis, 20
unintentional, 160
3D bioprinting, 334–335
3D printing, 332–337
ethical issues with, 451–452
and supply chain, 357
3G networks, 118, 119
TIBCO Spotfi re, 368, 374
Timeline app (Facebook), 240
Time strategy, 23
Time-to-exploitation, 164
Titanium implants, 334
Title VII of Civil Rights Act of 1964, 324
TMSs (transportation management systems), 
307–309
TOS (terms of service) agreements, 241, 244
Total cost of ownership (TCO), 136, 349
Total quality management (TQM), 310
Total Visibility TMS, 308–309
Touchpoints, 34, 270
TPSs (transaction processing systems), 47–50
TQM (total quality management), 310
Trade secrets, theft of, 150
Traffi c:
mobile, 123
Web, 199
Traffi c shaping, 117
Training:
in customer relationship management, 361
of employees, 326
and enterprise resource planning, 352
and project success, 415
Transactions, external vs. internal, 49
Transactional data, 85
Transactional search, 193
Transaction processing systems (TPSs), 47–50
Transmission control protocol/Internet protocol 
(TCP/IP), 118, 119
Transparency:
in business functions, 307
as recordkeeping principle, 104
Transport, intermodal, 307–308
Transportation Business Center (TBC), 128
Transportation costs, 128
Transportation management systems (TMSs), 
307–309
Travel services, 283–284
Trending topics, 248
Trial runs (with vendors), 407
Triple constraint, 418–419
Trojans, 160
Trustworthiness, of mobile networks, 127
Tunigo app, 121
Turkey, 145
Tweets, 248
Tweetdeck, 249

S-12    Subject Index
evolution of, 206
invention of, 226
Worms, 160
WWANs (wireless wide area networks), 126
X
XaaS (“as a service”) models, 62, 65, 403
XBRL (eXtensible Business Reporting Language), 
298, 317–318
XBRL tagging, 317–318
XML (extendable markup language), 206, 228
XMLHttpRequest, 228
Y
Yahoo! Web Analytics (YWA), 306
YamJam Conference, 343
Yammer, 127, 341–343
Yummer, 344
Yummversity, 344
YWA (Yahoo! Web Analytics), 306
Z
Zero-day exploits, 161
Zombies, computers as, 162
Web search industry, 189, 195–197
Website satisfaction surveys, 201
Web technologies, staying informed about, 229
Weighted hybrid recommendation engines, 212
What-if analysis, 52
White-hat SEO tactics, 201
Wide area networks (WANs), 126
Widgets, 231
Wi-Fi:
defi ned, 125
mashups with, 120
networking standards for, 125–126
Wi-Fi mapping, 450
Wikis, 231, 257
WiMAX, 119, 126
Wind power, 95
Wireless marketing, 284–286
Wireless networks, 123–127
at home, 226
packet switching on, 116
Wireless technologies, mashups of, 120
Wireless wide area networks (WWANs), 126
Wiretap Act, 450
Wi-Spy, 449
Work breakdown structure (WBS), 425
World Factbook (CIA), 20
Worldwide Malware Signature Counter, 161
World Wide Web (WWW):
communication on, 229–231
Volume, in data analytics, 87
VPNs, see Virtual private networks
Vulnerability:
cloud computing as, 163
in cyber risk management, 154
in cybersecurity, 153
fi xed with patches, 164
of Windows Sidebar and Gadgets, 154–155
W
WANs (wide area networks), 126
Wardriving, 450
WayBackMachine, 226
WBS (work breakdown structure), 425
Weaknesses (in SWOT analysis), 20
Wearable technology:
development of, 15
and social-mobile-cloud model, 9, 11
Web, see World Wide Web (WWW)
Web 2.0, 225–235
Web 3.0, 205–209
Web-based threats, 156
Web bots, 187
Web directories, 187
and ranking factors, 199
and relevance scores, 200
WebLogic Server Process Edition, 19
Web ontology language (OWL), 206

WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.

